CHARTER OF THE CITY OF SAN LEANDRO
TITLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. TITLE 2 REVENUE
TITLE 3 HEALTH AND SAFETY
TITLE 4 PUBLIC WELFARE
TITLE 5 STREETS AND PARKS
TITLE 6 VEHICLES
TITLE 7 MAPS, BUILDINGS, AND SUBDIVISIONS

CHARTER OF THE CITY OF SAN LEANDRO
ARTICLE I. SUCCESSION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL: MEMBERSHIP, COMPENSATION
ARTICLE III. CITY COUNCIL: FUNCTIONS
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE V. FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VI. ELECTIONS
ARTICLE VII. MISCELLANEOUS

ARTICLE I. SUCCESSION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
Section 100: NAME.
    The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of San Leandro shall remain and continue to be a body politic and corporate in fact and in law by the name of the City of San Leandro, and shall hereinafter be referred to as the City.

 

Section 105: BOUNDARIES.
    The boundaries of the City shall be the boundaries existing on the effective date of this Charter, until changed in the manner authorized by law.

 

Section 110: SUCCESSION, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
    The City shall continue to own, possess and control all rights and property of every kind and nature owned, possessed or controlled by it on the effective date of this Charter, and shall be subject to all its debts, obligations and liabilities.

 

Section 115: CONTINUANCE OF LAWS.
    All lawful ordinances, resolutions, and rules and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter and not in conflict or inconsistent herewith are continued in force until repealed or amended.

 

Section 120: CONTINUANCE OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
    The present officers and employees of the City shall retain their respective offices and employments, subject, however, to the provisions of this Charter.

 

Section 125: FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
    The government established by this Charter shall be the Mayor-Council-Manager form of government.

 

Section 130: POWERS.
    The City shall have the power to make and enforce all ordinances and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to restrictions and limitations provided in this Charter or in the Constitution of the State of California. The City shall have all the powers that are provided by the Constitution or by statute for cities. The City may exercise any of its powers jointly with other public agencies, and may agree with the County of Alameda for the assumption and discharge by the County of any of the City's municipal functions.
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL: MEMBERSHIP, COMPENSATION
Section 200. COMPOSITION.
    The City Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, shall consist of six Council Members and the Mayor.

 

Section 205: QUALIFICATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
    (a)   Any person is eligible to hold office as elected Council Member if such person is a registered voter of the City and a resident of the geographical area which constituted the district from which such person was nominated at the time of filing nomination papers, and was a resident of such area and a registered voter of the City at the time of filing nomination papers and for a period of thirty (30) days Immediately preceding the date of filing.

    (b)  Any person is eligible to hold office as appointed Council Member if such person is a registered voter of the City and a resident of the geographical area which constitutes the district from which such person's elected predecessor was nominated, and was a resident of such area and a registered voter of the City at the time of appointment and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately preceding appointment.

 

Section 210: QUALIFICATION OF MAYOR.
    Any person is eligible to hold office as elected Mayor if such person is a registered voter of the City and was a registered voter of the City at the time of filing nomination papers and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of filing. Any person is eligible to hold office as appointed Mayor if such person is a registered voter of the City and was a registered voter of the City for a period of thirty (30) days immediately preceding appointment.

 

Section 215: NOMINATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
    Each candidate for election to the office of Council Member shall be nominated from the district in which such candidate resides by the signatures of registered voters residing within said district.

 

Section 220: NOMINATION OF MAYOR.
    Each candidate for election to the office of Mayor shall be nominated from the City at large by the signatures of registered voters residing within the City.

 

Section 225: ELECTION OF COUNCIL.
    (a)   All Council Members and the Mayor shall be elected by the registered voters of the City at large. One Council Member shall be elected from each Council Member district.

    (b)  The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for the offices of Mayor and Council Members of the City shall be elected to such offices, provided that such candidate receives at least fifty percent (50%) plus one of the votes cast for each such office. In the event that no candidate for such elective office of the City receives at least fifty percent (50%) plus one of the votes cast for that office, the City Council shall provide for a run-off vote to determine the person elected. The City Council shall adopt an ordinance establishing a run-off system. The run-off system may include mailed ballots, an instant run-off voting system when such technology is available to the City, or a special run-off election. The ordinance setting forth the run-off system may be amended from time to time for any reason, but no amendment to the ordinance may take effect less than one hundred three (103) days prior to any municipal election.

    (c)   If at any election two or more persons receive an equal and highest number of votes for any office, the City Clerk shall order a public recount of the ballots cast for that office to be conducted in the manner provided by the Elections Code of the State of California. The expense of such recount shall be borne by the City.

    (d)  If the results of such recount indicate that two or more persons have received an equal and highest number of votes for any office, the City Clerk shall so certify to the Council. Upon receipt of the Clerk's certificate, the Council shall call a special election among the persons having an equal and highest number of votes for such office. The election shall be conducted and canvassed in the manner provided for general municipal elections.

 

Section 230: DISTRICTS.
    The boundaries of Council Member districts shall be the boundaries existing upon the effective date of this Charter, until changed by ordinance of the Council. Within one year after publication of the results of each federal census, and within one year after a determination that the population of the City has changed by five percent or more since the most recent division of the City into districts, the Council by ordinance shall divide the City into six districts numbered one through six. Each district shall consist of geographically compact contiguous territory and shall contain, as nearly as possible, equal numbers of residents. District boundaries shall approximate election precinct boundaries established by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Alameda. No change in district boundaries shall operate to disqualify an incumbent from office before the expiration of the term for which such person was elected or appointed.

 

Section 235: TERM OF OFFICE.
    (a)   Council Members and the Mayor shall hold office for four years. The term of office shall commence on January 1 following the election.

    (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 235(a) of this Charter, the officers elected in 2002 shall hold office for a term ending December 31, 2006 and officers elected in 2004 shall hold office for a term ending December 31, 2008.

 

Section 240: INCOMPATIBLE OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT.
    A Council Member or Mayor who accepts or retains an incompatible public office or incompatible public employment after taking office on the Council shall be deemed thereby to have resigned as Council Member or Mayor.

 

Section 245: VACANCIES: EXISTENCE.
    A vacancy shall exist in the office of Council Member or Mayor when the person elected or appointed to such office fails to qualify or becomes disqualified, or upon the occurrence of any event which, under the general laws, would cause a vacancy in such office.

 

Section 250: VACANCIES: FILLING.
    A vacancy in the office of Council Member or Mayor shall be filled by appointment by the Council. The appointee shall hold office until the next general municipal election and until a successor is elected and qualified. Any unexpired remainder of the term of such office shall be filled by the voters at such election. If the Council fails to fill such vacancy within sixty days after its existence, the Council shall call a special election, at which the unexpired remainder of the term of such office shall be filled by the voters.

 

Section 255: COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
    All provisions of the Government Code of the State of California relating to compensation, benefits and reimbursement for expenses applicable to members of a City Council of a general law city shall be applicable to Council Members.

 

Section 260: COMPENSATION OF MAYOR.
    The Mayor shall receive a salary established by ordinance. In addition, the Mayor shall be entitled to the same benefits and reimbursement for expenses as are Council Members.

 

Section 265: LIMITATION ON TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
    No person shall be eligible for the office of Council Member who has served two, complete four-year terms as Council Member immediately prior to the term for which such person seeks election or appointment.

 

Section 270: LIMITATION ON TERM OF MAYOR.
    No person shall be eligible for the office of Mayor who has served two, complete four-year terms as Mayor immediately prior to the term for which such person seeks election or appointment.

 

Section 275: VACANCY IN OFFICE OF COUNCIL MEMBER.
    Notwithstanding Section 265 of the Charter, should a Council Member vacate his or her office prior to completion of a second consecutive four year term as Council Member, he or she shall be ineligible for the office of Council Member for the following term.

 

Section 280: VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
    Notwithstanding Section 270 of the Charter, should the Mayor vacate his or her office prior to completion of a second consecutive four year term as Mayor, he or she shall be ineligible for the office of Mayor for the following term.

ARTICLE III. CITY COUNCIL: FUNCTIONS
Section 300: POWERS OF COUNCIL.
    All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.

 

Section 305: POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR.
    The Mayor shall be the political head of the City. The Mayor shall:

    (a)   recommend City policy;

    (b)  recommend to the Council appropriate and necessary legislation;

    (c)   recommend programs for the physical, economic, social and cultural development of the City;

    (d)  be responsible for public relations activities and represent the City for ceremonial purposes;

    (e)   represent the City in intergovernmental relations, personally or by delegated representative, at the direction of the Council;

    (f)   preside at meetings of the Council;

    (g)  establish and dissolve ad hoc committees, subject to approval by the Council;

    (h)  possess the authority to suspend implementation of any action taken by the Council by filing with the City Clerk, within three days after such Council action, a notice of suspension thereof. Such suspension shall constitute a motion for reconsideration of the action taken, to be voted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting;

    (i)   provide leadership and marshal citizen participation in City activities;

    (j)   report to the public from time to time on the affairs of the City;

    (k)  possess the authority and attributes of a Council Member;

    (l)   possess such authority and perform such duties as are granted or required by this Charter or by the Council.

 

Section 310: VICE MAYOR.
    At its first regular meeting in January of each year, the Council shall designate one of its members Vice Mayor, to serve for a period of one year and until a successor is elected and qualified. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall possess and perform the powers and duties of the Mayor.

 

Section 315: REGULAR MEETINGS.
    The Council shall hold regular meetings at least twice each month at such times as it shall fix by ordinance or resolution.

 

Section 320: PLACE OF MEETING.
    All regular Council meetings shall be held in the Civic Center Complex or on public property within the City, should the Council find and determine that the Civic Center Complex is hazardous or unsuitable for the conduct of a regular Council meeting.

 

Section 325: QUORUM.
    A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

Section 330: ACTIONS.
    The Council by ordinance shall establish rules of procedure for taking actions. Such rules shall:

    (a)   provide that Council actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the entire Council membership.

    (b)  provide for the introduction, publication, adoption, amendment, effective date and codification of ordinances.

    (c)   provide for the introduction and adoption of resolutions.

 

Section 335: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
    No one shall be denied the right, personally or through counsel, to present grievances or offer suggestions for the betterment of municipal affairs at any regular meeting of the Council, nor to speak to the subject of any special meeting.

 

Section 340: PUBLICATION OF LEGAL NOTICES.
    The Council by ordinance shall provide for a method of publication of legal notices.

 

Section 345: INTERFERENCE IN ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.
    Neither the Mayor nor any Council Member shall interfere with the execution of the powers and duties of the City Manager, or order, directly or indirectly, the City Manager or any department head to appoint or remove any person to or from any office or employment with the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor, and Council Members shall deal with the administrative service under the City Manager solely through the City Manager and neither the Mayor nor any Council Member shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.

 

Section 350: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
    The Council by ordinance shall create boards and commissions as necessary to facilitate governmental operations in all appropriate fields, including, but not limited to:

    (a)   Board of Zoning Adjustment;

    (b)  Historical-Cultural Commission;

    (c)   Human Resources Commission;

    (d)  Library Board;

    (e)   Personnel Relations Board;

    (f)   Planning Commission;

    (g)  Recreation and Parks Commission.

    An ordinance creating a board or commission shall specify its powers and duties, number of members and their terms of office, and such other matters as the Council deems appropriate. The Council by ordinance may consolidate, reorganize and rename any of such boards and commissions, provided that no board or commission shall be abolished except upon a determination by the Council after public hearing that the functions of such board or commission are no longer necessary for the proper administration of the City's business. The City Manager shall designate the officers and employees who shall provide staff assistance to each board and commission.

ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
Section 400: CITY MANAGER: APPOINTMENT.
    The Council shall adopt a City Manager, who:

    (a)   shall serve at the pleasure of the Council;

    (b)  shall be the chief administrative officer of the City;

    (c)   shall be chosen on the basis of administrative qualifications;

    (d)  shall be paid at a salary fixed by the Council commensurate with the responsibilities of the position;

    (e)   shall not have served on the Council within a period of one year immediately preceding the date of appointment.

    During a period of ninety days immediately following the date of installation of any person newly elected to the Council at a regular or special municipal election or of any person newly appointed to the Council, the Council shall take no action, whether immediate or prospective, to remove, suspend, request the resignation of, or reduce the salary of, the City Manager.

 

Section 405: CITY MANAGER: POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City, and:

    (a)   shall appoint, remove and discipline all administrative officers of the City, except as otherwise provided by or pursuant to this Charter;

    (b)  shall approve, modify or disapprove all recommendations for appointment of, removal of, and disciplinary actions to be taken against, employees by administrative officers of the City, except as otherwise provided by or pursuant to this Charter;

    (c)   shall, annually, prepare and submit to the Council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, and properly administer the budget as adopted by the Council;

    (d)  shall keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as are deemed necessary or desirable;

    (e)   shall provide for enforcement of all laws and regulations which the City is required to administer;

    (f)   shall engage in no incompatible business or occupation;

    (g)  shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by the Council.

 

Section 410: CITY MANAGER: MEETINGS.
    The City Manager:

    (a)   shall be accorded a seat at the Council table and at all meetings of boards and commissions;

    (b)  shall be entitled to participate in the deliberations of the Council, boards and commissions, but shall not have a vote;

    (c)   shall receive notices of all special meetings of the Council, boards and commissions.

 

Section 415: CITY MANAGER: ASSISTANTS; ACTING CITY MANAGER.
    The City Manager shall appoint:

    (a)   professional assistants to positions authorized by the Council for the proper administration of the City Manager's office. Such assistants:

    (1)  shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager;

    (2)  shall exercise such powers and perform such duties of the City Manager as are specified by the City Manager;

    (b)  subject to the approval of the City Council, an administrative officer of the City to serve as Acting City Manager during any temporary absence or temporary disability of the City Manager. The Acting City Manager shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the City Manager.

 

Section 420: DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS.
    The Council by ordinance shall create, reorganize and abolish departments and divisions thereof as necessary for the proper administration of the City's business. The City Manager shall appoint an administrative officer to head each department. Such department heads shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Manager also may appoint an administrative officer of the City to serve as a deputy for the purpose of performing any legally required act of a department head.

 

Section 425: CITY ATTORNEY: APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Council shall appoint a City Attorney, who:

    (a)   shall serve at the pleasure of the Council;

    (b)  shall be the chief legal officer of the City;

    (c)   shall perform such duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by the Council;

    (d)  shall recommend to the Council proposals for additions to, deletions from, and amendments of this Charter as are deemed necessary or desirable.

 

Section 430: CITY ATTORNEY: ASSISTANTS; ACTING CITY ATTORNEY.
    The Council, upon recommendation of the City Attorney, shall appoint:

    (a)   professional assistants to positions authorized by the Council for the proper administration of the City Attorney's office. Such assistants:

    (1)  shall serve at the pleasure of the Council;

    (2)  shall exercise such powers and perform such duties of the City Attorney as are specified by the City Attorney;

    (b)  a professional assistant to serve as Acting City Attorney during any temporary absence or temporary disability of the City Attorney. The Acting City Attorney shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the City Attorney.

 

Section 435: CITY CLERK.
    (a)   The Council shall appoint a City Clerk, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and shall perform such duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by the Council.

    (b)  The Council by ordinance may consolidate the office and functions of the City Clerk with that of the City Manager.

 

Section 440: FIDELITY BONDS.
    The Council shall determine the need for and the amounts of fidelity bonds for the officers and employees. Bond premiums shall be paid by the City.

 

Section 445: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
    The City shall remain a contracting agency under the provisions of the Public Employees' Retirement Law until this section is repealed in the manner authorized by law.

 

Section 450: BINDING ARBITRATION.
    (a)   Declaration of Policy. It is the policy of the City of San Leandro that strikes by its firefighters and police officers pose an imminent threat to public health and safety and should be prohibited, and that alternate methods should be adopted for peacefully and equitably resolving disputes that might otherwise lead to such strikes.

    (b)  Prohibition Against Strikes. No City police officer or firefighter employee, employee union, association or organization shall strike, slow down, sickout or engage in such concerted economic activity against the City. Disputes unresolved by negotiations shall be resolved by the procedure set forth herein. Any such employee who fails to report for work without good cause during negotiations or who aids, abets or encourages strikes, slow downs or sickouts against the City during such time shall be subject to disciplinary action, including, but not limited to, termination from City employment, subject to the provisions of this Charter, the City's Personnel Rules and Regulations and lawful procedures.

    (c)   Obligation to Negotiate in Good Faith. The City, through its duly authorized representatives, shall negotiate in good faith with recognized fire and police employee organizations on wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment, including procedures for the resolution of grievances submitted by the employee organization over the interpretation or application of any negotiated agreement, including provisions for binding arbitration of grievances. Unless and until agreement is reached through negotiations between the City and the recognized employee organization or a determination is made through the arbitration procedure hereinafter provided, no existing benefit or condition of employment for those employees shall be eliminated or changed.

    (d)  Both parties shall exchange their written demands at least 180 calendar days before the expiration of the then current agreement or arbitration award. Collective negotiations shall commence at least 150 calendar days before the expiration of the then current agreement or arbitration award.

    (e)   Agreements reached between City representatives and the representatives of the recognized employee organizations shall be submitted in writing to the City Council for its approval, modification, or rejection. All phases of negotiations, mediation and arbitration including the final binding decision of the mediator/arbitrator shall be completed at least 25 calendar days before the expiration of the then current agreement or arbitration award.

    (f)   Both parties shall select and schedule a person to act as both mediator and arbitrator (hereafter “arbitrator”) at least 200 calendar days before the expiration of the then current agreement or arbitration award. If they are unable to agree upon an arbitrator, they shall select such person from a list of seven names to be provided by an impartial third-party arbitration service mutually acceptable to the parties. The parties shall provide the arbitration service with sufficient notice to insure receipt of the list at least 190 calendar days before the expiration of the then current agreement or arbitration award. If at least 180 calendar days before the expiration of the then current agreement or arbitration award the parties still cannot agree upon an arbitrator, they shall immediately alternately strike names from the list, the choice of the first strike to be determined by lot. The last remaining unstruck name shall be selected and scheduled as arbitrator.

    (g)  If 90 calendar days before the expiration of the current agreement or arbitration award no agreement can be reached, or if the City Council refuses to ratify the agreement arrived at or modifies such agreement in any manner unacceptable to the employee organization, the parties shall commence mediation.

    (h)  If no agreement between the parties has been reached within 14 calendar days after the start of mediation, the arbitrator shall thereupon commence arbitration proceedings to deal with the issues still in dispute. Each party shall put in writing its last best offer on each of the issues still in dispute within 14 calendar days after the start of arbitration proceedings, and these offers shall immediately be made public. The arbitrator shall choose one of the parties' last best offer for each such issue still in dispute and shall have no power to modify or compromise the last best offers of either party. The arbitrator shall hear the evidence presented and consider all factors relevant to the issues from the standpoint of both employer and effected employees, including the interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the City to meet those costs. If one of the parties fails to submit its last best offer within the above allotted time, then the arbitrator shall be obligated to make an award incorporating the terms and conditions of the last best offer made by the party that has submitted its offer within the above allotted times. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on all parties.

    (i)   The costs of mediation and arbitration, including the scheduling of the arbitrator, shall be borne equally by all parties. Mediation and arbitration hearings shall be conducted within the City and closed to the public, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the parties with the concurrence of the arbitrator.

    (j)   The provisions of this Section shall not be construed as making any of the provisions of Section 923 of the Labor Code of the State of California applicable to City employees. The provisions of this Section pertaining to arbitration shall be construed as an “arbitration agreement” for the purpose of making applicable to the extent not in conflict herewith the provisions of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1280), Title IX, Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California.

    (k)  The time limits set forth above may be waived by the mutual, written agreement of the parties and the arbitrator.

ARTICLE V. FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Section 500: FISCAL YEAR.
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year.

 

Section 505: PROPOSED BUDGET.
    At least thirty-five (35) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council a proposed budget for such fiscal year, and shall file a copy of the proposed budget with the City Clerk for inspection by the public.

 

Section 510: BUDGET: PUBLIC HEARING.
    The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget. Notice of the hearing shall be published once in the official newspaper not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. All interested persons shall be heard at the hearing.

 

Section 515: BUDGET: ADOPTION; AMENDMENT.
    After the conclusion of the public hearing, and not later than June 30, the Council by resolution shall adopt the budget with such revisions as it deems necessary. A copy of the adopted budget shall be available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk.

    The Council may amend the budget at any time by resolution adopted by five affirmative votes.

 

Section 520: BUDGET: APPROPRIATIONS; EXPENDITURES.
    The budget shall provide appropriations to such capital and operating funds as are required for proper accounting and fiscal management. Expenditures of City funds shall be made only in accordance with such appropriations, and only upon presentation of accounting evidence of a City obligation. Appropriations to capital funds may be carried for not more than five fiscal years.

 

Section 525: PROPERTY TAX: PROCEDURE.
    The Council by ordinance shall provide a procedure for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes upon property.

 

Section 530: PROPERTY TAX: LEVY; LIMIT.
    Annually, within the time provided by law, the Council by ordinance shall levy a tax upon all property taxable by the City at a rate adequate to meet obligations of the City for the fiscal year. The tax levied upon each one hundred dollars ($100) of the assessed valuation of property shall not exceed, in the aggregate:

    (a)   one dollar ($1) for general municipal purposes, including:

    (1)  fifteen cents for libraries;

    (2)  twenty cents for recreation and parks;

    (b)  additional amounts required to pay the cost of retirement and pension benefits under the provisions of the Public Employees' Retirement Law;

    (c)   additional amounts authorized by the voters of the City for specified purposes.

 

Section 535: BONDED DEBT LIMIT.
    The indebtedness of the City evidenced by general obligation bonds shall at no time exceed fifteen percent of the assessed valuation of all property taxable by the City.

 

Section 540: PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS.
    The Council by ordinance shall provide for a method of competitive bidding upon and award of contracts for public works, other than maintenance and repair, requiring an expenditure of an amount which, under the general laws, would require bidding. The ordinance shall permit:

    (a)   the award of contracts without competitive bidding in emergencies;

    (b)  the accomplishment of public works by City employees.

 

Section 545: PURCHASING AND PERSONAL SERVICES.
    The Council by ordinance shall provide for a method of contracting for the purchase of equipment and supplies and for the obtaining of personal services. The ordinance shall provide ample opportunity for competitive bidding, with such exceptions as are necessary.

 

Section 550: SIGNATURES ON CHECKS.
    City checks shall bear the facsimile signatures of the City Manager and the Finance Director or their respective assistants.

 

Section 555: INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
    The Council shall provide for an annual independent audit of the City's fiscal affairs by a holder of a valid permit to practice public accountancy issued by the State Board of Accountancy.

ARTICLE VI. ELECTIONS
Section 600: GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
    General Municipal elections for the election of officers and for such other purposes as are required by law or as the Council may prescribe shall be held on the second Tuesday in April of each even numbered year. In order to consolidate the General Municipal election with the statewide direct primary or statewide general election, the Council may by ordinance provide for such consolidation.

 

Section 605: SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
    The Council may, and when required by law shall, call special municipal elections for such purposes as are required by law or as the Council may prescribe. A special municipal election may be held on any date specified by the Council.

 

Section 610: CONDUCT OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
    The Council by ordinance may provide for the method of conducting municipal elections. Any matter not provided for by ordinance or by this Charter shall be governed by the provisions of the general laws.

 

Section 615: INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL.
    The electors of the City reserve to themselves the powers of initiative and referendum and the recall of elective officers, to be exercised in the manner prescribed by the Elections Code of the State of California.

ARTICLE VII. MISCELLANEOUS
Section 700: FRANCHISES.
    The Council by ordinance may require, and provide a procedure for, the obtaining of a franchise for the furnishing of any utility, service or commodity, or the use of public streets or other public places or the traversing of any part of the City for such purpose.

 

Section 705: NEPOTISM.
    No person shall be appointed to the office of Council Member or Mayor or to any permanent salaried office or employment if such person is related by blood or marriage within the third degree to a Council Member or Mayor or to the appointing officer.

 

Section 710: VIOLATIONS.
    A violation of any provision of this Charter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by both.

 

Section 715: SEVERABILITY.
    If any provision of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Charter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.

TITLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1-1 CITY COUNCIL
CHAPTER 1-2 DEPARTMENTS
CHAPTER 1-3 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1-4 PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 1-5 PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1-6 PURCHASING, PERSONAL SERVICES AND SURPLUS SALES
CHAPTER 1-7 PUBLICATION OF LEGAL NOTICES
CHAPTER 1-8 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 1-9 RESERVED
CHAPTER 1-10 JUDICIAL REVIEW
CHAPTER 1-11 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION
CHAPTER 1-12 CITATION—VIOLATIONS
CHAPTER 1-13 SEVERABILITY
CHAPTER 1-14 DEFINITIONS

CHAPTER 1-1 CITY COUNCIL
ARTICLE 1. COUNCIL MEMBER DISTRICTS
1-1-100 DIVISION OF CITY.
    The City of San Leandro is hereby divided into six (6) Council Member Districts. Said districts shall be numbered, and the boundaries thereof shall be as indicated on that certain map entitled “City of San Leandro, Council Member District Map, 2012,” a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-070, 10/26/81; Ordinance No. 91-014, 9/16/91 (Section 1-1-100); Ordinance No. 2002-03, 2/19/02 (Section 1-1-100); Ordinance No. 2011-015, 12/5/11 (Section 1-1-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. COUNCIL MEETINGS
1-1-200 REGULAR MEETINGS.
    Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. If any such day is a City holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next business day at 7:00 p.m.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 96-07, 6/17/96 (Section 1-1-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. PROCEDURE
1-1-300 ACTIONS—METHOD.
    Actions of the Council shall be taken by ordinance, resolution or motion.

 

1-1-305 ACTIONS—MAJORITY VOTE.
    Actions of the Council shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the entire Council membership.

 

 

 



 

1-1-310 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS—READING.
    At the time of its introduction or adoption, an ordinance or resolution shall be ready by title only, unless a Council Member or the Mayor requests that the ordinance or resolution be read in full. Any matter designated as a consent item regularly appearing on the City Council agenda and available for public inspection in the City Clerk’s office may, by motion of the City Council, be deemed to have been read by title.

 

1-1-315 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS—NUMBERING.
    Ordinances and resolutions shall be numbered in separate series with the last two numbers of the year in which introduced followed by a dash and a consecutive number beginning with the number one each calendar year. The consecutive numbers assigned to ordinances shall be preceded by a zero.

 

1-1-320 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS—AUTHENTICATION.
    The City Clerk shall authenticate by signature all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council.

 

1-1-325 ORDINANCES—PUBLICATION AND POSTING.
    The title of each ordinance passed to print shall be published once and the City Clerk shall post a complete copy thereof on the City Council Chamber bulletin board for five (5) days prior to adoption. The title of each ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 1-1-345 shall be published once and the City Clerk shall post a complete copy thereof on the City Council Chamber bulletin board for five days following adoption.

 

1-1-330 ORDINANCES—ADOPTION.
    No ordinance shall be adopted within five (5) days after its passage to print.

 

1-1-335 ORDINANCES—ALTERATION PROHIBITED.
    No ordinance shall be altered as to a matter of substance after its passage to print. Correction of typographical or clerical errors shall not constitute alteration as to a matter of substance.

 

1-1-340 ORDINANCES—EFFECTIVE DATE.
    Each ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after its adoption, or at a later date specified therein.

 

1-1-345 ORDINANCES—IMMEDIATE ADOPTION AND EFFECT.
    Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, an ordinance may be introduced and adopted at the same meeting, and shall be effective upon adoption, if it is an ordinance:

    (a)   relating to an election;

    (b)  for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, containing a declaration of the facts constituting the urgency;

    (c)   relating to public improvement proceedings;

    (d)  relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the City;

    (e)   annexing territory to the City;

    (f)   covered by particular provisions of law prescribing the manner of its passage and adoption.

 

1-1-350 COMPREHENSIVE CODES OF TECHNICAL REGULATIONS—ADOPTION.
    The Council may adopt any comprehensive code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance.

 

1-1-355 COMPREHENSIVE CODE OF ORDINANCES—ADOPTION.
    Any ordinance may be compiled into a comprehensive code which the Council may adopt by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance.

 

1-1-360 COMPREHENSIVE CODES—PUBLICATION NOT REQUIRED.
    Comprehensive codes of regulations or of ordinances adopted by reference need not be published, provided that copies thereof shall be available at the office of the City Clerk for use or purchase by the public.

 

1-1-365 COMPREHENSIVE CODES—REPEALS, AMENDMENT, ADDITIONS.
    Repeal or amendment of codified ordinances, or additions to a comprehensive code, shall be accomplished by reference to numerical designations assigned thereto for the purpose of arrangement and indexing of the comprehensive code.

 

1-1-370 TRAFFIC CODE.
    The City Clerk shall compile and maintain a Traffic Code, in duplicate, which shall contain, in logical format and order, all ordinances, resolutions and regulations adopted pursuant to Title 6. The ordinance or resolution number shall be indicated in the Traffic Code. The Traffic Code shall be updated periodically. The Traffic Code shall be a public record.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 82-031, 5/24/82; Ordinance No. 86-030, 8/18/86)

CHAPTER 1-2 DEPARTMENTS
1-2-100 DEPARTMENTS CREATED.
    The following departments are hereby created, and shall be under the direct control of the designated department heads:

 

Departments

Department Heads

City Attorney

City Attorney

City Manager

City Manager

Community Services

Community Services Director Department

Development Services Department

Development Services Director

Engineering and Transportation Department

Engineering and Transportation Director

Finance Department

Finance Director

Fire Department

Alameda County Fire Chief (pursuant to contract with Alameda County Fire District)

Human Resources Department

Human Resources Director

Police Department

Police Chief

Public Works Services Department

Public Works Services Director

 

1-2-105 CITY MANAGER—POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The City Manager shall possess exclusive administrative authority over all departments except that of City Attorney. The City Manager shall:

    (a)   create, reorganize and abolish divisions within each department as necessary for the proper administration of the City’s business;

    (b)  assign duties to each department and division as necessary for efficient functioning of City services;

    (c)   assign employees to each department and division as necessary for the accomplishment of assigned duties;

    (d)  prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of City officers and employees; and

    (e)   prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of City administrative officers and employees.

 

1-2-110 CITY CLERK FUNCTIONS.
    Notwithstanding Section 1-2-105, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office or personage of a City Clerk, either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, the officer in the City Manager’s office assigned to City Clerk duties shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation, or liability and shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation or liability. The City Manager shall, at all times, assign an officer of the City to the duties of City Clerk, and such officer shall possess the requisite qualifications for such duties. Such assignment shall be approved by the City Council. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents, records, and election results and for the deposit and custody of resolutions, ordinances, minutes, disclosure statements, petitions and other official documents, the assigned officer shall use the seal, title and emoluments of the office of the City Clerk to the extent required by law.

 

1-2-115 TITLE OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR, CITY ENGINEER, SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS, ET AL.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code to the contrary, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office or personage of a public works director, city engineer, superintendent of streets or the like, either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation or liability and shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation or liability. The City Manager shall, at all times, assign an officer or officers of the City to the duties of a public works director, city engineer and superintendent of streets and such officers shall possess the requisite licenses, registrations and qualifications for such duties. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents, records and maps, the assigned officers shall use the seal, title and emoluments, if any, of the office of a public works director, city engineer or superintendent of streets to the extent required by law. As used herein, “Public Works Director” shall mean “Community Development Director” or “Public Works Services Director,” as appropriate to the text.

 

1-2-120 CITY TREASURER FUNCTION.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code to the contrary, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office or personage of a City Treasurer either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, the City Manager’s designee to perform the duties of the City Finance Director shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation or liability and shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation or liability. The City Manager shall, at all times, assign the Finance Director of the City to the duties of a City Treasurer, and the Finance Director shall possess the requisite qualifications for such duties. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents and records, the Finance Director shall use the seal, title and emoluments, if any, of the office of City Treasurer to the extent required by law.

 

1-2-125 FUNCTIONS OF FORMER COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code to the contrary, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office of the Community Development Department, either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code, by an uncodified ordinance or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation or be subject to such liability and shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation or incur such liability. The City Manager shall, at all times, assign officers of the City to the former duties of the Community Development Department and such officers shall possess the requisite licenses, registrations and qualifications for such duties. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents, records and maps, the assigned officers shall use the seal, title and emoluments, if any, of their respective offices. As used herein, “Community Development Director” shall mean Development Director, Engineering and Transportation Director and Planning and Building Director as appropriate to the text.

 

1-2-126 FUNCTIONS OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
    The Development Services Department shall perform all duties assigned by this Code and the City Manager. Any references in this Code to the Development Department or the Planning and Building Department shall mean the Development Services Department.

 

1-2-127 FUNCTIONS OF FORMER LIBRARY DEPARTMENT AND RECREATION HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code to the contrary, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office of the Library or Recreation Human Resources Director, either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code, by an uncodified ordinance or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation or be subject to such liability and shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation or incur such liability. The City Manager shall, at all times, assign officers of the City to the former duties of the Library or Recreation Human Resources Director and such officers shall possess the requisite licenses, registrations and qualifications for such duties. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents, records and maps, the assigned officers shall use the seal, title and emoluments, if any, of their respective offices.

 

1-2-128 FUNCTIONS OF FORMER PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code to the contrary, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office of the Personnel Director, either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code, by an uncodified ordinance or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation, or be subject to such liability and shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation, or incur such liability. The City Manager shall, at all times, assign officers of the City to the former duties of the Personnel Director and such officers shall possess the requisite licenses, registrations and qualifications for such duties. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents, records and maps, the assigned officers shall use the seal, title and emoluments, if any, of their respective offices.

 

1-2-129 FUNCTIONS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code to the contrary, whenever a function, power, obligation or liability is imposed upon the office of the Fire Chief, either by the general laws of the State of California, by the Charter of the City of San Leandro, by this Code, by an uncodified ordinance or by any administrative rules, regulations, custom or practice of the City of San Leandro, and only for the term of any agreement between the City and the Alameda County Fire Department, the Alameda County Fire Chief or designee shall have or exercise such function, power, obligation, or be subject to such liability. The Alameda County Fire Chief shall be fully vested with the requisite legal authority and exclusive responsibility to have or perform such function, power, obligation, or incur such liability. The Alameda County Fire Chief shall, at all times and pursuant to agreement with the City, assign officers to the former duties of the San Leandro Fire Chief and his or her subordinate officers, and such officers shall possess the requisite licenses, registrations and qualifications for such duties. For the authentication and certification of official acts, documents, records and maps, the Alameda County Fire Chief and assigned officers shall use the seal, title and emoluments, if any, of their respective offices.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 79-10, 4/20/79; Ordinance No. 81-075, 10/30/81; Ordinance No. 83-025, 9/19/83; Ordinance No. 84-018, 7/16/84; Ordinance No. 89-09, 4/3/89 (Section 1-2-120); Ordinance No. 90-014, 7/16/90 (Sections 1-2-100, 1-2-125); Ordinance No. 92-013, 7/20/92 (Sections 1-2-100, 1-2-126); Ordinance No. 94-02, 3/7/94 (Sections 1-2-100, 1-2-127, 1-2-128); Ordinance No. 95-010, 6/26/95 (Sections 1-2-100, 1-2-129); Ordinance No. 2002-027, 10/22/02 (Section 1-2-110))

CHAPTER 1-3 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-3-100 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS CREATED.
    The following Boards and Commissions are hereby created:

    (a)   Board of Appeals;

    (b)  Board of Zoning Adjustments;

    (c)   Handicapped Access Appeals Board;

    (d)  Human Services Commission;

    (e)   Library-Historical Commission;

    (f)   Personnel Relations Board;

    (g)  Planning Commission;

    (h)  Recreation and Parks Commission;

    (i)   Site Development Sub-Commission;

    (j)   Youth Advisory Commission;

    (k)  Rent Review Board;

    (l)   Senior Commission; and

    (m) Arts Commission.

 

1-3-105 MEMBERS—APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL.
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, Board and Commission members shall be appointed by the Council and may be removed by the Council without cause, notice or hearing.

 

1-3-110 MEMBERS—DISTRICT REPRESENTATION.
    One elector from each Council Member District shall be appointed to each of the following Boards and Commissions:

    (a)   Board of Zoning Adjustment;

    (b)  Human Services Commission;

    (c)   Library-Historical Commission;

    (d)  Planning Commission;

    (e)   Recreation and Parks Commission;

    (f)   Senior Commission; and

    (g)  Arts Commission.

    All other members of each such Board and Commission shall be appointed at large. Three (3) residents selected at large shall be appointed to the Youth Advisory Commission by each Council Member, at least one resident selected from each Council Member District, and the remainder may be selected at large. No change in Council Member District boundaries shall operate to disqualify an incumbent from office before the expiration of the term for which such member was appointed.

 

1-3-115 MEMBERS—TERM OF OFFICE.
    (a)   Members of the following Boards and Commissions who were appointed from a specific Council Member District pursuant to Section 1-3-110 of this Article (“District Members”) may hold office for up to four (4) years, commencing on the date of appointment:

    (1)  Board of Zoning Adjustments;

    (2)  Human Services Commission;

    (3)  Library-Historical Commission;

    (4)  Planning Commission;

    (5)  Recreation and Parks Commission;

    (6)  Senior Commission; and

    (7)  Arts Commission.

    The terms of District Members shall terminate upon the expiration of the regular term of the Council Member representing the Council Member District from which the District Member was appointed. The City Council may fill a vacancy by appointment for the unexpired remainder of the term.

    (b)  Any members of the Boards and Commissions listed in subsection (a) of this section who were appointed at large pursuant to Section 1-3-110 of this Article may hold office for up to four (4) years, commencing on the date of appointment. The terms of at large members shall terminate upon the expiration of the Mayor’s regular term of office. The City Council may fill a vacancy by appointment for the unexpired remainder of the term.

    (c)   Youth Advisory Commission Board Members shall hold office for one year commencing September 1, and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Youth Advisory Commission Board Members may be appointed for up to four (4) consecutive terms. The City Council may fill a vacancy by appointment for the unexpired remainder of the term.

    (d)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, a Board and Commission member whose term is not provided for in subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall hold office for four (4) years from the date of appointment. The City Council may fill a vacancy by appointment for the unexpired remainder of the term.

    (e)   Arts Commission District Members from Council Member Districts 1, 3, and 5 and at large members appointed in 2014 shall hold office until December 31, 2016. Arts Commission Members appointed after 2014 shall not be subject to this subsection.

    (f)   Notwithstanding the formal term expiration dates described above, Board and Commission member terms of appointment shall continue until a successor has been appointed or until they formally resign their position.

 

1-3-120 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2003-09, 6/2/03)
 

1-3-125 MEMBERS—EMPLOYEES EXCLUDED.
    No employee of the City shall be eligible to hold office as a Board or Commission member, except members of the Youth Advisory Commission, the youth member of the Library-Historical Commission, or as required by ordinance.

 

1-3-130 MEMBERS—COMPENSATION, EXPENSES.
    Members of Boards and Commissions shall receive no compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in performance of official duties.

 

1-3-135 MEMBERS—CONCURRENT APPOINTMENTS.
    The City Council may designate a single appointee to serve concurrently as both a Planning Commissioner and Board of Zoning Adjustments member.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-042, 6/15/81; Ordinance No. 83-010, 4/4/83; Ordinance No. 83-011, 4/4/83; Ordinance No. 91-08, 7/15/91 (Sections 1-3-100, 1-3-110, 1-3-115); Ordinance No. 95-04, 3/6/95 (Section 1-3-115); Ordinance No. 95-017, 9/5/95 (Sections 1-3-110, 1-3-115); Ordinance No. 2001-09, 4/2/01 (Section 1-3-100); Ordinance No. 2001-023, 11/19/01 (Section 1-3-100); Ordinance No. 2001-024, 11/19/01 (Section 1-3-100); Ordinance No. 2003-09, 6/2/03 (Sections 1-3-115—1-3-120); Ordinance No. 2013-008, 10/21/13 (Section 3-1-125); Ordinance No. 2014-015, 9/15/14 (Sections 1-3-100, 1-3-110, 1-3-115); Ordinance No. 2018-020, 12/17/18 (Section 1-3-135))

 

 

ARTICLE 2. PROCEDURE
1-3-200 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
    Each Board and Commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business.

 

1-3-205 REGULAR MEETINGS.
    Each Board and Commission shall hold regular meetings at such times as it shall fix in its rules of procedure.

 

1-3-210 PLACE OF MEETINGS.
    All regular Board and Commission meetings shall be convened in the Civic Center.

 

1-3-215 QUORUM.
    A majority of the membership of a Board or Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

1-3-220 MAJORITY VOTE.
    Board and Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the entire membership of the Board or Commission.

 

1-3-225 ACTIONS.
    Board and Commission actions shall be taken only in the Civic Center.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 3. BOARD OF APPEALS
1-3-300 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Board of Appeals shall be the “Administrative Hearing Body,” which shall mean three (3) City of San Leandro department manager level employees designated by the City Manager to hear and decide upon together, appeals held pursuant to this Chapter.

 

1-3-305 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Board shall possess the powers and perform the duties prescribed in:

    (a)   Chapter 3-3 of this Code;

    (b)  Chapters 7-5, 7-9 and 7-10 of this Code;

    (c)   Article 9 of Chapter 6-1 of this Code.

 

Editor’s Note: Article 9 of Chapter 6-1, referred to in this section, was repealed by Ordinance No. 94-022.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-033, 9/21/92 (Section 1-3-305); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 1-3-300))

 

ARTICLE 4. BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENTS
1-3-400 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall consist of seven (7) members.

 

1-3-405 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Board shall:

    (a)   Hear and decide upon applications for the approval of:

    (1)  Conditional uses other than Planned Unit Developments under Chapter 7-2 of this Code (Signs) and the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro;

    (2)  Variances under the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro and Chapter 7-7 of this Code (Right-of-way Lines);

    (3)  Home occupations under the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro;

    (4)  Modification of requirements for and restrictions upon fences, walls and hedges under the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro;

    (5)  Installation of operating accessory structures in required yards under the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro;

    (6)  Any matter within the jurisdiction of the Site Development Sub-Commission under Chapter 7-2 and the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro when such application is filed in combination with an application for approval of a matter within the jurisdiction of the Board. In so hearing and deciding, the Board shall have the same powers and duties and shall be limited to the same scope of review as is the Site Development Sub-Commission;

 

    (b)  Hear and decide appeals from administrative action under the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro;

    (c)   Make recommendations to the Planning Commission as to the desirability of amendments to the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro.

 

Editor’s Note: Chapter 7-2, referred to in this section, was repealed by Ordinance No. 95-037, 11/6/95.

 

 

1-3-410 BOARD ACTION.
    The Board shall act upon any matter brought before it within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing unless otherwise agreed with the applicant. Failure to act within such time shall constitute disapproval of the application.

 

1-3-415 APPEAL OF BOARD DECISION.
    Any decision of the Board shall be subject to appeal to the Council, and shall not be effective until expiration of the appeal period.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-037, 11/19/07 (Section 1-3-405); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 1-3-405))

 

ARTICLE 5. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Article 5, Historical-Cultural Commission, repealed by Ordinance No. 83-010, 4/4/83)

 

ARTICLE 6. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Added as Chapter 19 by Ordinance No. 78-10, 2/21/78; Ordinance No. 82-079, 9/20/82; Article 6, Handicapped Access Appeals Board, repealed by Ordinance No. 2013-009, 11/18/13 (Sections 1-3-600—1-3-670))

 

ARTICLE 7. HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
1-3-700 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Human Services Commission shall consist of nine (9) members.

 

1-3-705 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Commission shall advise the Council on all matters relating to social conditions within the City, assess and report to the Council the social needs of the people, recommend to the Council methods for meeting such needs, and assist the Council in marshalling the human resources necessary to accomplish the foregoing. In discharge of this responsibility, the Commission shall:

    (a)   Evaluate social services being provided to communities in need within the City, and provide advice and assistance toward equitable provision and coordination thereof;

    (b)  Provide motivation for the development of new social services as the need therefor is determined;

    (c)   Coordinate the efforts of social service agencies to raise funds from the community;

    (d)  Assist in the procurement of grants from public and private funding sources;

    (e)   Study proposed programs and proposed budgets of social service agencies requesting City assistance and recommend Council approval or disapproval of such programs, budgets and requests. The Commission shall conduct periodic reviews of such programs and budgets and shall report to the Council on the implementation of such programs and expenditures of City funds and physical resources therefor.

    The Commission shall not be limited to those duties hereinbefore specifically set forth, but shall do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of the City of San Leandro in relation to social conditions, needs and aspirations within the City and to assist in the assumption of such role and the discharge of such responsibility by the City of San Leandro. In so doing, the Commission shall work with and seek the cooperation of individuals and public and private entities in bringing to bear the human resources of the community for the foregoing purposes.

 

1-3-710 OVERSIGHT RESPONSIBILITY.
    The Commission shall be responsible for oversight of the City of San Leandro’s Community Assistance Grant Fund Program. In accordance therewith, no grants thereunder shall be made to any agency for which a staff member, whether paid or unpaid, nor any member of the Board of Directors or any officer of such agency, is a member of the Commission.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-024, 11/19/01 (Sections 1-3-700 and 1-3-710); Ordinance No. 2018-003, 3/19/18 (Section 1-3-705))

 

ARTICLE 8. LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION
Note
*     Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2003-015 repealed and replaced Article 8 in its entirety.

 

1-3-800 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall consist of seven (7) adult members and one youth member pursuant to Section 1-3-801. The membership shall comprise at least one elector from each of the six (6) Council Member Districts pursuant to Section 1-3-110 of this Code. Each Commission member shall be appointed by the City Council and may be removed from the Commission without cause, notice, or hearing by the City Council under Section 1-3-105.

 

1-3-801 YOUTH MEMBER.
    The Library Director shall nominate a youth member to the Library-Historical Commission for appointment by the City Council. The youth member shall be a resident of the City, and under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of appointment. The youth member shall hold office for one year commencing in September, until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.

 

1-3-805 ACTIONS AND CONDUCT.
    Except where specifically noted in this Article, the actions and conduct of the Library-Historical Commission shall be governed by the policies and procedures set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of this Chapter.

    The actions and conduct of the Library-Historical Commission shall comply in all respects with Section 54950 et seq., of the Government Code, known commonly as the Ralph M. Brown Act.

 

1-3-810 MEETINGS.
    Regular meetings of the Library-Historical Commission are held on the third Tuesday of each month inside the Main Public Library. Commission meetings shall be held regularly with respect to time, place, and date as set by resolution of the Commission.

 

1-3-815 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall:

    (a)   Recommend policies for the use and improvement of all property operated for library purposes by the City;

    (b)  Recommend rules and regulations governing the operation of library buildings;

    (c)   Recommend acceptance or rejection of proposed donations to the City for library purposes;

    (d)  Recommend regarding proposed contracts with other agencies for the provision and use of library services and facilities;

    (e)   Serve as an advisory body to the City Council and provide leadership regarding historic preservation issues within the community;

    (f)   Seek a means for the identification, designation, protection, retention, and preservation of historic resources as defined under the provisions of Chapter 4-26 of this Code;

    (g)  Promote and coordinate the continuing education of the San Leandro community about the City’s heritage and its designated historic resources;

    (h)  Provide liaison between the Council and all historical organizations operating within the local community;

    (i)   Devise and recommend to the Council implementation procedures for establishing and maintaining appropriate relationships with non-local historical organizations;

    (j)   Assist all historical organizations operating within the local community to develop a high level of community participation in historical endeavors and activities;

    (k)  Study proposed programs and proposed budgets of historical organizations making requests of the City and recommend Council approval or disapproval of any proposed program or budget for which City funds are requested. No such program or budget involving City assistance or City funding, or the use of City property, shall be implemented without approval of the Council;

    (l)   Conduct periodic audits of Council-approved programs and budgets and report to the Council on the implementation of such programs and expenditures of City funds therefor;

    (m) Recommend and support inclusive programs and activities that celebrate the City’s cultural diversity, Sister and Friendship City engagement;

    (n)  Serve as the liaison between the City Council, community, and organizations with an interest in the City’s library, historical, and multicultural activities.

    The Library-Historical Commission shall not be limited to those duties hereinbefore specifically set forth, but shall do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of San Leandro in relation to community historical interests and activities and to assist in the assumption of such role and discharge of such responsibility by the City. In so doing, the Commission shall cooperate with individuals and with private and public groups and organizations to achieve broad community participation in and to strengthen the leadership of local historical endeavors.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-015, 11/17/2003 (Sections 1-3-800—1-3-815); Ordinance No. 2013-008, 10/21/13 (Sections 1-3-800, 1-3-801); Ordinance No. 2018-004, 3/19/18 (Section 1-3-815))

 

ARTICLE 9. PERSONNEL RELATIONS BOARD
1-3-900 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Personnel Relations Board shall consist of five (5) members.

 

1-3-905 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Board shall possess the powers and perform the duties prescribed in Chapter 1-4 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

 

ARTICLE 10. PLANNING COMMISSION
1-3-1000 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members.

 

1-3-1005 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Planning Commission shall:

    (a)   Hear and recommend to the City Council on proposals to adopt, amend or repeal a general plan for the physical development of the City;

    (b)  Exercise such functions with respect to land subdivisions, planning, zoning and future right-of-way lines as are prescribed in Chapters 7-3, 7-13 and 7-16 of this Code;

    (c)   Hear and recommend to the City Council proposals that affect the traffic circulation in the City, if such proposals are referred to the Commission by the Zoning Enforcement Official or the Engineering and Transportation Director or designee; initiate proposals to the City Council regarding the desirability of enacting new regulations or programs regarding traffic circulation; and hear and make the final decision on an appeal following the denial of an application for a parklet;

    (d)  Possess the powers and perform the duties prescribed by statute.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-011, 4/16/01 (Section 1-3-1005); Ordinance No. 2017-008, 5/1/17 (Section 1-3-1005))

 

ARTICLE 11. RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
1-3-1100 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Recreation and Parks Commission shall consist of nine (9) members.

 

1-3-1105 MEMBERS NOMINATED BY SAN LEANDRO BOARD OF EDUCATION.
    One member of the Commission appointed at large shall reside within the boundaries of the San Leandro Unified School District. The governing board of the San Leandro Unified School District shall submit the name of a nominee for appointment by the City Council.

 

1-3-1110 MEMBER NOMINATED BY SAN LORENZO BOARD OF EDUCATION.
    One member of the Commission appointed at large shall reside within the boundaries of the San Lorenzo Unified School District. The governing board of the San Lorenzo Unified School District shall submit the name of a nominee for appointment by the City Council.

 

1-3-1115 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Commission shall:

    (a)   Recommend policies for the management and improvement of all property used for recreational purposes by the City;

    (b)  Recommend plans for the future development of the recreation program to meet the needs of the City;

    (c)   Interpret the City’s recreation programs and plans to the people;

    (d)  Advise the Council on all matters concerning the cultural state of the City;

    (e)   Report to the Council the cultural needs of the City;

    (f)   Recommend to the Council the means for fulfilling the cultural needs of the City;

    (g)  Provide liaison between the Council and all cultural organizations operating within the local community;

    (h)  Coordinate cultural activities within the City;

    (i)   Devise and recommend to the Council implementation of procedures for establishing and maintaining appropriate relationships with non-local cultural organizations;

    (j)   Assist all cultural organizations operating within the local community to develop a high level of community participation in cultural endeavors and activities;

    (k)  Study proposed programs and proposed budgets of cultural organizations making requests of the City and recommend Council approval or disapproval of any proposed program or budget for which City funds are requested. No such program or budget involving City assistance or City funding, or the use of City property, shall be implemented without approval of the Council;

    (l)   Conduct periodic audits of Council-approved programs and budgets and report to the Council on the implementation of such programs and expenditures of City funds therefor;

    (m) Coordinate and provide for the execution of appropriate programs in the City in order to stimulate interest in and advancement of the arts.

    The Commission shall not be limited to those duties hereinbefore specifically set forth, but shall do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of the City of San Leandro in relation to community cultural interests and activities and to assist in the assumption of such role and discharge of such responsibility by the City of San Leandro. In so doing, the Commission shall cooperate with individuals and with private and public groups and organizations to achieve broad community participation in and to strengthen the leadership of local cultural endeavors.

 

1-3-1120 RULES AND REGULATIONS—VIOLATIONS.
    The Commission shall recommend to the Council such rules and regulations for the conduct of activities within public parks and recreational areas as shall be deemed necessary to assure proper use of such facilities, or to protect persons and property. Such rules and regulations shall become effective upon their approval by the Council. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk. A violation of any such rule or regulation shall constitute a violation of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 83-010, 4/4/83 (Section 1-3-1120); Ordinance No. 88-024, 10/3/88 (Section 1-3-1105); Ordinance No. 2009-004, 4/6/09 (Sections 1-3-1105, 1-3-1110))

 

 

ARTICLE 12. SITE DEVELOPMENT SUB-COMMISSION
1-3-1200 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Site Development Sub-Commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed and qualified in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro.

 

1-3-1205 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Sub-Commission shall possess the power and perform the duties prescribed in the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro and Chapter 7-2 of this Code.

 

        Editor’s Note: Chapter 7-2, referred to in this section, was repealed by Ordinance No. 95-037, 11/6/95.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-012, 10/6/03 (Section 1-3-1200))

 

ARTICLE 13. YOUTH ADVISORY COMMISSION
1-3-1300 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Youth Advisory Commission shall consist of twenty-one (21) members. Members shall be entering their freshman, sophomore, junior or senior year of secondary education at the time of their appointment.

 

1-3-1305 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Commission shall do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of the City of San Leandro in relation to the youth of the City and to assist the Council in identifying those programs, projects and activities which will promote the general welfare of youth in the City. The Commission shall undertake its powers and duties and shall report directly to the City Council from time to time. In addition the Commission shall:

    (a)   Identify and study the social, economic, educational, cultural and emotional needs of the youth of the community and to create citizen awareness of those needs;

    (b)  Advise and make recommendations to the City Council on the matters affecting the youth of San Leandro;

    (c)   Provide advice and assistance to other City boards and commissions, to City departments, to school districts, and to private and voluntary agencies on matters concerning local youth;

    (d)  Increase public awareness of problems affecting young people;

    (e)   Suggest specific program areas in which the needs of youth are not being met and will not be met by other organizations;

    (f)   Provide opportunities for the youth of San Leandro to learn about and appreciate the variety of services and programs provided by local government;

    (g)  Foster mutual understanding, respect and communication among teen groups of all races, religions and nationalities;

    (h)  Encourage teen leadership and responsibility through involvement;

    (i)   Provide coordination of community youth activities and the promotion of cooperative relationships among the various youth organizations in the City.

 

ARTICLE 14. RENT REVIEW BOARD
1-3-1400 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Rent Review Board shall consist of five (5) members. Two (2) members of the Board shall be tenants that rent residential property in San Leandro, two (2) members shall be landlords that own rental property in San Leandro, and one member shall be a San Leandro resident that is neither a tenant nor a landlord.

 

1-3-1405 TERM OF OFFICE—VACANCIES.
    The term of office for each member of the Rent Review Board shall be a period of four (4) years and until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified.

    The term of office for the members of the Rent Review Board shall be staggered in such a way as to have two (2) members’ terms expire every two (2) years. The member who is neither a tenant nor a landlord shall stay on the Board for a period of four (4) years and until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. A vacancy shall be filled by Council appointment for the unexpired remainder of the term.

 

1-3-1410 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Board shall possess the powers and perform the duties prescribed in Chapter 4-32 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 91-008, 7/15/91 (Sections 1-3-900, 1-3-905); Ordinance No. 95-017, 9/5/95 (Section 1-3-1300); Ordinance No. 2001-09, 4/2/01 (Sections 1-3-1400—1-3-1410); Ordinance No. 2002-026, 10/7/02 (Section 1-3-1400); Ordinance No. 2003-013, 10/6/03 (Section 1-3-1405); Ordinance No. 2015-004, 4/6/15 (Section 1-3-1400))

 

ARTICLE 15. SENIOR COMMISSION
1-3-1500 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Senior Commission shall consist of nine (9) members.

 

1-3-1505 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Commission shall advise the Council on matters relating to the status and condition of senior citizens within the City, assess and report to the Council the social, cultural, health and other needs of senior citizens, recommend to the Council inclusive methods of meeting such needs, and assist the Council in marshaling the resources necessary to accomplish the foregoing. In discharge of this responsibility, the Commission shall:

    (a)   Assess the social, economic, educational, cultural, emotional and other needs of senior citizens within the City and create citizen awareness of those needs;

    (b)  Conduct informational hearings on matters affecting senior citizens in the community;

    (c)   Monitor legislative developments concerning senior citizens, and inform the City Council, seniors, and the public of such developments;

    (d)  Encourage better coordination in the delivery of services to senior citizens, seek to improve the quality of such services, and foster increased communication between providers of such services within the community and the residents of the City, through voluntary public and private initiatives;

    (e)   Assess paratransit and other transportation needs of the community’s senior citizens, and make recommendations to enhance transportation services for senior citizens;

    (f)   Review the City Manager’s budget recommendations as they affect programs concerning senior citizens, as part of the City’s annual budget process;

    (g)  Advise and make recommendations to the City Council on all matters relating to the community’s senior citizens, including delivery of city services; funding for senior services, facilities, and programs except funding provided through the Community Assistance Grant funding process; and availability of various funding opportunities for senior citizen-related programs and services that may be available to the City;

    (h)  Consider and act upon as necessary all matters relating to the social needs of senior citizens, and all other matters relating to senior citizens heretofore referred to or considered by the Human Services Commission;

    (i)   Consider and act upon as necessary all matters relating to recreation and cultural programs targeted to senior citizens, policies for the management and improvement of any public facility dedicated for the use of senior citizens, and all other matters relating to senior citizens heretofore referred to or considered by the Recreation and Parks Commission.

    The Commission shall not be limited to those duties hereinbefore specifically set forth, but shall perform such other functions and render such reports and recommendations as may be directed by the City Council, and do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of the City of San Leandro in relation to the needs and aspirations of its senior citizens and to assist in the assumption of such role and the discharge of such responsibility by the City of San Leandro. In so doing, the Commission shall work with and seek the cooperation of individuals and public and private entities in developing programs to meet the assessed needs of older adults, and to assure the aging population the dignity and care they deserve.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-023, 11/19/01 (Sections 1-3-1500—1-3-1505); Ordinance No. 2018-005, 3/19/18 (Section 1-3-1505))

 

ARTICLE 16. ARTS COMMISSION
1-3-1600 MEMBERSHIP.
    The Arts Commission shall consist of nine (9) members. The membership shall include one member from each of the six (6) Council Member Districts pursuant to Section 1-3-110 of this Code. The membership shall also include three (3) at large members, with at least one at large member who shall be a resident of the City of San Leandro.

 

1-3-1605 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Commission is charged with assessing, developing, and promoting art opportunities to enrich and enhance the San Leandro community. In discharge of this responsibility, the Commission shall:

    (a)   Encourage and promote art programs and activities within the City;

    (b)  Make recommendations to the City Council regarding local visual and performing art needs, activities and programs;

    (c)   Receive and gather input from the community on issues relevant to art policies;

    (d)  Enhance community awareness of art resources;

    (e)   Work cooperatively with public and private agencies to procure space and opportunities for public art that celebrates our diversity and to contribute to the enrichment of the community by adding public art that is of the highest quality, inclusive visually stimulating and of enduring value;

    (f)   Analyze and make recommendations to the City Council on long term financing to support arts;

    (g)  Advise and make recommendations to the City Council on the acceptance of donations and submissions of art and other matters of arts in the community;

    (h)  Support the goals and priorities of the City Council.

    The Arts Commission shall not be limited to those duties hereinbefore specifically set forth, but shall perform such other functions and render such reports and recommendations as may be directed by the City Council, and do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of the City of San Leandro in relation to art interests and activities and to assist in the assumption of such role and discharge of such responsibility by the City. In so doing, the Commission shall cooperate with individuals and with private and public groups and organizations to achieve broad community participation in and to strengthen the leadership of local artistic endeavors.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-015, 9/15/14; Ordinance No. 2018-002, 3/19/18 (Section 1-3-1605))

CHAPTER 1-4 PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 1. PERSONNEL RELATIONS BOARD
1-4-100 MEMBERS—EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.
    No person shall be eligible to hold office as a Personnel Relations Board member who has held a salaried non-elective office or employment with the City within the preceding year. No person shall be eligible to hold a salaried non-elective office or employment with the City who has held office as a Personnel Relations Board member within the preceding year.

 

1-4-105 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Board shall:

    (a)   adopt comprehensive rules for the administration of a merit personnel program. Any such rules relating to personnel classification, compensation, or benefits, or otherwise significantly affecting City expenditures, shall be subject to Council approval;

    (b)  provide for the hearing of appeals from administrative action taken against any member of the merit personnel system for whom no other appeal procedure exists, and the submission of findings and recommendations after hearing to the City Manager;

    (c)   provide for the hearing and determination of grievances, establishment of appropriate units, and allegations of unfair labor practices, in matters for which no other procedure exists;

    (d)  provide advice regarding personnel relations matters upon request of the Council or the City Manager.

 

1-4-110 HEARINGS—SUBPOENAS—OATHS.
    In the conduct of its hearings, the Board may:

    (a)   issue subpoenas requiring attendance of witnesses and production of books, documents or other things before it;

    (b)  administer oaths and affirmations.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 2. PERSONNEL RULES
1-4-200 EXEMPT POSITIONS.
    The following persons shall be exempt from the general provisions of the rules governing the merit personnel program:

    (a)   Council Members and the Mayor;

    (b)  persons who hold office at the pleasure of the appointing authority pursuant to the City Charter;

    (c)   personal service contractors;

    (d)  volunteers;

    (e)   hourly or per diem wage-earners;

    (f)   temporary employees;

    (g)  subject to Board approval, employees subsidized under statutory programs.

 

 

1-4-205 RULES APPLICABLE TO EXEMPT POSITIONS.
    The personnel rules shall specify the privileges and responsibilities therein, if any, which shall apply to each person who is exempt from the merit personnel program.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 3. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-4-300 COUNCIL AND BOARD AUTHORITY.
    The Council, and insofar as delegated by this Chapter or by action of the Council, the Board, shall have the authority to regulate the wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment not otherwise regulated by effective approved Memoranda of Understanding. The Council shall have the authority to contract with any person or organization for the performance of any City activity.

 

1-4-305 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY.
    It is the policy of the City and of the Council that the merit personnel program be administered in a manner designed to attract to and to retain in municipal service competent and dedicated officers and employees, to assure that appointments and promotions are based upon merit and ability, to eliminate mediocrity and to provide incentive to perform to capacity. No officer, employee or applicant shall enjoy or suffer discrimination cased upon religion, race, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, political affiliation or physical handicap.

 

1-4-310 REINSTATEMENT IN MERIT PROGRAM.
    Any person appointed from a position subject to the merit personnel program to a salaried position which is exempt from such program shall, upon removal from the exempt position for other than cause, be reinstated to the merit position or its equivalent without suffering a break in service for any purpose.

 

1-4-315 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED.
    No officer or employee of the City shall engage in political activities during such person’s working hours, nor upon City-owned or operated property at any time.

 

(Legislative History:)

CHAPTER 1-5 PUBLIC WORKS
ARTICLE 1. CONTRACTS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-5-100 CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS.
    All contracts and orders for Public Works projects shall be signed by the City Manager or designee.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 2. CONTRACTS—COMPETITIVE BIDS
1-5-200 COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED.
    Public works projects, other than maintenance and repair, requiring an expenditure in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) shall be subject to competitive bidding. Projects requiring an expenditure in excess of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) shall be awarded by the City Council. Projects requiring an expenditure of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) or less shall be awarded by the City Manager or designee. For purposes of this Chapter, the term “City” shall mean and include the City Council for projects in excess of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) and shall mean and include the City Manager or designee for projects of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) or less.

 

1-5-205 SPLITTING PROJECT PROHIBITED.
    No public works project shall be split into smaller projects or work orders for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Chapter.

 

1-5-210 NOTICE INVITING BIDS.
    A notice inviting bids shall be published once not less than seven (7) days before the date of opening bids.

 

1-5-215 RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS.
    All bids shall be sealed, identified on the envelope, and submitted to the City at or before the time specified on the notice. At the time specified, the bids shall be publicly opened and read. Any bid submitted after commencement of bid opening shall be rejected and returned unopened.

 

1-5-220 BID DEPOSIT.
    Each bid shall be accompanied by a bid deposit equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the amount bid. Such deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier’s check payable to the City, or bidder’s bond in favor of the City. If a bidder awarded a contract fails to execute the contract or furnish the bonds or certificates required within the time provided by the specifications, the bid deposit shall be forfeited to the City.

 

1-5-225 AWARD TO LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the City shall award a contract for a public works project to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid complies with the specifications. In determining responsibility, the City shall consider the known reliability, resources, experience, integrity and the reputation for workmanship of the various bidders. The City may waive any informalities or minor irregularities in bids received.

 

1-5-230 REJECTION OF BIDS.
    The City, in its discretion, may reject any bids received and may:

    (a)   Abandon the project;

    (b)  Readvertise;

    (c)   Proceed under Article 3 of this Chapter.

 

1-5-235 EMERGENCIES.
    Upon a determination by the City that an emergency exists which threatens the public health, safety or welfare, the City may award a contract for a Public Works project without competitive bidding.

 

1-5-240 AWARD WITHOUT COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article 2 to the contrary, the City may award a contract or contracts for public works without formal competitive bidding contemplated by this Article whenever, upon competent evidence, the City finds that:

    (a)   Formal competitive bidding would result in greater cost and expense to the City and is consequently impractical, undesirable or incongruous; or

    (b)  The public works contemplated are capable of being performed only by a sole provider such as a public utility, the holder of an exclusive patent or franchise, or another governmental agency; and

    (c)   In the instance of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the price offered to the City is fair, just and equitable.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 84-013, 6/4/84; Ordinance No. 89-008, 3/20/89; Ordinance No. 2013-002, 4/1/13 (Section 1-5-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. ACCOMPLISHMENT BY CITY EMPLOYEES
1-5-300 NO BIDS RECEIVED.
    If no bids are received the City may order that a public works project be accomplished by City employees.

 

1-5-305 BIDS UNACCEPTABLE.
    If all bids are unacceptable, either because the amounts of the bids are too high, or because the bids are not submitted by responsible bidders, or both, the City, after rejecting the bids, may determine that the work would be performed more reliably or more economically, or both, by City employees, and order that a public works project be accomplished by City employees.

 

1-5-310 EMERGENCIES.
    Upon a determination that an emergency exists which threatens the public health, safety or welfare, and that the emergency can be met best by City employees, the City may order that a public works project be accomplished by City employees.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 89-08, 3/20/89)

 

ARTICLE 4. PREVAILING WAGES
1-5-400 PAYMENT OF PREVAILING WAGES APPLICATION TO ARTICLE.
    The provisions of this Article shall apply to the following contracts:

    (a)   City contracts for performance of public works valued in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00); and

    (b)  Contracts between private persons for the performance of construction work under either of the following circumstances:

    (1)  The property subject to the construction work is privately owned, but upon completion of construction more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross leasable area is leased to the City for its use and such construction work is performed according to the plans and specifications of the City; or

    (2)  The property subject to the construction work is owned in fee by the City and is leased for private use or development.

    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the City shall comply with the provisions of Section 1782 of the California Labor Code and amendments to that section when awarding all City contracts for the performance of public works.

 

1-5-405 PAYMENT OF GENERAL PREVAILING RATE.
    Not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for work of a similar character in the locality in which the contracts subject to the provisions of this Article are performed, and not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for holiday and overtime work fixed as provided in Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code (commencing at Section 1720 et seq.), shall be paid to all workers employed on such works. For purposes of this Article, workers employed by contractors or subcontractors in the execution of any contract subject to the provisions of this Article are deemed to be employed upon public work.

 

1-5-410 PENALTIES.
    The contractor for all contracts subject to the provisions of this Article shall forfeit as penalty to the City Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) per calendar day or portion thereof for each worker paid less than the prevailing rates for such work or craft in which such worker is employed for any work done under the contract, or by any subcontractor under him or her. In addition to said penalty, the difference between the prevailing rates and the amounts paid for each worker less than the prevailing wage rates shall be paid to each worker by the contractor.

 

1-5-415 DETERMINATIONS OF DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS.
    The determinations of the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to Labor Code Section 1720 shall constitute the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for purposes of this Article. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit payment of more than the general rate of prevailing wages.

 

1-5-420 POSTING AND NOTICE.
    The City Clerk shall maintain for public inspection, the current wage determinations of the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations. All contracts subject to the provisions of this Article shall reference the obligations imposed hereby. Any contractor subject to the provisions hereof shall post a copy of the general prevailing rate of wages applicable to the work to be done at the job site.

 

1-5-425 PAYROLL RECORDS.
    The provisions of Section 1776 of the Labor Code pertaining to records, retention and inspection thereof shall be applicable to all contracts subject to the provisions of this Article.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-039, 10/28/85; Ordinance No. 2014-018, 11/3/14 (Section 1-5-400))

CHAPTER 1-6 PURCHASING, PERSONAL SERVICES AND SURPLUS SALES
ARTICLE 1. PURCHASING—GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-6-100 CONTRACTS FOR PURCHASES.
    All contracts and orders for the purchase of equipment, materials or supplies shall be signed by the City Manager or designee.

 

1-6-105 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
    Real property shall be acquired only upon order of the Council.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 2. PURCHASING BY COMPETITIVE BID
1-6-200 COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED.
    Purchases of equipment, materials or supplies requiring an expenditure in excess of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) shall be subject to formal competitive bidding.

 

1-6-205 NOTICE INVITING BIDS.
    A notice inviting bids shall be published once not less than seven (7) days before the date of opening bids.

 

1-6-210 RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS.
    All bids shall be sealed, identified on the envelope, and submitted to the City at or before the time specified on the notice. At the time specified, the bids shall be publicly opened and read. Any bid submitted after commencement of bid opening shall be rejected and returned unopened.

 

1-6-215 INFORMAL BIDDING.
    Purchase of equipment, materials or supplies requiring an expenditure in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) but not in excess of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) shall be subject to informal competitive bidding. The Purchasing Agent or the requesting department shall solicit written or verbal bids from a reasonable number of suppliers.

 

1-6-220 AWARD TO LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the Purchasing Agent shall award a contract for the purchase of equipment, materials or supplies to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid complies with the specifications. In determining responsibility, consideration shall be given to the quality and reputation for performance of the equipment or supplies proposed to be furnished, the reliability of the bidder, warranties, and in the case of equipment, the ability of the bidder to provide parts and maintenance.

 

1-6-225 COMPARISON OF BIDS.
    (a)   Findings: The City Council of the City of San Leandro hereby finds that it is in the City’s interest to have a healthy local business community. The City Council also finds that San Leandro businesses, particularly small and nonprofit organizations, often encounter obstacles to participating in City projects and procurements, obtaining financing and credit, and bonding and insurance, which affects the economic viability and growth of these businesses and organizations.

    (b)  Declaration of Policy and Purpose:

    (1)  It shall be a policy of the City of San Leandro that San Leandro business enterprises, including small and nonprofit businesses, should be encouraged to participate as contractors and suppliers in the provision of goods and services to the City. Policies and programs that enhance opportunities and utilize the skills and expertise of San Leandro businesses, including small businesses and nonprofit organizations, serve the public interest, primarily because the growth and development of such businesses have a significant positive impact on the economic health of the City of San Leandro. A City ordinance that grants a preference for awarding contracts for projects and procurements to businesses located or operating within the City serves the public interest by encouraging businesses, including small and nonprofit businesses, to locate, hire residents and remain in San Leandro.

    (2)  Investment in San Leandro businesses is important to sustain and expand regional partnerships that connect workforce and local business participation, a vibrant arts community and educational development.

    (3)  It is a goal of this section to encourage the enactment of legislation that mandates setting aside a percentage of the City’s budget for all projects developed or built by the City for workforce training, local employment and the arts.

    (4)  Because many San Leandro businesses are small and may not have the resources, capability or experience to act as a prime contractor or to provide specialty services, it shall be a policy of the City of San Leandro to encourage qualified prime contractors to use San Leandro businesses, including small businesses and nonprofit organizations, as subcontractors and suppliers to participate in City projects and purchases and gain experience in a way that will enhance their ability to eventually compete for contracts as prime contractors.

    (c)   Definitions.

    (1)  “Contract” means any contract or agreement between the City and a person to provide or procure labor, goods, materials, equipment, furnishing, supplies or services to, for or on behalf of the City. Except as otherwise specifically defined in this section a contract does not include:

    (i)   Awards made by the City with Federal or State grant monies or City general fund grants to a nonprofit entity where the City offers assistance, guidance or supervision on a project or program and the recipient of the grant award uses the monies to provide services to the community;

    (ii)  Contracts wherein the funding or monies available for the project, service or procurement, whether for the whole or a portion of the project’s scope, are restricted by the funder, donor or grantor, whether as to amount, use or otherwise;

    (iii) Sales transactions where the City sells its personal or real property;

    (iv) Gifts of materials, equipment, supplies or services to the City;

    (v)  Contracts exempted from the provisions of Chapter 1-6 of the San Leandro Municipal Code; or

    (vi) Contracts that would violate any State or Federal law or grant requirements.

    (2)  “Contract awarding authority” or “CAA” means the City officer, department, employee or legislative body authorized and empowered by law to enter into contracts on behalf of the City. In the case of an agreement with a prime contractor to perform or fund the performance of construction related services, the term “contract awarding authority” or “CAA” shall mean the prime contractor receiving funds from the City to perform or fund the performance of such services.

    (3)  “Contractor” or “prime contractor” means any person who submits a bid or proposal to perform, perform any part of, agrees with a person to provide services in relation to or enters into any contract subject to this Chapter with the CAA for public works or improvements to be performed, or for goods or services or supplies to be purchased at the expense of the City or to be paid out of monies deposited in the treasury or out of trust monies under the control of, or collected by, the City.

    (4)  “Joint venture” means and may be referred to as an “association” of two (2) or more businesses, one of which is a San Leandro business or San Leandro nonprofit organization acting as a contractor and performing or providing services on a contract, in which each joint venture or association partner combines property, capital, efforts, skill and/or knowledge. The San Leandro business or nonprofit organization participating in the joint venture must receive at least five percent (5%) of the total contract amount for the provisions of this Chapter to apply. The joint venture must conform to all pertinent laws that govern the creation of such entities.

    (5)  “Person” means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, trade or professional associations, corporations, nonprofit organizations, and cooperatives.

    (6)  “San Leandro business” means any business which possesses or establishes all of the following at least six (6) months before bids or proposals are opened by the City. Such a business will be subject to monitoring to prove validity of the following:

    (i)   A written agreement for City occupancy or proof of ownership of a San Leandro office;

    (ii)  Proof that business is transacted or revenue generated in an office located in San Leandro;

    (iii) A conspicuously displayed business sign at the San Leandro business premises except where the business operates out of a residence;

 

    (iv) Proof that the office is appropriately equipped for the type of business for which certification as a San Leandro business is sought. Where equipment, such as computer and reproduction and communications machines are typically and routinely used in a non-San Leandro location, comparable equipment shall be installed and routinely used at the San Leandro office;

    (v)  A valid City of San Leandro business license.

    (d)  Contracts Subject to this Section: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the following categories of contracts awarded by the City:

    (1)  Construction and public works contracts awarded to prime contractors valued at or above One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00);

    (2)  Professional and non-professional service contracts valued at or above Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00);

    (3)  Contracts for the procurement of goods, materials, equipment, furnishings or supplies valued at or above Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00).

    With respect to special services and professional personal services contracts, no provision or requirement of this section shall supersede or pre-empt the City’s powers to contract with and employ any persons for the furnishing to the City special services as described in California Government Code Section 53060, and California Government Code Section 4526, including, but not limited to, advice in financial, economic, accounting, engineering, legal or administrative matters if such persons are specially trained and experienced and competent to perform the special services required. The City shall have the sole discretion to determine what bases of competence and professional qualifications are necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required.

    (e)   Local Business Preference: Whenever a competitive process is utilized by the City of San Leandro to award a contract identified in Section 1-6-225(c)(1), the following shall apply:

    (1)  Solely for the purpose of calculating the lowest bid or proposal, a sum equal to ten percent (10%) of the total bid, or of the base bid and each alternate, of the proposal shall be deducted from the amount of the total bid, or the base bid and each alternate, respectively, of the bid or the proposal of a contractor, prime contractor or supplier whose principal place of business is located within the City of San Leandro. If, after performing the above calculation there is a tie for the lowest bid the contractor, prime contractor or supplier whose principal place of business is located within the City of San Leandro shall be deemed the lowest bid subject to the qualifications concerning responsibility, as required by law. If the tie bidders both have as their principal places of business the City of San Leandro, then the City Council shall draw lots to determine to whom to award the contract.

    (2)  Solely for the purpose of calculating the lowest bid a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the total bid, or of the base bid and each alternate, or the proposal shall be deducted from the amount of the total bid, or the base bid and each alternate, respectively, of a bid or proposal submitted by a contractor, prime contractor or supplier that is a joint venture wherein one of the joint venturers is a business that has as its principal place of business, its headquarters, or a significant portion of its operations within the City of San Leandro.

    (3)  Under no circumstances shall the real dollar amount of the percentage applied under subsections (a) or (b) exceed Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) in the reduction of the lowest bid, or the base bid and each alternate, or the proposal respectively.

    (f)   Local Business Participation Goal:

    (1)  Prior to award of a contract governed by this Chapter that is or exceeds One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00), the contractor, prime contractor or supplier shall engage in good faith efforts to hire or contract with San Leandro businesses, nonprofit organizations or residents to perform the contract with the goal that at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total contract dollar amount is spent on local businesses.

    (2)  Good faith efforts shall be established by any combination of five (5) of the following activities. In order to show good faith efforts towards meeting the local business participation goal, the contractor or supplier shall certify that it has already completed, or will complete during the course of the project, the activities identified herein through submittal of a declaration at the time bids or proposals are due:

    (i)   Attending any pre-solicitation or pre-bid meetings scheduled by the City to inform all contractors, subcontractors, suppliers, and San Leandro residents of the project and the requirements of this section;

    (ii)  Convening a meeting within the City of San Leandro for San Leandro businesses, suppliers, nonprofit organizations and residents to identify specific items of work to be performed on the project in order to increase the likelihood of meeting the business participation goal and intent of this Chapter, including breaking down contracts into smaller units;

    (iii) Listing all contact information for any San Leandro business or nonprofit organization that will participate in the project, or provide services or supplies to the prime contractor or supplier if a contract is awarded to the prime contractor or supplier;

    (iv) Advertising for subcontracting, supplying or employment opportunities on the project not less than twenty (20) calendar days before the date bids are due in one or more daily or weekly newspapers, websites, trade association publications, trade journals or other media;

    (v)  Documentation of personal contacts with San Leandro businesses or nonprofit organizations informing them of the opportunity to subcontract or supply to the project;

    (vi) Documentation of good faith negotiations with San Leandro businesses and nonprofit organizations to subcontract or supply to the project;

    (vii) Making the project plans, specifications and in the case of a construction, design or engineering contract, the City Engineer’s estimates available for review upon the request of interested San Leandro businesses and San Leandro nonprofit organizations;

    (viii)  Documentation of requests for assistance from San Leandro community organizations, San Leandro contractors or professional groups, local, State or Federal business assistance offices or other organizations that provide assistance in the recruitment and placement of San Leandro businesses and San Leandro nonprofit organizations, if any are available.

    (g)  Compliance: Prior to award of a contract, contractors, prime contractors, or suppliers shall do the following, which shall be subject to a verification process:

    (1)  Demonstrate in their bids or proposals that they have used good faith efforts through documenting proof of completion of good faith activities as identified in Section 1-6-225(f)(2) to utilize San Leandro businesses, San Leandro small businesses and/or San Leandro nonprofit businesses; or

    (2)  Identify the particular San Leandro businesses, San Leandro small businesses and/or San Leandro nonprofit businesses and suppliers to be utilized in performing the contract, specifying for each such business the dollar value of the San Leandro business’ scope of work in the project or procurement and the type of work the San Leandro business will perform.

    (3)  Evidence of willful failure to enact good faith efforts or intentional misrepresentation of San Leandro businesses’ participation as certified in the bid or proposal submitted shall be grounds for finding a breach of contract, subsequent debarment from bidding or proposing on City contracts in the future, and further legal action at the City’s discretion.

    (4)  The City is empowered to take actions to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The actions which the City is empowered to take may include, but are not limited to:

    (i)   Ordering the suspension of the selection process for the award of the contract;

    (ii)  Intervening in the selection process to correct contracting practices which hinder business opportunities for San Leandro businesses, San Leandro small businesses and San Leandro nonprofit businesses;

    (iii) Declaring the contractor, prime contractor, or supplier to be nonresponsive and ineligible to receive the award of contract;

    (iv) Declaring an existing contract terminated;

    (v)  Imposing penalties in the form of liquidated damages. The liquidated damages shall be in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the contract. All liquidated damages assessed shall be payable to the City upon demand and may be set off against any monies due to the contractor, prime contractor, or supplier from any contract with the City and the City shall have the right to withhold payments due to the contractor to satisfy the penalty.

    (vi) Disqualifying the contractor, prime contractor or supplier from eligibility to provide goods or services to the City for a period not to exceed five (5) years. Any business disqualified under this subsection shall have a right to review and reconsideration by the City Manager after two (2) years upon a showing of corrective action indicating that violations are not likely to recur.

    (h)  Incentive Program: Per the City Council’s findings and stated purpose, the City Manager is authorized to award, at his or her discretion, if funds are available within the project budget, a monetary bonus for any contractor, prime contractor or supplier that exceeds the local business participation goal by one hundred percent (100%) or more.

 

1-6-230 REJECTION OF BIDS.
    The Purchasing Agent shall have the discretion to reject any bid received and to seek new bids.

 

1-6-235 SPLITTING PURCHASES PROHIBITED.
    No required acquisition of equipment, materials or supplies shall be accomplished by the issuance of several purchase orders for portions thereof for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Article.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-010, 7/5/88; Ordinance No. 89-008, 3/20/89; Ordinance No. 2002-001, 1/7/07 (Sections 1-6-200, 1-6-215, 1-6-225); Ordinance No. 2013-002, 4/1/13 (Section 1-6-215); Ordinance No. 2014-001, 1-6-14 (Section 1-6-225))

 

ARTICLE 3. PURCHASING WITHOUT COMPETITIVE BIDS
1-6-300 SMALL PURCHASES.
    Purchases of equipment, materials or supplies requiring an expenditure of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) or less may be made without competitive bidding. When, in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, it is feasible to do so, the Purchasing Agent shall solicit such equipment, materials or supplies from suppliers whose principal place of business is located within the City of San Leandro.

 

1-6-305 SPECIALTY ITEMS.
    Purchases of equipment, materials, or supplies which are not amenable to competitive bidding procedures, including, but not limited to, books, items available through cooperative purchasing with other governmental agencies, may be made without competitive bidding.

 

1-6-310 EMERGENCIES.
    Purchases of equipment, materials, supplies and services determined by the City Manager or designee to be necessary to respond to an emergency which threatens the public health, safety or welfare may be made without competitive bidding and without Council approval if such purchases are in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) or under.

 

1-6-315 COUNCIL DETERMINATION.
    Purchases of equipment, materials, services and supplies determined by the Council to serve the best interests of the City may be made without competitive bidding.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-011, 7/6/92 (Section 1-6-310); Ordinance No. 2002-001, 1/7/02 (Section 1-6-300); Ordinance No. 2012-006, 5/7/12 (Sections 1-6-310, 1-6-315); Ordinance No. 2013-002, 4/1/13 (Section 1-6-300))

 

 

ARTICLE 4. PERSONAL SERVICES
1-6-400 NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
    Contracts for nonprofessional personal services shall be subject to the provisions of Articles 1 through 3 of this Chapter.

 

1-6-405 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
    Contracts for professional personal services shall not be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

 

1-6-410 CITY EMPLOYEE SERVICES.
    Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to prohibit provision of personal services, whether or not herein described, by City employees.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 5. SURPLUS SALES
1-6-500 SALES OF SURPLUS EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES.
    The Purchasing Agent shall sell or exchange, in a manner designed to serve the best interests of the City, equipment, materials and supplies which have become unsuitable or unnecessary for City purposes.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 6. LIVING WAGE
1-6-605 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Article is to assure that City employees, employees of City service contractors, subcontractors, and employees and contractors of City financial assistance earn an hourly wage that is sufficient to live with dignity and to achieve economic self-sufficiency. The City contracts with many businesses and organizations to provide services to the public, and provides financial assistance to developers and businesses for the purpose of promoting economic development and job growth. Such public expenditures should also be spent to set a community economic standard that permits workers to live out of poverty. The City Council finds that the use of City funds to provide living wage jobs will decrease poverty, increase consumer income, invigorate neighborhood businesses and reduce the need for taxpayer funded social service programs.

    This Article shall be known and may be cited as the “Living Wage Ordinance.” The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare. It does this by requiring that public funds be expended in such a manner as to facilitate individual self-reliance by employees of City contractors, lessees, recipients of City financial aid and their respective subcontractors.

 

1-6-610 FINDINGS.
    (a)   The City of San Leandro awards contracts to private firms and other businesses to provide services to the public and to City government; and

    (b)  The City of San Leandro has a limited amount of taxpayer resources to expend; and

    (c)   The use of taxpayer dollars to promote sustenance and creation of living wage jobs will increase consumer income, decrease levels of poverty and reduce the need for taxpayer-funded social programs in other areas; and

    (d)  When City funds are used to contract for services, such contracts should demonstrate an effort to promote an employment environment that enhances the general quality of life within the community and maximizes the productive effect of the City’s limited resources; and

    (e)   The City’s use of contractors that do not provide health insurance to their employees can result in imposing the costs of their medical care on the County, State and Federal governments; and

    (f)   That employees are far likelier to be healthy if their employer provides reasonable health insurance to them and their dependents; and

    (g)  The payment of a minimum level of compensation as required by this Article benefits these interests.

 

1-6-615 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this Article shall be construed as defined in this section:

    (a)   “City” means the City of San Leandro and all City agencies.

    (b)  “City financial aid recipients” mean all persons or entities that receive from the City, direct assistance in the form of grants, loans, or loan guarantees, in-kind services, waivers of City fees, real property or other valuable consideration in the amount of more than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) within the City’s fiscal year (July 1 through June 30). This term shall not include those who enjoy an economic benefit as an incidental effect of City policies, regulations or ordinances.

    (c)   “Contractor” means any person or entity that enters into a service contract as hereafter defined with the City in an amount equal to or greater than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) within the City’s fiscal year. (Contractor includes subcontractors whose employees are engaged in City funded services.)

    (d)  “Employee” means any individual employed by an employer who performs at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the work arising from City financial aid, or a City lease, or who performs work arising from a service contract. No work may be reassigned in order to evade coverage under this Article.

    (e)   “Health benefits” mean an employer’s monetary contribution toward the cost of health and medical care insurance for covered employees and their dependents. Health benefits may include the following types of insurance: medical health, including mental health, dental and vision care. The hourly cost of providing health benefits shall be credited as compensation along with wages under this chapter. Retirement benefits, accidental death and dismemberment insurance, life insurance, disability insurance and other benefits that do not provide medical or health-related coverage shall not be credited as compensation.

    (f)   “Nonprofit” shall mean a nonprofit organization described in Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 which is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c) of that code, or any nonprofit educational organization qualified under Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (g)  “Person” means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, or other entity that may employ individuals or enter into contracts.

    (h)  “Service contract” means a contract given a contractor by the City for Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) or more for the furnishing of services to or for the City, except those contracts where services are incidental to delivery of products, equipment or commodities. Service contracts include, but are not limited to, security guard services, janitorial services, waste management, landscaping, parking attendant services, and towing. “Service contract” does not include: (1) a contract between the City and another governmental entity or public utility; and (2) a contract subject to Federal or State laws or regulations that would preclude application of the living wage requirement otherwise applicable pursuant to this Article.

 

1-6-620 PERSONS AND ENTITIES SUBJECT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ARTICLE.
    The persons and entities described below shall comply with the minimum compensation standards established by this Article if they employ more than six employees:

    (a)   The City of San Leandro, including all its agencies, departments and offices, for all regular and permanent part-time employees.

    (b)  For-profit service contractors which employ six or more employees and receive contract(s) from the City for Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) or more within the City’s fiscal year. Compliance shall be required during the term of the contract for all employees who perform, and while engaged in work arising from the service contract.

    (c)   Nonprofit service contractors which employ six (6) or more employees and receive contracts from the City of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) or more within the City’s fiscal year. Compliance shall be required during the term of the contract for all employees who perform at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the work arising from the service contract.

    (d)  Lessees of public property, licensees, concessionaires and franchises which employ six (6) or more employees and have Three Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($350,000.00) or more in annual gross receipts. Compliance shall be required during the lease term for any employees who spend twenty-five percent (25%) or more of their compensated time on the leased property or engage in work directly related to the license, concession or franchise.

    (e)   City financial aid recipients which employ six (6) or more employees and receive more than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) in grants, loans or other cash and/or non-cash assistance within the City’s fiscal year. Compliance shall be required for a duration of one year for each One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) of assistance, up to a maximum duration of five (5) years, following receipt of the aid for all employees who spend twenty-five percent (25%) or more of their compensated time engaged in work directly related to the purposes for which the City provided the aid.

    (f)   Subcontractors and sub lessees of any of the entities or persons described in subsections (a) through (e) of this section.

 

1-6-625 LIVING WAGE RATE.
    All persons and entities subject to this chapter shall pay covered employees a wage of no less than the living wage set forth in this Article:

    (a)   Living wage means no less than Twelve Dollars and Forty Cents ($12.40) per hour including wages and health benefits. For health benefits to be counted as a part of the living wage, the benefit must be at least One Dollar and Fifty Cents ($1.50) per hour. If employer contributions for health benefits are not paid on an hourly basis, the employer must demonstrate to the City the hourly value of such benefits in order to receive credit for such payments to covered employees.

    (b)  Time-off: Employees shall be entitled to at least twenty-two (22) days off per year for sick leave, vacation, or personal necessity. At least twelve (12) of the required days off shall be compensated at the same rate as regular compensation for a normal working day. Ten (10) of the required twenty-two (22) days may be uncompensated days off. Employees who work part-time shall be entitled to accrue compensated days off in increments proportional to that accrued by full-time employees. Employees shall be eligible to use accrued days off after the first six (6) months of satisfactory employment or consistent with employer policy, whichever is sooner. Paid holidays, consistent with established employer policy, may be counted toward provision of the required twelve (12) compensated days off.

    (c)   Additional Compensation Permissible: Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit an employer’s discretion to provide greater wages to its employees.

    (d)  The initial rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall increase annually on July 1, beginning July 1, 2008, to reflect the twelve (12) month average in the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose Metropolitan Statistical Areas for the preceding year from May through April.

    (e)   If the prevailing wage for services occupations are posted by the State Department of Industrial Relations (or any successor agency) and exceeds the compensation required by the living wage, then the contractor is required to pay its employees the posted prevailing wage.

    (f)   The City Council may periodically adjust the living wage rate up or down to reflect average living wage rates in effect in other Alameda County cities.

 

1-6-630 WAIVERS.
    Following a review and recommendation by the City Manager, the City Council may approve waivers with or without conditions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this Article, or in any implementing policies, upon a finding that such action is in the best interest of the City.

 

1-6-635 REQUIRED CONTRACT PROVISIONS.
    Every City contract, lease, license agreement, concession agreement, franchise agreement or agreement for financial aid with an employer or amendment thereto affecting financial aid or extending the term shall require compliance with the requirements of this Article. Such contract provisions shall address the employer’s duty to promptly provide to the City, documents and information verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and sanctions for noncompliance. Such contract provisions shall also require the employer to give written notification to each current employee, and to each new employee at time of hire, of his or her rights under this Article. The notification shall be in the form provided by the City in English and Spanish, and translated by the employer to other languages spoken by a significant number of the employees, and shall also be posted prominently in areas at the work site where it will be seen by all employees.

 

1-6-640 EXEMPTIONS.
    The requirements of this Article shall not be applicable to the following employees:

    (a)   Employees of another government agency, including without limitation, cities, counties, state agencies, joint power authorities, and public utilities.

    (b)  An employee participating in a temporary job training program approved by the City in which a significant component of the employee’s training consists of acquiring specialized knowledge, abilities, skills or job readiness (e.g., the importance of proper work attire, punctuality and workplace demeanor).

    (c)   Any disabled employee who; (1) is covered by a current sub-minimum wage certificate issued to the employee by the U.S. Department of Labor; or (2) would be covered by such a certificate but for the fact that the employer is paying a wage equal to or higher than the minimum wage.

    (d)  An employee who is in an internship or other job training program for which the employee is also receiving academic credit.

    (e)   An employee who is under eighteen (18) years of age.

    (f)   A temporary employee of the City of San Leandro who is employed for a limited term to a regular or nonregular position including casual, seasonal and emergency appointments with no guarantee of continued employment beyond the initial hire season.

    (g)  Volunteers.

    (h)  Employees who are standing by or on-call according to the criteria established by the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. Section 201. This exemption shall apply only during the time when the employee is actually standing by or on-call.

    (i)   Employees of contractors and subcontractors subject to the requirements of Division 2, Part 7, of the California Labor Code, for payment of prevailing wage when prevailing wage requires compensation greater than that required by this Article.

    (j)   An employee for whom application of the requirements of this Article is prohibited by State or Federal law.

    (k)  An employee subject to a bona fide collective bargaining agreement where the waiver of the provisions of this Article are set forth in clear and unambiguous terms in such an agreement.

 

1-6-645 RETALIATION AND DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED—WORKER RETENTION.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful to retaliate or discriminate against any person on account of having inquired into or having claimed a violation of this Article.

    (b)  Each entity which is to replace a prior entity, subject to the requirements of this Article, and described in Section 6, shall offer employment to the employees of the prior entity. Such employees may be not be terminated by the new entity during the first ninety (90) days except for just cause. The new entity may operate at lower staffing levels than its predecessor but in such event, shall place its predecessor’s employees on a preferential reinstatement list based on seniority. For purposes of this section, an entity “replaces” another if it (1) assumes all or part of the lease, contract, subcontract or City aid of a prior employer, and (2) offers employment which employees of the prior entity can perform. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that supervisory, managerial or confidential employees retained by the new contractor be kept in a supervisory, managerial or confidential position.

 

1-6-650 EMPLOYEE COMPLAINTS TO THE CITY.
    (a)   An employee who alleges violation of any provision of the requirements of this Article may report such acts to the City. The City Manager may establish a procedure for receiving and investigating such complaints and take appropriate enforcement action.

    (b)  Any complaints received shall be treated as confidential matters to the extent permitted by law. Any complaints received and all investigation documents related thereto shall be deemed exempt from disclosure pursuant to California Government Code Sections 6254 and 6255.

 

1-6-655 ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   A person claiming violation of this Article may bring an action in the Superior Court of the State of California against an employer and obtain the following remedies:

    (1)  Back pay for each day during which the employer failed to pay the compensation required by this Article.

    (2)  Reinstatement and compensatory damages.

    (3)  For a willful violation of this Article, a court may award as a penalty up to treble the amount of monies to be paid as damages.

    (4)  Reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.

    (b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Article or any ordinances to the contrary, no criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of this chapter.

    (c)   No remedy set forth in this Article is intended to be exclusive or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce any rights hereunder in a court of law.

    (d)  No liability of City: Claims or lawsuits against the City arising under this Article are not authorized, nor shall the remedies provided in subsection (a) be awarded against the City. The City shall not be liable to any person or entity because of the City’s failure to notify an employer of the applicability of this Article, the City’s failure to investigate or enforce violations of this Article, or based upon another employer’s failure to comply with this Article.

    (e)   The City may terminate a service contract, financial assistance, or lease or facility agreement and pursue any other legal remedies available to the City, including debarment, for noncompliance with this Article.

 

1-6-660 EFFECTIVE DATE.
    This Article shall apply to every City contract, lease, license, concession agreement, franchise agreement or agreement for financial aid with an employer entered into or amended on or after September 1, 2007.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-018, 6/30/07 (Sections 1-6-600—1-6-660))

CHAPTER 1-7 PUBLICATION OF LEGAL NOTICES
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
1-7-100 SOLICITATION OF BIDS.
    The Purchasing Agent shall solicit bids from each newspaper of general circulation for the City for the publication of legal notices on behalf of the City for such period as the Purchasing Agent deems appropriate in the best interest or the City.

 

1-7-105 RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS.
    All bids shall be sealed, identified on the envelope, and submitted to the Purchasing Agent at or before the time specified in the solicitation, At the time specified, the bids shall be publicly opened and read. Any bid submitted after commencement of bid opening shall be rejected and returned unopened.

 

1-7-110 REJECTION OF BIDS.
    The Purchasing Agent shall reject any bid which fails to comply with the specification in any respect.

 

1-7-115 DELIVERY OF BIDS TO COUNCIL.
    The Purchasing Agent shall deliver all qualified bids accepted to the Council.

 

1-7-120 REJECTION OR SELECTION OF BID.
    The Council may reject any or all bids received, or may select therefrom the bid of the newspaper which the Council determines to be most likely to provide adequate notice to the public within the City and enter into an agreement with such newspaper for such publication.

 

1-7-125 NO QUALIFIED BID.
    In the event that no qualified bid is received and accepted, the Council may:

    (a)   Negotiate and enter into an agreement for such publication with any daily newspaper of general circulation for the City; or

    (b)  Negotiate and enter into an agreement for such publication with any daily newspaper of general circulation for the County; or

    (c)   Direct that legal notices be published by posting in three (3) public places in the City; or

    (d)  Provide for any combination of the foregoing.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 94-010, 6/6/94 (Section 1-7-100))

CHAPTER 1-8 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
1-8-100 CLAIMS PRESENTATION PROCEDURES.
    All claims for money or damages against the City shall be presented to the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee.

 

1-8-105 FURTHER CLAIMS PRESENTATION PROCEDURES.
    Pursuant to Section 935 of the Government Code, the following claims procedures are hereby established, to wit: all claims against the City for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by State law, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code, notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the Council.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-09, 2/16/82; Ordinance No. 93-022, 11/1/93 (Sections 1-8-100, 1-8-105))

CHAPTER 1-9 RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Chapter 1-9, Appeals Procedure, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance No. 82-070 was repealed by Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11. (Sections 1-9-100—1-9-115))

CHAPTER 1-10 JUDICIAL REVIEW
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
1-10-100 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION.
    Any interested person seeking judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure (“CCP”) § 1094.5 of any final decision, as defined in CCP § 1094.6(e), of the City Council or any boards, commissions, officers, agents or employees of the City empowered to make such decisions may do so only if the petition for writ of mandate pursuant to CCP § 1094.5 is filed within the time limits specified in CCP § 1094.6.

 

1-10-105 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CITY COUNCIL.
    Any judicial action challenging a final decision, not otherwise specified in Section 1-10-100, of the City Council or any boards, commissions, officers, agents or employees of the City empowered to make such decision, must be commenced within thirty (30) days after the decision being challenged unless at different limitation period is otherwise specified.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-071, 8/2/82)

CHAPTER 1-11 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
Note
* Editor’s note: Article 1, consisting of Sections 1-11-100 and 1-11-105, derived from Ordinance Nos. 95-008, 97-019, 99-008 and 2005-008, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2010-002.

 

1-11-100 DATE OF GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION.
    (a)   The General Municipal Election of the City of San Leandro for the year 2010 shall be consolidated with the Statewide General Election to be conducted on November 2, 2010.

    (b)  Future General Municipal Elections of the City of San Leandro shall be consolidated with the Statewide General Election to be conducted the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year.

 

1-11-105 TERM OF OFFICE.
    Pursuant to Charter Section 235, the term of office for those persons elected to City offices shall commence on January 1 following the election.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-008, 7/5/05; Ordinance No. 2010-002, 2/1/10 (Sections 1-11-100, 1-11-105))

 

ARTICLE 2. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 97-022, 6/30/97 (Section 1-11-200); Ordinance No. 2005-022 repealed Article 2 (Section 1-11-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. CONDUCT
1-11-300 DEFINITIONS.
    RANKED CHOICE VOTING: “Ranked choice voting” shall mean an election system in which voters rank the candidates for office in order of preference, and the ballots are counted in rounds that simulate a series of runoffs until one candidate receives a majority of votes. Ranked choice voting is also known as “instant runoff voting.”

    MAJORITY OF VOTES: “Majority of votes” shall mean fifty percent (50%) plus one of the votes cast on continuing ballots.

    CONTINUING BALLOT: “Continuing ballot” shall mean a ballot that counts towards a continuing candidate.

    CONTINUING CANDIDATE: “Continuing candidate” shall mean a candidate that has not been eliminated.

    CHOICE: “Choice” means an indication on a ballot of a voter’s assigned ranking of candidates (i.e., first choice, second choice, third choice, etc.) for any single office according to the voter’s preference.

    VOTE: “Vote” means a ballot choice that is counted toward the election of a candidate. During each round of counting, each continuing ballot contains one vote. All first choices are votes and lower ranked choices are potential runoff votes that may, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, become votes and subsequently credited for a continuing candidate.

    ROUND OF COUNTING: “Round of counting” or “round” means a step in the counting process during which votes for all continuing candidates are tabulated for the purpose of determining whether a candidate has achieved a majority of the votes cast for a particular office, and, absent a majority, which candidate or candidates must be eliminated.

    NEXT RANKED: “Next ranked” means the highest ranked choice for a continuing candidate.

 

1-11-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
    (a)   Ranked choice voting elections for the offices of Mayor and City Councilmember shall be conducted according to the procedures in this Chapter.

    (b)  Ranked choice voting shall commence with the 2010 General Municipal Election and continue for all general municipal elections thereafter unless later repealed or invalidated by a subsequent Federal, State or City law, statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance.

    (c)   The Alameda County Registrar of Voters must agree to the request for all election services that allow the City to use ranked choice voting and consolidation of the election prior to the use of ranked choice voting.

 

1-11-310 ELECTION SERVICES.
    The request for election services submitted to the Registrar of Voters shall include all requirements and procedures enumerated in this Chapter.

 

1-11-315 BALLOT.
    (a)   The ranked choice voting ballot shall allow voters to rank at least three (3) choices.

    (b)  The ballot shall not interfere with a voter’s ability to rank a write-in candidate.

 

1-11-320 TABULATION.
    The ballots shall be counted in rounds.

    (a)   In the first round, every ballot shall count as a vote towards the first choice candidate.

    (b)  After any round, if any candidate receives a majority of votes from the continuing ballots, that candidate shall be declared the winner.

    (c)   If no candidate receives a majority, the candidate receiving the fewest number of votes shall be eliminated.

    (d)  Every ballot counting towards the eliminated candidate shall be advanced to the next-ranked continuing candidate. All the continuing ballots for all continuing candidates shall be counted again in a new round.

 

1-11-325 TIES.
    In the event that two (2) or more candidates tie for the fewest number of votes, the candidate to eliminate shall be chosen by lot.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2010-005, 4/19/10)

CHAPTER 1-12 CITATION—VIOLATIONS
ARTICLE 1. CODE ENFORCEMENT
1-12-100 TITLE.
    This Ordinance shall be known as the “Code Enforcement Ordinance,” and is hereinafter referred to within this Chapter 1-12 as “this Chapter.”

 

1-12-105 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the City of San Leandro (“City”) with criminal, civil, and administrative remedies, which shall be in addition to all other legal remedies that may be pursued by the City, to prevent, discourage, abate, or otherwise address any violation of this Code, as that term is defined below.

 

1-12-110 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   AFFECTED PROPERTY. “Affected property” shall mean the lands, or portions thereof, within the City, and/or improvements on such lands, on, in, or concerning which a violation has occurred.

    (b)  THIS CODE OR THE CODE. “This Code” or “the Code” shall mean the San Leandro Municipal Code and shall include the City’s Zoning Code, the Administrative Code, all incorporated Uniform Codes, and any applicable state laws and regulations.

    (c)   DAY OR DAYS. “Day” or “days” shall mean calendar days.

    (d)  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. “Enforcement Officer” means the City Manager or any person who is authorized or directed by the City Manager to enforce any provision of this Code. In addition to any other powers conferred upon him or her by this Code or by other State, County or Federal law, any such designated Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to arrest a person without a warrant, issue a notice to appear, as described in Penal Code Section 948, or issue a notice of violation or administrative penalty, as described in Sections 1-12-400, 1-12-410 and 1-12-415 below, if such Enforcement Officer has cause to believe that a violation of this Code was, or is being, committed.

    (e)   HEARING BODY. “Hearing Body” shall mean the City Manager, or any person or persons appointed by the City Manager to conduct a hearing authorized by this Chapter.

    (f)   OWNER. “Owner” shall mean the owner or owners of record of the affected property.

    (g)  PENALTY. “Penalty” shall mean an administrative penalty imposed by an Enforcement Officer, pursuant to Section 1-12-415 of this Code.

    (h)  RESPONSIBLE PARTY. “Responsible party” shall mean any natural persons, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business trust, trustee, or entity, and the parents or legal guardian of any person under eighteen (18) years of age, whose acts or omissions have caused or contributed to a violation of this Code, and shall include any owners, tenants, or holders of other estates or rights in, the affected property.

 

1-12-115 VIOLATION A PUBLIC NUISANCE, ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES PROVIDED.
    A violation of this Code, including any continuing violation as set forth in Section 1-12-140, below, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to the remedies for nuisance abatement provided in this Chapter, the City expressly reserves the right to utilize other enforcement remedies found within specific chapters of the Code, remedies available under any applicable state or federal statute or pursuant to any other lawful power the City may possess.

    All such remedies shall be alternative to or in conjunction with, and not exclusive of, one another. The election of remedies provided by this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City and its officials.

    The City Manager may direct that any required hearing be conducted before a Hearing Body. An Enforcement Officer, or a Hearing Body designated by the City Manager, may order the abatement of any public nuisance, as defined in this Code or in any state or federal statute, following notice and an opportunity for a hearing. However, no notice or hearing is required to abate a nuisance pursuant to the summary abatement authority set forth in Section 1-12-500, below.

 

1-12-120 VIOLATION OF LICENSE, PERMIT, AGREEMENT OR APPROVAL.
    It shall be a violation of this Code to violate any term or condition of any license, permit, agreement, or approval granted or issued pursuant by the City. Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or contributing to the violation of any such term or condition shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this Chapter or any other law.

 

1-12-130 CAUSING, PERMITTING, ETC., A VIOLATION.
    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, contributing to, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Code shall constitute a violation of such provision.

 

1-12-140 SEPARATE AND CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day a violation of this Code occurs or continues. Any condition of real property that constitutes a violation of this Code, where the same, substantially similar, or related violations have been the subject of two (2) or more enforcement actions within any twelve (12) month period, is deemed to be a continuing violation. For the purposes of this section, “enforcement action” shall mean any notice of violation, including a warning or courtesy notice, hearing, citation, complaint or petition, or any administrative or judicial order under authority of this Chapter or pursuant to any other legal authority. Any subsequent enforcement action with respect to such continuing violation may include issuance of a written order prohibiting future violations of this Code, establishing fines for subsequent violations, and authorizing the City, or an agent or contractor of the City, to enter onto the affected property and abate the condition that is the subject of said enforcement action, and allowing recovery by the City of the costs of future enforcement actions.

 

1-12-150 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
    An Enforcement Officer may exercise all lawful authority to enter upon any real property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this Code are being obeyed and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of his or her code enforcement duties. Inspections may include and/or involve the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence and conferring with persons present.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12-9-02 (Sections 1-12-100—1-12-150); Ordinance No. 2006-016, 9/18/06 (Section 1-12-140); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Sections 1-12-100—1-12-150))

 

ARTICLE 2. VIOLATIONS
1-12-200 CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT OF CODE VIOLATIONS.
(a)       A violation of this Code may be prosecuted as a criminal offense. Unless expressly described as an infraction, a violation of any provision of this Code, or failing to comply with any mandatory requirement hereof, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence or any other section of this Code, a violation of this Code may, in the discretion of the enforcing authority, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

    (b)  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment.

    (c)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, or a fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same Code section within one year. A third (or more) violation of the same code section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.

    (d)  Upon entry of a second or subsequent conviction against the same responsible party within a two (2) year period for a condition of real property constituting a public nuisance under this Chapter, the court may require the responsible party to pay to the City treble the cost of the abatement. Any costs awarded to the City may be enforced in the manner described in Section 1-12-600, below.

 

1-12-210 CRIMINAL CITATION PROCEDURE.
    (a)   If an Enforcement Officer arrests a person for a violation of this Code and elects to charge the violation as a misdemeanor or infraction, such Officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear, pursuant to Penal Code Section 948, containing the name and address of such person, the offense(s) charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. The arresting Enforcement Officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the violator and the violator, in order to secure release, must give his or her written promise to so appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the Officer. The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least thirty (30) days after the date of the arrest.

    (b)  In any matter where the City Attorney is charged with prosecuting the violation, the arresting Enforcement Officer shall, as soon as practicable, send a duplicate notice to appear to the City Attorney, who will process the citation with the Superior Court of Alameda County (hereinafter, “the court”). In all other cases, the matter shall be referred directly to the District Attorney’s office for prosecution. Thereupon the clerk of the court shall fix the amount of bail according to the City’s approved bail schedule. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the court the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before a Magistrate, if the defendant does not appear in person or by counsel, the Magistrate may declare bail forfeited, and may, in his or her discretion, order that no further proceedings be had in such case.

    (c)   The City Council shall establish, by resolution, a recommended bail schedule which may be amended from time to time. The amount of recommended bail imposed for violations that are prosecuted as criminal offenses pursuant to this Chapter shall be set forth in the bail schedule. The bail schedule shall include a recommended amount for any increased bail amount for repeated violations of the same provisions by the same person within a twelve (12) month period from the date of the issuance of a notice to appear.

    (d)  Any person willfully violating his/her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested.

 

1-12-220 VIOLATIONS OF RULES AND REGULATIONS OF SUBORDINATE BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS.
    Except as expressly provided in this Code, any conduct or activity that violates any rule or regulation adopted by any subordinate board or commission established pursuant to a resolution adopted by the City Council, shall be prosecuted as an infraction, if the Enforcement Officer elects to pursue criminal enforcement of such violation.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-044, 12/16/85; Ordinance No. 89-02, 2/6/89; Ordinance

No. 90-03, 2/20/90 (Section 1-12-210); Ordinance No. 92-019, 9/8/92 (Sections 1-12-215, 1-12-220); Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Sections 1-12-200—1-12-220); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Sections 1-12-200—1-12-220))

 

ARTICLE 3. CIVIL ACTION
1-12-300 CIVIL ACTION — COLLECTION OF COSTS BY THE CITY.
    The provisions of this Code may be enforced by a civil court action, prosecuted by the City Attorney in the name of the City.

    (a)   Whenever the City Attorney is authorized or directed to commence or sustain any civil action or proceeding, either at law or in equity, to enforce any provision of this Code, or any rule, regulation or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or any condition of an approval, permit or license granted pursuant to this Code, or to enforce any provision of any contract or agreement, or to enjoin or restrain any violation thereof, or to otherwise abate a public nuisance or collect any sums of money on behalf of the City, then the City shall be entitled to collect all costs and expenses of the same, including, without limitation, reasonable attorney’s fees and the reasonable investigation costs, which shall be set by the court and made a part of and judgment in any such action or proceeding.

    (b)  Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil judgment against the same property owner within a two (2) year period for a condition of real property constituting a public nuisance under this Chapter, the court issuing judgment may order the owner to pay treble the cost of the abatement.

    (c)   Any costs awarded to the City under this section may be enforced and collected upon in the manner described in Section 1-12-600, below.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 78-54, 11/6/78; Ordinance No. 81-01, 1/5/81; Ordinance No. 84-01, 1/16/84; Ordinance No. 85-034, 9/30/85; Ordinance No. 85-037, 10/21/85; Ordinance No. 86-03, 1/20/86; Ordinance No. 86-015, 6/2/86; Ordinance No. 86-040, 1/12/87; Ordinance No. 90-9, 5/7/90 (Section 1-12-310); Ordinance No. 91-023, 12/2/91 (Section 1-12-310); Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Section 1-12-300); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Section 1-12-300))

 

ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
1-12-400 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CODE VIOLATIONS.
    Any Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to gain compliance with all provisions of this Code. These powers include the power to issue a notice of violation and administrative penalties, as described below in Sections 1-12-410 and 1-12-415, the power to inspect public and private property, and to seek and employ whatever remedies are available under this Code.

 

1-12-410 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
    (a)   Subject to subsection (e) of this section, whenever an Enforcement Officer finds that a provision of this Code has been violated, including but not limited to a failure to comply with a condition imposed by any agreement, entitlement, permit, license or environmental document issued or approved by or on behalf of the City or failure to comply with any County, State or Federal laws the violation of which constitutes a public nuisance, and such officer determines to pursue administrative enforcement of the violation pursuant to this Chapter, he or she shall issue the responsible party a written notice of the violation providing that the City will abate the violation and providing the responsible party with an opportunity to appeal the notice of violation and show cause at a hearing as to why such condition should not be abated by the City at the responsible party’s expense (“notice of violation”). Failure to appeal pursuant to Section 1-12-425 of this Chapter constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal the notice of violation and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. Such notice of violation shall be served on the responsible party in the manner described in subsection (b) of this section. The Enforcement Officer shall include in the notice of violation the following information:

    (1)  The date and location of the violation, including the address or other definite description of the location where the violation occurred, or is occurring.

    (2)  The sections of the Code being violated and a description of each such violation.

    (3)  Actions required to correct or abate the violation, and the period of time during which such required actions shall be commenced and completed, such period of time to be determined in the manner set forth in subsection (d) of this section.

    (4)  A statement that the failure to correct and abate the violation, will result in the Enforcement Officer ordering the violation or violations abated, and ordering that the responsible party bear the costs of such abatement including all administrative costs incurred by the City.

    (5)  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of a violation of this Code described in the notice of violation.

    (6)  A statement that the responsible party may appeal the notice of violation by filing with the City Clerk, on the form provided for that purpose, a request for hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the notice of violation is served that includes the following information:

    (i)   If the responsible party appeals the notice of violation, the responsible party may appear before the Hearing Body and show cause why the violations and conditions specified in the notice of violation should not be abated by the City at the responsible party’s expense.

    (ii)  Upon failure to appear for the hearing, or the failure to correct and abate a condition which is determined to constitute a violation, the Hearing Body may order the violation or violations abated, and may order that the responsible party shall bear the costs of such abatement including all administrative costs incurred by the City.

    (iii) Failure to appeal the notice of violation constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal the notice of violation. Failure to appeal also waives the right to seek further administrative remedies.

    (7)  The signature of the citing Enforcement Officer.

    (b)  Service of notice of violation shall be made upon the responsible party or the owner, personally or by First Class U.S. mail, with certificate of mailing, and if by such mail to the owner it shall be sent to the last known address listed on the most recent tax assessor’s records. In the case of personal service, service shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery. In the case of service by First Class U.S. mail, service shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit into the United States mail. Where service is by First Class U.S. mail upon the owner, a copy of the notice of violation shall be conspicuously posted at the affected property for a period of not less than three (3) calendar days prior to the first date that commencement of corrective action or abatement is to be undertaken. The failure of any person to receive a notice of violation that was sent via First Class U.S. mail shall not affect the validity of any enforcement proceedings under this Chapter.

    (c)   Proof of service of the notice of violation shall be certified by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the date, time, and manner that service was made, and the date and place of posting, if applicable. The declaration, along with the certificate of mailing, shall be affixed to a copy of the notice of violation and retained by the Enforcement Officer.

    (d)  The time allowed for abatement of a violation shall be a “reasonable time” in the judgment of the Enforcement Officer, based upon the circumstances of the particular violation, taking into consideration the means required to abate the violation, the period of time that the nuisance has existed, and the potential threat to public health and safety created by the violation. If the violation pertains to building, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues where the violation does not create an immediate threat to health or safety, the responsible party shall be provided not less than ten (10) calendar days in which to correct, abate, or otherwise remedy the violation.

    (e)   The failure of a notice of violation to satisfy all of the requirements of this provision shall not affect the validity of any other enforcement proceedings under this Code.

 

1-12-415 ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
    (a)   Whenever an Enforcement Officer finds that a provision of this Code has been violated, including but not limited to a failure to comply with a condition imposed by any agreement, entitlement, permit, license or environmental document issued or approved by or on behalf of the City or failure to comply with any County, State or Federal laws the violation of which constitutes a public nuisance, such Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue administrative penalties. Administrative penalties may be issued for the enforcement of any section or provision of this Code. Such penalties may be issued to the responsible party.

    (b)  Administrative penalties shall be issued on forms approved by the City Attorney. Each penalty shall indicate, at a minimum, the following information:

    (1)  The name of the person or entity to whom the penalty is issued.

    (2)  The address or location where the violation is observed.

    (3)  The section of this Code that is being violated.

    (4)  The date by which an appeal of the penalty must be sought before the penalty becomes final.

    (5)  The procedure for seeking an appeal of the penalty.

    (6)  The amount of the administrative penalty to be imposed for each violation up to a maximum penalty of One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) for a first violation, Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) for each additional violation within one year, and the first day that any such penalty will be imposed.

    (7)  The manner of payment of the administrative penalty.

    (8)  If the violation pertains to building, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues where the violation does not create an immediate threat to health or safety, the responsible party shall be provided not less than ten (10) calendar days in which to correct, abate, or otherwise remedy the violation before a penalty is imposed.

    (c)   Service of the penalty shall be made upon the responsible party or the owner, personally or by First Class U.S. mail, with certificate of mailing, and if by such mail to the owner it shall be sent to the last known address listed on the most recent tax assessor’s records. In the case of personal service, service shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery. In the case of service by First Class U.S. mail, service shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit into the United States mail. Where service is by First Class U.S. mail upon the owner, a copy of the penalty shall be conspicuously posted at the affected property. The failure of any person to receive a copy of the penalty that was sent via First Class U.S. mail shall not affect the validity of any enforcement proceedings under this Chapter.

    (d)  The payment of a penalty by or on behalf of any responsible party shall not relieve such party from the responsibility of correcting, removing or abating the violation, nor prevent further proceedings under this Chapter or any other lawful authority to achieve the enforced correction, removal or abatement of the violation.

    (e)   A responsible party may appeal the imposition of any penalty or the amount of such penalty by filing a request for hearing form in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-12-425 of this Chapter.

    (f)   Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued, or permitted shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. A penalty may continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, up to a maximum amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00).

    (g)  Any penalty is a debt owed to the City. In addition to all other means of enforcement, any penalty may be enforced as a personal obligation of the responsible party. If the violation is in connection with real property, any penalty may be enforced by imposition of a lien or special assessment upon the real property. Any lien or special assessment imposed upon the real property shall remain in effect until the penalty is paid in full.

 

1-12-420 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY.
    (a)   If a penalty is imposed and the responsible party fails to timely and properly appeal such imposition, the responsible party against whom a penalty is imposed shall pay any such penalty within thirty (30) days of the imposition thereof. Any penalty imposed shall be payable to the City, or to a collection agency if the penalty has been assigned to a collection agency pursuant to subsection (c) of this section.

    (b)  If the amount of any penalty imposed for a violation relating to real property has not been satisfied in full within sixty (60) days of the date due and has not been successfully challenged in court, the penalty amount may become a special assessment and lien against the affected property, as provided in Section 1-12-600 of this Chapter. If the City elects to make the amount of any penalty a special assessment or lien against the affected property, a statement of the amount due, and any additional costs or expenses that might be recoverable as part of the enforcement action, shall be prepared and submitted to the City Council for confirmation in accordance with the procedures described in Section 1-12-600.

    (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, the amount of any unpaid penalty may be collected by commencement of a civil action to collect such penalty, or in any other manner provided by law for the collection of debts, including assignment of the debt to a collection agency. Subject to the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable law, amounts assigned for collection are subject to collection agency rules, regulations and policies. The City shall be entitled to recover any and all costs associated with collection of any such penalty.

    (d)  The payment of a penalty by or on behalf of any responsible party shall not relieve such party from the responsibility of correcting, removing or abating the violation, nor prevent further proceedings under this Chapter or any other lawful authority to achieve the enforced correction, removal or abatement of the violation.

 

1-12-425 HEARINGS.
    (a)   Any person appealing a notice of violation or penalty must obtain a “request for hearing” form from the City Clerk’s Office and return it fully completed within fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the notice of violation or penalty. At the time of returning the request for hearing form to the City Clerk’s Office, the person or entity requesting the appeals hearing shall pay an appeals processing fee established by the City Council. Failure to submit a completed appeals form or to pay the appeals processing fee constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal the notice of violation or penalty and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. Imposition of a penalty shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.

    (b)  The hearing on appeal shall be set for a date not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days from the date the request for hearing form is filed, unless the Enforcement Officer determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time, in which case the date for such hearing may be shortened, or extended, as warranted by the circumstances.

    (c)   Any other hearing set pursuant to a request for hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days from the date the request for hearing was received by the City Clerk.

    (d)  A hearing under authority of this section shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in this subsection. The failure of any interested party to appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to such hearing and a failure by such party to exhaust their administrative remedies.

    (1)  When a request for hearing is filed, the City Clerk shall set the time and place for hearing pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of this section, and shall serve a notice of hearing by regular mail to the appellant at the address provided in the request for hearing form. The time for such hearing shall be no sooner than ten (10) days from the date of said notice of hearing.

    (2)  At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the Administrative Hearing Body shall conduct a hearing on the issues subject to the appeal, the alleged violations and/or the imposition and amount of any penalty. The Administrative Hearing Body shall provide for any interested person or persons to appear and object to the determination that is the subject of the appeal, including, but not limited to, whether a violation has occurred and/or that the violation continues to exist, or any matter pertaining to any penalty. The Administrative Hearing Body may consider any written or oral testimony and evidence regarding the issue presented by the alleged appellant, the owner, any officer, employee, or agent of the City, and any other interested party.

    (3)  After receiving all of the evidence presented, the public portion of the hearing shall be closed. The Administrative Hearing Body may then deliberate and consider what action, if any, should be taken, or may adjourn the hearing and take the matter under consideration.

    (4)  Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Body shall issue written findings and make a determination regarding the issue on appeal.

    (i)   The Administrative Hearing Body shall issue written findings and make a determination regarding the existence of the violation and/or the failure of the responsible party to take required corrective action within the specified time period, or the validity of any penalty imposed. If the Administrative Hearing Body finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation occurred, or that a violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the notice of violation or with the issuance of the penalty, the Administrative Hearing Body shall issue its decision including any Administrative Order in accordance with Section 1-12-430, below. If the Administrative Hearing Body finds that no violation occurred, that the violation was corrected within the specified time period, or that the appellant is not the responsible party, the Administrative Hearing Body shall issue a decision with written findings of those facts.

    (6)  The appellant shall be served with a copy of the decision of the Administrative Hearing Body, including an Administrative Order if one is issued, in the manner and method set forth in Section 1-12-410(b) of this Article.

 

1-12-430 DECISION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING BODY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
    (a)   The Administrative Hearing Body considering any appeal of the imposition of a penalty pursuant to Section 1-12-425 may confirm, vacate, or modify but not increase, any such penalty imposed, and order the payment thereof. The decision shall state that review of the decision may be had by filing an appeal pursuant to Section 1-12-450, and shall specify the time limits for such filing.

    (b)  The Administrative Hearing Body considering any appeal of a notice of violation, if it determines that a violation exists, may issue an Administrative Order imposing the remedies provided in this subsection. Notice concerning judicial review of the decision shall be given as provided in Section 1-12-800(d). The remedies for a violation found as a result of such a hearing shall be as follows:

    (1)  Requiring the responsible party to correct or eliminate the violation or nuisance condition, including a proposed schedule for correction or elimination.

    (2)  Authorizing the City to enforce the Administrative Order and abate or cause the abatement of the violation where the responsible party has refused or has otherwise neglected to take appropriate steps to correct or eliminate the violation. The Administrative Order shall specify that if the City undertakes to abate or eliminate the violation it shall be entitled to recovery of all costs and expenses incurred in performing such work, and shall also be entitled to recover its administrative costs. Administrative costs shall include costs incurred by the City in connection with the proceeding, including attorney’s fees, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and the cost of any re-inspection and other costs necessary to enforce the Administrative Order. Such costs, if unpaid, may be recovered by the City through a lien on the affected property or through a special assessment as provided in Section 1-12-600 of this Chapter.

    (3)  Any other order or remedy that is in the interests of justice.

 

1-12-440 PAYMENT OF PENALTY.
    (a)   Any penalty imposed by the Administrative Hearing Body shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision, unless an extension of time is requested by the violator and granted by the Administrative Hearing Body.

    (b)  Any appeals processing fee that is paid pursuant to Section 1-12-425(a) of this Article shall be refunded to the payee if it is determined by the Administrative Hearing Body that the person assessed the penalty was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in said notice.

    (c)   Payment of any penalty that is upheld or otherwise imposed by the Hearing Body shall not excuse or permit any continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation that is the subject of the penalty.

    (d)  Any penalty imposed by the Administrative Hearing Body shall accrue from the date specified in the penalty and shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected. The determination of compliance or elimination of the violation shall be made by the Enforcement Officer, unless such determination was made by the Administrative Hearing Body as a result of the hearing. The Administrative Hearing Body, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of any penalty for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days during which the responsible party applies for permits required to achieve compliance, and such permit applications are actively pending before, or have already been issued by, the City, the State, or other appropriate governmental agency.

    (e)   Any penalty assessed by the Administrative Hearing Body is a debt owed to the City. In addition to all other means of enforcement and/or collection, any such penalty may be enforced as a personal obligation of the responsible party. If the violation is in connection with real property, such penalty may be enforced by imposition of a lien or special assessment upon the real property. Any lien or special assessment imposed upon the real property shall remain in effect until the penalty is paid in full.

1-12-450 REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING BODY DECISION.
    (a)   Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the Administrative Hearing Body may seek review of said decision by filing a request for City Manager review. The request for City Manager review must be filed with the City Clerk’s office within fifteen (15) days from the date of issuance of Administrative Hearing Body Decision. Upon timely receipt of a request for City Manager review, the City Manager may consider any written or oral testimony and evidence presented. The City Manager will issue a final written decision within thirty (30) days from the receipt of request for City Manager review.

    (b)  Any person or entity aggrieved by the City Manager Review decision issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section relating to a decision of a Hearing Body made pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 1-12-430 may obtain judicial review of said decision pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 by filing an appeal to the Superior Court for the County of Alameda, subject to the time limits described in Section 1-12-800, below.

    (c)   Any person or entity aggrieved by the City Manager Review decision issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section relating to a decision of a Hearing Body made pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 1-12-430 may obtain review of said decision in the Superior Court for the County of Alameda by filing with said court a Petition for Writ of Mandate, subject to the time limits described in Section 1-12-800 of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Sections 1-12-400—1-12-450); Ordinance No. 2006-016, 9/18/06 (Section 1-12-410); Ordinance No. 2007-037, 11/19/07 (Section 1-12-420); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Sections 1-12-420—1-12-450); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Sections 1-12-400—1-12-450))

 

ARTICLE 5. SUMMARY ABATEMENT
1-12-500 SUMMARY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, whenever, in the reasonable judgment of the Enforcement Officer, the existence or continuance of any violation of this Code; or any public nuisance, or any other condition which poses an imminent or immediate danger of significant harm to persons or property, or so endangers the public health, welfare or safety, an Enforcement Officer may act immediately and without prior notice or hearing to abate such condition. The expense or cost resulting from such summary abatement shall be enforceable as a personal obligation of the responsible party. The expense or cost of summary abatement may be imposed as a lien or a special assessment on real property, as described in Section 1-12-600.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Section 1-12-500); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Section 1-12-500))

 

ARTICLE 6. LIENS
1-12-600 COST ACCOUNTS AND IMPOSITION OF LIENS OR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
    (a)   If a judicial order or Administrative Order authorizes the City to abate a public nuisance, the City official responsible for such abatement shall keep an accounting of the cost of abatement along with any other recoverable costs. The accounting shall be submitted to the Finance Director for inclusion in the annual report prepared by the Finance Director for the City Council. At least ten (10) days prior to the submission of the report to the City Council, a copy of the report and notice shall be mailed to the responsible party and/or to the owner of the property where the nuisance existed, if the nuisance concerns real property, at the address shown for such owner on the last tax roll.

    (b)  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report required by subsection (a) of this section, the City Council shall hear any objections by the responsible party or property owner against whom such costs are being charged or against whose property an abatement lien or special assessment may be imposed for such costs. After considering the report and any objections thereto, the City Council may make such modifications to the report as it deems appropriate, after which the report shall be confirmed by resolution or order.

    (c)   Any penalty imposed for violations of this Code, including any other codes or statutes that have been incorporated into this Code, any administrative costs or other expenses of enforcement, and the cost or expenses associated with the abatement of a public nuisance that are levied in accordance with this Chapter, whether imposed or levied judicially or administratively, may be enforced by the recordation of a lien against the property of the owner of the real property where the nuisance condition existed. Any such lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder for Alameda County, and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. A lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien, that the lien is being imposed on behalf of the City of San Leandro, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

    (d)  Before recordation of a lien authorized by this section, a notice of lien shall be served on the responsible party and/or owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance existed, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice of lien shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. If the owner of record cannot be found, after a diligent search, the notice of lien may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Alameda County, California.

    (e)   Any fee imposed on the City by the County Recorder for costs of processing and recording the lien and the cost of providing notice to the property owner in the manner described herein may be recovered from the property owner in any foreclosure action to enforce the lien after recordation.

    (f)   As an alternative to the lien procedure described in subsection (c) of this section, any penalty imposed for violations of this Code, including any other codes or statutes that have been incorporated into this Code, any administrative costs or other expenses of enforcement, and the cost or expenses associated with the abatement of a public nuisance that are levied in accordance with this Chapter, whether imposed or levied judicially or administratively, may become a special assessment and lien against the real property where the nuisance condition existed. Any special assessment imposed on real property pursuant to this section may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. Notice of any special assessment that is levied on real property pursuant to this section shall be given to the property owner by certified mail, and shall contain the information set forth in Government Code Section 38773.5(c). All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes, including those described in Government Code Section 38773.5(c), shall be applicable to such special assessment.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Section 1-12-600); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Section 1-12-600))

 

ARTICLE 7. SUPPLEMENTARY ENFORCEMENT
1-12-700 SUPPLEMENTARY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City from initiating any other legal or equitable proceeding to obtain compliance or to discourage noncompliance with the provisions of this Code. The enforcement procedures described in this Chapter are intended to be alternative methods of obtaining compliance and/or discouraging noncompliance with the provisions of this Code and are expressly intended to be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or this Code. It is the intent of the City Council that the immunities prescribed in Penal Code Section 836.5 shall be applicable to the Enforcement Officer, and any other public officers or employees, acting in the course and scope of employment pursuant to this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Section 1-12-700); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Section 1-12-700))

 

ARTICLE 8. JUDICIAL REVIEW
1-12-800 LIMITATION OF TIME FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
    (a)   An appeal filed pursuant to Section 1-12-450(a), seeking judicial review pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 of an administrative penalty imposed by the decision of a Hearing Body, shall be filed within the time limits prescribed therein.

    (b)  Except as otherwise provided herein; the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure (C.C.P.) Section 1094.6 or successor statute are hereby adopted and any petition for review of an administrative decision of the City of San Leandro, or of any of its boards, commissions, departments, agencies, or persons authorized to render such a decision, including review pursuant to Section 1-12-450(b), shall be filed within the time limits prescribed therein. Notwithstanding such time limits, where a shorter time limitation is provided by any other law, such shorter time limit shall apply.

    (c)   Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the limitation provided in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any final administrative order or decision made as the result of a proceeding in which by law a hearing is required to be given, evidence is required to be taken and discretion in the determination of facts is vested in the person conducting the hearing.

    (d)  The limitation provided in subsection (b) shall apply to all administrative proceedings specified in subsection (c) now pending or hereafter begun. Written notice of this limitation shall be given to the parties to such proceedings by the decision-maker in substantially the following form:

 

“The time within which judicial review of this decision must be sought is governed by C.C.P. Section 1094.6. Judicial review must be sought not later than the 90th day following the date on which this decision becomes final, except that where a shorter time is provided by any State or Federal law, such shorter time limit shall apply.”

 

    (e)   This section shall not be deemed to revive any cause of action or grounds for relief through a special proceeding which is barred by law or equity.

    (f)   All costs of preparing a record which may be recovered by a local agency pursuant to C.C.P. Section 1094.6(c) or successor statute, shall be paid by the petitioner prior to delivery of the record to petitioner.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-031, 12/9/02 (Section 1-12-800); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Section 1-12-800))

CHAPTER 1-13 SEVERABILITY
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
Note
*Editor’s Note: Former Sections 8-2-100 through 8-2-110 were editorially renumbered to be 1-13-100 through 1-13-110 by the codifier during the 1999 republication.

 

1-13-100 SEVERABILITY.
    If any title, chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each title, chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more titles, chapters, articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases are declared unconstitutional or invalid.

 

1-13-105 RESTATEMENTS.
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as contained in the “San Leandro Municipal Code” relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.

 

1-13-110 SAVINGS PROVISION.
    With respect to violations, rights accrued, liabilities incurred, or appeals taken prior to the effective date of this Code under any provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code, all provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code or any part thereof shall be deemed to remain in full force for the purpose of sustaining any proper suit, action, or other proceeding, with respect to any such violation, right, liability or appeal.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-069, 8/2/82)

CHAPTER 1-14 DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Former Section 8-3-100 was editorially renumbered to be 1-14-100 by the codifier during the 1999 republication.

 

1-14-100 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this Code shall be construed as defined in this Chapter unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

    (a)   City. “City” shall mean the area within the territorial city limits of the City of San Leandro, and such territory outside of this City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or Charter provisions, or any law.

    (b)  Civil Code Provisions. The provisions of §§ 13 and 1645 of the Civil Code of the State of California are hereby adopted in the interpretation of word and phrases, unless otherwise provided herein.

    (c)   Council. “Council” shall mean the City Council of this City.

    (d)  Days. “Days shall mean calendar days.

    (e)   Genders. Any gender includes the other gender.

    (f)   Oath. “Oath” includes affirmation or declaration under penalty of perjury.

    (g)  Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, or any office, or ordinance or Charter shall mean such officer, employee, office, ordinance or Charter of the City of San Leandro, unless otherwise specifically designated.

    (h)  Person. “Person” shall mean natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

    (i)   Shall and May. “Shall” is mandatory; “May” is permissive.

    (j)   Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

    (k)  Street. “Street” shall include all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs and other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State.

    (l)   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa.

    (m) Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases used in this Code and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage or the language.

    (n)  Written. “Written” shall include printed, typewritten, mimeographed, or multigraphed.

 

(Legislative History:)

TITLE 2 REVENUE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-008. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


CHAPTER 2-1 SALES AND USE TAX
CHAPTER 2-2 BUSINESS LICENSE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. CHAPTER 2-3 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
CHAPTER 2-4 UTILITY USERS TAX
CHAPTER 2-5 MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 2-6 HEALTH FACILITY REVENUE BOND LAW
CHAPTER 2-7 MARINA AND PARK AREA DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BOND LAW
CHAPTER 2-8 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BOND LAW
CHAPTER 2-9 TAX COLLECTION
CHAPTER 2-10 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
CHAPTER 2-11 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
CHAPTER 2-12 UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALL BUILDINGS ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
CHAPTER 2-13 EMS TAX
CHAPTER 2-14 SAN LEANDRO DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
CHAPTER 2-15 SHUTTLE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
    CHAPTER 2-16 RESERVED
CHAPTER 2-17 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX
CHAPTER 2-18 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM ACCESS TAX
CHAPTER 2-19 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
CHAPTER 2-20 COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 2-21 CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX

CHAPTER 2-1 SALES AND USE TAX
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-1-100 SHORT TITLE.
    This ordinance shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.

 

2-1-105 RATE.
    The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this ordinance shall be one percent (1%).

 

2-1-110 OPERATIVE DATE.
    This ordinance shall be operative on January 1, 1974.

 

2-1-115 PURPOSE.
    The City Council hereby declares that this ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    (a)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

    (b)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

    (c)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

    (d)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance.

 

2-1-120 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
    Prior to the operative date this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this ordinance.

 

2-1-125 SALES TAX.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 2-1-105 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date.

 

2-1-130 PLACE OF SALE.
    For the purposes of this ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, which such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

 

2-1-135 USE TAX.
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 2-1-105 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

 

2-1-140 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
    Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein.

 

2-1-145 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the Title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this ordinance; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6838 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

 

2-1-150 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this ordinance.

 

2-1-155 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
    There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

    (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

    (b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State.

    (c)   The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators or common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this City.

    (d)  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.

 

2-1-160 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

    (b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this ordinance.

    (c)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

    (d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use or such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

 

2-1-165 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   Section 2-1-160 of this ordinance shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 2-1-155 of this ordinance shall become inoperative.

    (b)  In the event that Section 2-1-160 of this ordinance becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the State-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 2-1-155 of this ordinance shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time Section 2-1-160 of this ordinance shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 2-1-160 shall again become operative and Section 2-1-155 shall become inoperative.

 

2-1-170 AMENDMENTS.
    All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this ordinance.

 

2-1-175 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.

 

2-1-180 REPEALS.
    Chapter 1.1 and Chapter 1.2 of Title II of the Code are hereby repealed; provided, however, that said Chapter 1.2 of Title II shall remain applicable for the purposes of the administration of said Chapter and the imposition of and the collection of tax with respect to the sales of, and the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property prior to January 1, 1974, the making of refunds, effecting credits, the disposition of monies collected, and for the commencement or continuance of any action or proceeding under said Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 73-72, Ordinance No. 78-54; Ordinance No. 83-037, 12/5/83; Ordinance No. 85-021, 6/24/85)

CHAPTER 2-2 BUSINESS LICENSE
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE
2-2-100 PURPOSE.
    This Chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulation and raising revenue for general municipal purposes, except that where a license shall be required for the conduct of business by the State for regulatory purposes or where no license may be required by law for regulatory purposes, the purpose shall be solely that of raising revenue. That portion of the business license fee, if any, imposed for regulatory purposes is a fee, whereas that portion imposed for revenue purposes is a tax regardless of the description herein as a “fee” or “tax.”

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87; Ordinance No. 93-027, 12/20/93 (Section 2-2-100); Ordinance No. 94-027, 12/5/94; Ordinance No. 95-020, 11/6/95 (Section 2-2-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
2-2-200 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the provision or context otherwise require, the following definitions contained in this Article shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

 

2-2-205 RESERVED.
 

2-2-210 NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES.
    Number of employees shall mean and include the total number of full time and part time employees engaged or to be engaged within this City in the applicant’s business during the license period, whether as owner, partner, spouse or employee and any others who may work without charge. The Finance Director may require the applicant to submit information concerning the number of employees engaged in applicant’s business including but not limited to a copy of the relevant sections of the State Employment Development Department Quarterly Report (DE-3) form(s) as verification of the number of employees when this information is used to calculate a business license fee as specified in Article 5 of this Chapter.

 

2-2-215 BUSINESS.
    Business shall mean any profession, trade, occupation or activity conducted, including but not limited to regular delivery of goods within the City, having a fixed place of business located in the City, taking orders from clients located within the City, manufacture of products within the City, or processing orders within the City for sale elsewhere, whether or not carried on for profit, except as defined in Section 2-2-720.

 

2-2-220 BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION.
    Business classification shall mean the following general business categories:

    (a)   Automobile Wrecking. Any person engaged in the business of buying or trading used or wrecked motor vehicles and reselling the parts thereof or the building of motor vehicles from the salvaged parts of such motor vehicles.

    (b)  Bingo shall mean a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.

    (c)   Carnival. Any person engaged in the business of operating a carnival, circus or other itinerant amusement concession, excluding an activity for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro and which is:

    (1)  An incidental part of an overall business promotional activity conducted by an organized group of merchants licensed to do business within the City.

    (2)  Carried on, by, or on behalf of a civic, religious, cultural, benevolent or similar nonprofit organization with a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the gross receipts of such activity to be received by such organization.

    (3)  A neighborhood carnival, exhibit, celebration or festival sponsored by an organized group of residents in the vicinity, provided that no mechanical rides are a part of such activity.

    (4)  A booth for charitable, welfare or patriotic purposes.

    (d)  Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales. Christmas tree and pumpkin sales shall mean the selling of Christmas trees and pumpkins at retail, excluding such sales by a licensee from a permanently established licensed place of business within the City.

    (e)   Coin-Operated Device. Coin-operated device shall mean laundry machine, video game machine, pinball machine, juke box, vending machine or other similar coin-operated electrical or mechanical device.

    (f)   Commercial Advertising. Commercial advertising shall mean the distribution of commercial advertising material, excluding distribution of such material advertising a permanently established licensed business within the City by the owner or employees of such business.

    (g)  Contractors. Any person who is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes or offers to undertake or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof. The term contractor includes subcontractor and specialty contractor.

    (h)  Dance Hall shall mean any establishment where dancing is permitted with or without charge, whether or not in conjunction with any other business.

    (i)   Firearms Dealer shall mean a person whose business substantially consists of the selling, transferring, or leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or offering or exposing for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm capable of being concealed upon the person as defined by the Penal Code of the State of California.

    (j)   Fortunetelling. Any person engaged in the business of telling fortunes, forecasting futures or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge.

    (k)  Itinerant Merchant. Any person engaged in the temporary business of exhibiting, selling and delivering goods, wares or merchandise and who for the purpose of carrying on such business hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, room, motor vehicle, tent or other place within the City.

    (l)   Second Hand Dealer. Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, trading, accepting for sale or consignment, secondhand personal property of whatever kind or description.

    (m) Manufacturing. Any person conducting, managing or carrying on a business consisting mainly of manufacturing any goods, wares, merchandise or produce.

    (n)  Miscellaneous. Any person engaged in a business not specifically defined by other provisions of this Chapter and not otherwise exempt.

    (o)  Parking Lot means and includes, but is not limited to:

    (1)  Any outdoor space or uncovered plot, place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where motor vehicles may be parked, stored housed or kept, for which any charge is made;

    (2)  Any building or structure, or any portion thereof, in which motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, for which a charge is made.

    (p)  Pawnbroker. Any person engaged in the business of receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan.

    (q)  Peddler. Any person conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or provisions from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.

    (r)   Public Utilities. Any person engaged in the business of providing utility services (whether or not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission) to the general public including, but not limited to, electricity, telephone, gas, cable television services, cellular phone service, and data transmission.

    (s)   Professional. Any person engaged in a profession or vocation requiring a period of specialized training such as, but not limited to the following:

 

Architect

Attorney-at-Law

Certified Public Accountant

Chiropractor

Dentist

Engineer (Chemical, Civil, Electrical, etc.)

Environmental Consultant

Geologist

Optician

Optometrist

Osteopath

Physician

Podiatrist

Psychologist

Public Accountant

Veterinarian

 

    (t)   Recreation and Entertainment. Any person engaged in the business of providing entertainment, recreation or amusement services.

    (u)  Nonresidential Property Rental. Any person engaged in the business of renting or letting a building or structure of any kind, including warehouses, mini-storage, industrial, commercial, and office buildings to a tenant for purposes other than dwelling, sleeping or lodging. For the purposes of calculating fees, when combining nonresidential and residential property rentals, all property must be under the same ownership.

    (v)  Residential Property Rental. Any person engaged in the business of conducting or operating an apartment house, single-family house rental, duplex, condominium, townhouse, hotel/motel, mobile home park, rooming or boarding house having one or more residential units, excluding for purposes hereof the unit, if any, occupied by the taxpayer. For the purposes of calculating fees, when combining nonresidential and residential property rentals, all property must be under the same ownership.

    (w)  Retailing. Any person providing or carrying on a business consisting mainly of selling at retail any goods, including restaurants and establishments where meals or refreshments may be procured.

    (x)  Services. Any person providing services, repairs, or improvements to or on real and personal property; renting or leasing personal property to businesses or persons; providing services to persons such as, but not limited to:

 

Ambulance

Appraiser

Assayer

Bail Bond Broker

Barber and Beauty Shops

Bookkeeping Service

Claims Adjuster

Cleaning and Dyeing

Collection Agency

Commercial Artist

Consultant

Delivery of Goods

Designer or Decorator

Detective or Detective Agency

Draftsman

Employment Agency

Escrow Company

Finance/Loan Company

Gardener

Health Studio

Instruction (Dance, etc.)

Insurance Adjuster/Broker

Investment Advisor

Landscape Designer

Laundries

Locksmith

Manufacturer’s Representative

Messenger

Mortician

Notary Public

Outdoor Advertising

Photographer

Photographic Processing

Photographic Studios

Physio-Therapist

Public Stenographer

Real Estate Broker/Agent

Repair Shops (Automobile, Machine, Tools, etc.)

Shoe Repair

Stock/Bond Broker

Surveyor

Tax Counselor

Taxicabs

Taxidermist

Travel Agency

X-Ray Laboratory

 

    (y)  Solicitor. Any person taking or attempting to take orders from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property or services of any nature whatsoever for future delivery.

    (z)   Towing. Any person engaged in the business of towing or transporting any motorized or non-motorized vehicle.

    (aa) Warehousing/Storage. Any person or firm engaged in providing and/or operating warehousing facilities primarily used for the storage and/or consolidating of items such as raw materials, private goods, and the intermediary storage of bulk goods intended for further distribution. This classification includes moving and furniture storage companies.

    (ab) Waste Disposal Site. Any person engaged in the business of conducting or operating a landfill, transfer station or collection center for the receipt and processing of household, commercial and industrial solid waste materials.

    (ac) Wholesaling/Distribution—General. Any person or firm primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to other wholesalers for resale to individual consumers; or to industrial users for their own consumption or resale to individual consumers. This classification includes order-processing fulfillment centers, logistics businesses, and other facilities that provide for the repackaging and/or shipment of an on-site inventory of goods and products directly to retail/wholesale customers or retail stores. This classification also includes truck terminals, whose purpose is to provide for the consolidation, division and/or distribution of bulk goods through the use of large trucks and trailers, including cross-dock trucking uses.

    (ad) Wholesaling/Distribution—Large Local Seller. Any person or firm which meets the parameters of Wholesaling/Distribution—General and contributes more than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) in sales tax payable to the City of San Leandro during the prior July 1 through June 30 time period.

 

2-2-225 RESERVED.
 

2-2-230 RESERVED.
 

2-2-235 RESERVED.
 

2-2-240 RESERVED.
 

2-2-245 EMPLOYEE CHARGE.
    Employee charge shall mean a fee, based upon the total number of full time and part time employees, including owners and any others who may work without charge. The number of employees shall not be less than one.

 

2-2-247 EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS.
    When any person, by the use of advertising mediums, including but not limited to radio, television, signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, facsimile, or newspapers, shall advertise, hold out, or represent that he or she is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he or she is in business in the City, or when any person makes a sale, takes an order, renders a commercial service, or performs any other similar act within the City, whether operating from a fixed location in the City or coming into the City from an outside location to engage in such activity, then such facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he or she is conducting a business in the City.

 

2-2-250 GROSS RECEIPTS.
    (a)   Gross receipts shall include the total of amounts actually received or receivable from all sales and services. Gross receipts shall include the total amount of compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise; and gains realized from trading in stocks or bonds, interest income, carrying charges, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, or other emoluments, however designated.

    (b)  Included in “gross receipts” shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, except that the following shall be excluded therefrom:

    (1)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

    (2)  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchases upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded in either cash or by credit;

    (3)  Amounts received or receivable by persons for goods produced or acts or services performed outside the City, but only to the extent a business license fee has been paid to the City or County where the goods were produced or acts or services were performed;

    (4)  Any fee required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

    (5)  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into the income of the business shall not be excluded;

    (6)  As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others, except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker;

    (7)  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business, commonly called interdepartmental transfers;

    (8)  That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors; provided the general contractor furnishes the Finance Director with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor. All subcontractors shall be required to be licensed under this title.

    (9)  Anything which the City may not lawfully include by virtue of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California.

    (10) The amount paid for wages, benefits and payroll taxes for employees of an employment agency providing full or part-time employees to another business or firm and being responsible for the wages, benefits and payroll taxes.

    (11) For retail sales of motor vehicles (including trucks and industrial or construction vehicles) the value of the motor vehicle taken in trade for the sale of a new or used motor vehicle, or an amount equal to thirty-three percent (33%) of the total gross receipts of such retail motor vehicle sale whichever is less.

    (c)   The Finance Director may demand proof of gross receipts and require such applicant to submit a copy of the State Sales and Use Tax Returns or other formal documentation relative to such business. As specifically provided in Article 5 of this Chapter, when gross receipts are used as a business license unit fee measure, the appropriate number will be ascertained as follows:

    (1)  If an application is for an original license, the applicant shall estimate the gross receipts attributable to the business activities to be conducted within the City to be received during the license period, which estimate shall be used in determining the appropriate fee to be levied.

    (2)  If an application is for a renewal, but the prior year was not a full twelve (12) months, the renewal will be calculated on the average month (gross receipts multiplied by twelve (12)).

    (3)  If an application is for a renewal, the applicant shall report the gross receipts directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the City received during the previous license period, which figure shall be used in determining the appropriate fee to be levied.

 

2-2-255 PERSON.
    Person shall mean any individual, agent, association, group, partnership, representative, firm, corporation or any agent or representative thereof.

 

2-2-260 SPACE.
    Space shall mean each location in a mobile home park that is rented or intended to be rented.

 

2-2-265 SQUARE FEET.
    For persons or firms within the nonresidential property rental classification, square feet shall mean all of the space within the exterior walls of the building regardless of use that is rented or intended to be rented. For persons or firms within the warehousing/storage or wholesaling/distribution classifications, square feet shall mean all of the space within the exterior walls of the building leased or owned by the business regardless of use as substantiated by a lease document, floor plan/blueprint, or other form of documentation approved by the Director of Finance. No business shall be deemed to be less than one unit fee.

 

2-2-270 UNIT.
    Unit shall mean each residential dwelling that is rented or intended to be rented. No business shall be deemed to be less than one unit fee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 86-02, 1/20/86; Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87; Ordinance No. 90-020, 11/5/90, (Sections 2-2-210 and 2-2-245); Ordinance No. 91-022, 11/18/91 (Sections 2-2-220, 2-2-250, 2-2-265); Ordinance No. 92-036, 12/21/92, (Sections 2-2-210, 2-2-220, 2-2-245, 2-2-247); Ordinance No. 93-027, 12/20/93, (Sections 2-2-200—2-2-270); Ordinance No. 94-027, 12/5/94 (Sections 2-2-200—2-2-270); Ordinance No. 95-020, 11/6/95 (Sections 2-2-200—2-2-270; Ordinance No. 98-05, 2/17/98 (Sections 2-2-220, 2-2-250); Ordinance No. 2006-004, 2/6/06 (Section 2-2-220); Ordinance No. 2016-025, 12/19/16 (Sections 2-2-220, 2-2-265))

 

ARTICLE 3. LICENSES
2-2-300 LICENSE REQUIRED.
    No person shall commence or carry on any business in this City without first having obtained a license and paid the appropriate fees in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

 

2-2-303 SAME LOCATION.
    A separate license must be obtained for each separate business on the same premises. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in that license. Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with, and incidental to, a business licensed under this Chapter are not deemed to be separate businesses for the purposes of this section.

 

2-2-305 SEPARATE LOCATIONS.
    A separate license must be obtained for each and every branch establishment or place of business in which any portion of a business is carried on or conducted.

 

2-2-310 DISPLAY.
    Every business required to obtain a license under this Chapter must display the license in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the business is conducted. If the licensee does not maintain a fixed place of business within the City or uses a vehicle in the business, licensee shall carry proof of license on their person at all times when engaged in business within the City of San Leandro and shall display a proof of license at the request of any City Officer or employee or any customer or prospective customer.

 

2-2-315 TERM.
    Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be effective for up to one calendar year and shall expire on December 31, of the year for which issued, except a license or which a different period is specifically provided in this Chapter.

 

 

2-2-320 CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
    Cannabis businesses will receive their annual business licenses upon payment of any and all applicable cannabis business tax as required by the Municipal Code.

 

2-2-325 LICENSE OR PERMIT.
    The Finance Director shall not issue any license under this Chapter for the conduct of any business for which another license or permit is required by law until the applicant has first exhibited such license or permit to the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall note the type, number and expiration date of such license or permit. The applicant is responsible for obtaining all City-required approvals and permits. A business license issued without the applicant first obtaining all City-required approvals and permits does not constitute a license to operate a business within the City.

 

2-2-330 CONTENTS.
    The license shall set forth the name of the business to whom the license is issued, the kind of business for which the license is issued, the address of the place of business and the date of expiration of the license.

 

2-2-335 RENEWAL.
    (a)   Duty of Finance Director. On or before December 31, or each year, the Finance Director shall mail to each person holding a valid business license for the current calendar year a renewal form for such license. Each applicant for renewal of a license shall provide such information as the Finance Director may require in determining whether there has been any change in the nature of the licensed business and the appropriate license fee to be levied for the ensuing calendar year.

    (b)  Duty of Licensee. Each applicant for renewal of license shall submit to the Finance Director the appropriate license fee no later than January 31, of the calendar year for which renewal of the license is requested. Failure of the Finance Director to mail the license renewal form shall not relieve the licensee from responsibility for requesting renewal or submitting the appropriate license fee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87; Ordinance No. 93-027, 12/20/93, (Sections 2-2-300—2-2-335); Ordinance No. 94-027, 12/5/94 (Sections 2-2-300—2-2-335); Ordinance No. 95-020, 11/6/95 (Sections 2-2-300—2-2-335); Ordinance No. 04-020, 9/20/04, (Sections 2-2-303, 2-2-310, 2-2-325; Ordinance No. 2016-025, 12/19/16 (Sections 2-2-303, 2-2-320)))

 

ARTICLE 4. PROCEDURE
2-2-400 APPLICATIONS.
    All license applications shall be submitted to the Finance Director. Each applicant shall provide such information as the Finance Director shall require to ascertain the nature of the proposed business and the appropriate license fee to be levied. Such form shall contain a declaration, under penalty of perjury, to be signed by the applicant that the information provided is true.

 

2-2-405 FEE.
    The Finance Director shall determine from the information provided on the application and from such other information as is available, the appropriate license fee to be levied in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 of this Chapter.

 

2-2-410 RESERVED.
 

2-2-415 ISSUANCE.
    Upon a determination that all statements in the application are true, that the proposed business will comply with applicable laws and that the appropriate license fee has been levied and paid, the Finance Director shall issue the license.

 

2-2-420 REJECTION.
    Whenever the Finance Director has reasonable cause to believe that any statement contained in an application is not true or that a proposed business will not comply with any applicable laws or whenever an applicant fails or refuses to pay an appropriate license fee, the Finance Director shall give written notice to the applicant that the application has been rejected and shall state the reason for such rejection.

 

2-2-425 RESERVED.
 

2-2-430 RESERVED.
 

2-2-435 ERROR IN LEVY.
    Whenever the Finance Director has reasonable cause to believe that by reason of error, misrepresentation, fraud or any other cause whatsoever, the license fee has not been properly levied and paid for any license issued, the Finance Director shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice of the error in levy to the licensee. The written notice shall require the licensee to show cause, at a time and place specified in said notice, why a fee determined and specified by the Finance Director should not be fixed for such license. At such hearing the licensee shall appear and offer evidence why such specified fee should not be fixed as the license fee. After such hearing, the Finance Director shall determine the appropriate fee to be levied and within five (5) days after said hearing shall give written notice to the licensee of such determination and the amount of such fee. Upon failure of the licensee to pay such additional fee within ten (10) days of the mailing of such notice, the Finance Director shall revoke the license and shall give written notice of revocation to the licensee. Within five (5) days of the mailing of notice of revocation, the licensee shall cease the operation of the business for which the license was issued.

 

2-2-440 REVOCATION.
    Whenever the Finance Director has reasonable cause to believe that any statement contained in an application pursuant to which a license has been issued is not true, or that a licensed business does not comply with any statute of the State of California or any ordinance of the City of San Leandro, or whenever a license which has been issued remains unpaid by reason of dishonor of a licensee’s check tendered in payment of the license fee, the Finance Director shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice of the deficiency to the licensee. The written notice shall require the licensee to show cause, at a time and place specified in said notice, why the license should not be revoked. Should the licensee fail to present evidence at such hearing which established that the licensee is entitled to retain the license or should the licensee fail to pay the license fee, including any penalty then due for delinquency, the Finance Director shall revoke the license and shall give written notice of revocation to the licensee. Within five (5) days of the mailing of notice of revocation, the licensee shall cease the operation of the business for which the license was issued.

 

2-2-445 RESERVED.
 

2-2-450 APPEAL.
    Within ten (10) days after mailing the notice regarding the determination of the Finance Director, an applicant or licensee may appeal to the City Council in writing. The City Council shall set a hearing date and notify licensee not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall show cause why the action or determination of the Finance Director should not be approved. The findings of the City Council shall be final and conclusive in the matter. In the alternative, the City Council may refer the appeal to a hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be submitted to the City Council which may, on the basis of the record only, approve or disapprove the findings of the hearing officer.

 

2-2-455 NOTICE.
    Any notice herein required shall be deemed as having been served when the notice is posted in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid and addressed to the person’s business address as shown on the records of the Finance Director.

 

2-2-460 AUDIT OF STATEMENTS AND RECORDS.
    Records which shall be maintained for audit purposes shall include State and Federal income tax returns, schedules and records included in such returns, any and all work papers used to prepare such returns, and in the case of businesses whose business license fee is computed upon number of employees, quarterly and annual State and Federal payroll tax returns.

    All persons subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall keep complete records of all business transactions and shall retain such records for examination by the Finance Director and maintain them for a period of at least three (3) years from the annual due date of the Federal tax return or the City business license fee return, whichever time period is greater. No person required under this section to keep records shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine said records at reasonable times and places.

    A mistake made in stating the amount of the business license fee shall not, in any case, prevent or prejudice the Finance Director from collecting what is actually due from any person or entity carrying on a trade, calling, profession or occupation subject to a business license fee under this Chapter.

    If any person, subject to the fee imposed by this Chapter, fails to submit information required, or if the Finance Director is not satisfied with records and statements filed, the Finance Director shall determine the amount of the business license fee due from such person by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain and shall mail a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing in the United States Post Office at the most recent home or business address.

 

2-2-465 CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS AND DISCLOSURE TO OTHER AGENCIES.
    The statement of gross receipts filed pursuant of the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered for all purposes as a trade secret and shall be confidential in character, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to the Finance Director or authorized employee of the Finance Director.

    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the following: The disclosure to, or examination of records by the City employee charged under this Chapter with collection of business license fees; a grand jury or court of law, upon a subpoena, or in a proceeding to determine the existence or amount of any tax liability of the particular taxpayer to the City; the disclosure of the business name, location, owners names and general type or nature of business, the expiration date and status pursuant to this Chapter. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, unlawful disclosure of confidential information to any person not authorized by this section shall be a misdemeanor under the Code and punishable in the manner prescribed.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87; Ordinance No. 93-027, 12/20/93, (Sections 2-2-400—2-2-455); Ordinance No. 94-027, 12/5/94 (Sections 2-2-400—2-2-455); Ordinance No. 95-020, 11/6/95 (Sections 2-2-400—2-2-465); Ordinance No. 96-016, 12/2/96 (Section 2-2-220))

 

ARTICLE 5. FEES
Note
*Editor’s Note: The fees portion of Ordinance 96-016 was put before the voters and was ratified by the electors. The fees portion of Ordinance 95-020 was put before the voters on June 8, 1998 as Measure B (Ordinance 98-04) and was not ratified by the electors. Thus, the fees reverted back to those enacted by Ordinance 94-027, as amended by Ordinance 96-16.

 

2-2-500 FEES BASED ON NATURE OF BUSINESS.
    Every person commencing or carrying on a business within this City shall pay a license fee in an amount determined by the Finance Director in accordance with the nature of the business as hereinafter set forth:

 

 


Business Classification

Annual Base Fee

Unit Fee

Unit Fee Basis

Automobile Wrecking

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Bingo

$146.20

-

Flat/Annual

Carnival

$146.20

$263.50

Flat/Daily

Christmas Trees/Pumpkin Patch

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Coin-Operated Device

$146.20

$1.30

x per $1,000 of gross receipts

Commercial Advertising

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Contractors

$146.20

$87.90

x per each owner and each employee

Dance Hall

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Firearms Dealer

$146.20

$4.40

per $100 of gross receipts attributable to the sales of firearms capable of being concealed upon the person and ammunition for such firearms, excluding sales to public agencies

Fortunetelling

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Itinerant Merchant

$146.20

$45.40

Flat/Weekly

Manufacturing

$146.20

$43.90

x per each owner and each employee

Miscellaneous

$146.20

$43.90

x per each owner and each employee

Mobile Food Vendors

$146.20

-

Flat/Annual

Nonresidential Property Rental

$146.20

$21.90

x per 1,000 square feet

Residential Property Rental

$146.20

$13.20

x per unit or space

Parking Lot

$146.20

$100.00

x per $1,000 of gross receipts

Pawnbroker

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Peddler/Solicitor

$146.20

$43.90

x per each owner and each employee

Professional

$146.20

$110.00

x per each owner and each employee

Public Utilities

$146.20

$43.90

x per each owner and each employee

Recreation and Entertainment

$146.20

$87.90

x per each owner and each employee

Retail

$146.20

$43.90

x per each owner and each employee

Secondhand Dealer

$732.70

-

Flat/Annual

Services

$146.20

$87.90

x per each owner and each employee

Towing

$146.20

$1.30

x per $1,000 of gross receipts

Warehouse/Storage

$146.20

$114.10

x per 1,000 square feet

Waste Disposal Site

$146.20

$1.97

per ton

Wholesale/Distribution General

$146.20

$114.10

x per 1,000 square feet

Wholesale/Distribution - Large Local seller

$146.20

$43.90

x per each owner and each employee If sales tax revenues to the City is >$50,000 based on prior fiscal year

 

The business license fees established by this section shall continue to be adjusted annually by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose metropolitan area, as published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics.

 

2-2-505 APPEAL OF FEE DETERMINATION.
    A business license applicant may appeal the fee amount owed by filing a written appeal with the Finance Director within thirty (30) days from the date the fee is first due and payable. The written appeal shall include the facts and circumstances forming the basis for the appeal including, if applicable, the number of employees engaged in the applicant’s business and/or the gross receipts of the business. Within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed, the Finance Director shall adjust the fee owed if he or she determines in his or her sole and exclusive discretion that the fee owed is not calculated correctly.

 

2-2-510 RESERVED.
 

2-2-515 PARTIAL YEAR.
    Except for business categories of coin operated devices, waste disposal site and towing of Section
2-2-500, the business license fee levied in accordance with Section 2-2-500 for any business commenced after June 30 of any year shall be reduced by one-half.

 

2-2-520 TRANSFER.
    For each transfer of ownership of a licensed business or transfer of a licensed business to a new name or location, an applicant shall pay a Fifty Dollar ($50.00) administrative fee for said license and submit a new business license application.

 

2-2-525 DUPLICATE LICENSE.
    For each duplicate license issued to replace one lost, a licensee shall pay an amount established by the City Council by resolution.

 

2-2-530 DUE DATES.
    All fees provided for herein shall be payable before the first day of the period for which the license is issued, and shall be delinquent thirty (30) calendar days thereafter, except that all daily, weekly and monthly fees provided for shall be payable in advance and shall be delinquent upon commencing business.

2-2-535 PENALTY.
    Before issuing any license to any person who has failed to pay the fee within thirty (30) days after the due date, the Finance Director shall assess against and receive from said person a penalty in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the business license fee or Fifty Dollars ($50.00), whichever is greater. If any person fails to pay the fee within ninety (90) days of the due date, the Finance Director shall assess against and receive from said person a penalty in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the business license fee or One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), which-ever is greater. Any business found to be without a City business license shall be assessed the appropriate annual business license fee plus a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the business license fee or One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), whichever is greater. This same penalty shall apply to every year in which a business has operated without a business license under the same ownership, even if business was previously in a different location.

 

2-2-536 AMNESTY PROGRAM.
    The Finance Director may, from time to time, establish an amnesty program whereby the City will not impose the penalties set forth in Section 2-2-535 on an existing business where that business has never previously applied for a business license, and has never previously received notice from the City that the business is required to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. No business will be eligible to participate in an amnesty program more than once. No business will be eligible to participate in an amnesty program if it has previously paid a business license tax, or has previously been notified by the City that the business is obligated to comply with this Chapter. The Finance Director is authorized to set the beginning and end dates for a particular amnesty program. No business may participate in an amnesty program outside the term established by the Finance Director.

 

2-2-540 NO BILL REQUIRED.
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, neither the Finance Director or any other City Official is required to send or give any notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this Chapter, and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any license fee or penalty levied pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.

 

2-2-545 REGULATIONS NOT WAIVED.
    The payment of a license fee required by this Chapter, the acceptance of said fee by the City, or the issuance of the license to any person shall not be construed to entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business which is in violation of any law or ordinance.

 

2-2-550 NO WAIVER.
    If the Finance Director shall make a mistake in levying or collecting the correct amount of the license fee, such mistake or failure shall not relieve the licensee of the obligation to pay the correct fee to the City.

 

2-2-555 LICENSE A DEBT.
    The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City; and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the City to do so shall be liable to action in the name of the City, in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of license, penalties, interest and attorneys’ fees.

    If the fees are not paid when due, such fee, penalty and interest shall constitute an assessment against the licensee’s real property and shall be a lien on the property in the amount thereof, which lien shall continue until the amount thereof including all penalties and interest are paid, or until it is discharged of record.

 

2-2-556 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES AND FEES.
    During July of each year, the Finance Director shall submit to the City Council a report of delinquent charges and fees. A time, date and place for hearing of the report and any objections or protests thereto shall be fixed by the City Clerk. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the Finance Director shall mail written notice thereof to the owner of each of the premises affected thereby, using for this purpose the names and addresses which appear on the last equalized tax assessment roll.

    (a)   At said hearing the City Council shall hear any objections or protests of owners of premises liable to be assessed for delinquent charges or fees. The City Council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which the report shall be confirmed by resolution. The delinquent charges and fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective premises and are a lien on the premises for the amounts of such delinquent charges and fees.

    (b)  Prior to August 10, a certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the County Auditor, who shall enter each assessment on the tax roll against the respective premises. Said assessment shall be collected at the same time in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessments.

    (c)   The lien created attaches upon recordation of a certified copy of the confirmed report in the office of the County Recorder and shall continue until the charges and fees are fully paid.

    (d)  The Finance Director shall set an administrative fee to reimburse the City for the administrative costs of placing a lien on a property to collect delinquent charges, fees, and penalties. This administrative fee shall be added to the delinquent fees and penalties, and shall be included in the lien.

    (e)   Any successor business on a premises, whether related to the previous business or an entirely new business, shall be responsible for all delinquent charges, fees, and penalties associated with that premises. The successor business has the obligation to determine the delinquency status of the prior business.

 

2-2-560 EVIDENCE OF LIABILITY.
    In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this Chapter, the fact that the person engaged in any business for which a license is required, or that such person exhibited a sign indicating such business, shall be conclusive evidence of the liability of such person to pay for a license for such business.

 

2-2-565 REFUNDS.
    No business license fee collected under the provisions of the Chapter shall be refundable or prorated in any manner; except if the business subject to the fee establishes to the satisfaction of the Finance Director that it has paid more than once, the fee was erroneously or illegally collected or paid in excess of the correct amount and files a claim with the Finance Director for refund of such over-payment within a period of one year from the date of the overpayment.

 

2-2-570 REFUND CLAIMS.
    No order for a refund under this Chapter shall be made, except on a claim:

    (a)   Verified by the person who paid the fee, his or her guardian, executor or administrator.

    (b)  Filed within one year after making the payment sought to be refunded.

 

2-2-575 ACTIONS TO COMPEL REFUND.
    The person who paid the fee, his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator may bring an action only in the Superior Court against the City to recover a fee which the City has refused to refund or for a claim filed pursuant to this Chapter. No other person may bring such an action; but if another should do so, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff.

 

2-2-580 CLAIMS RELATING TO VALIDITY OF A PORTION OF THE FEE.
    If the Court finds that a fee is void in whole or in part, it shall render judgment for the plaintiff for the amount of the fee paid or portion thereof that is found to be void. The fee or a portion thereof not found to be void shall constitute a valid business license fee which shall carry penalties, interest and costs for delinquency.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 86-002, 1/20/86; Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87; Ordinance No. 90-020, 11/5/90 (Sections 2-2-500 and 2-2-535); Ordinance No. 91-022, 11/18/91 (Sections 2-2-500, 2-2-520, 2-2-555 and 2-2-556); Ordinance No. 92-036, 12/21/92 (Sections 2-2-500, 2-2-520); Ordinance No. 93-027, 12/20/93 (Sections 2-2-500—2-2-560); Ordinance No. 94-027, 12/5/94 (Sections 2-2-500—2-2-560); Ordinance No. 95-020, 11/6/95 (Sections 2-2-505—2-2-580); Ordinance No. 96-016, 12/2/96 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 04-020, 9/20/04 (Sections 2-2-535, 2-2-536, 2-2-556); Ordinance No. 06-014, 7/27/06 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2007-012, 5/21/07 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2008-006, 5/19/08 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2009-006, 5/18/09 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2010-008, 5/17/10 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2011-007, 5/16/11 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2012-007, 5/7/12 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2013-003, 5/20/13 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2014-004, 5/19/14 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2015-005, 5/18/15 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2016-003, 5/16/16 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2016-025, 12/19/16 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2017-009, 5/15/17 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2017-018, 12/4/17 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2018-007, 5/21/18 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2019-006, 5/5/19 (Section 2-2-500); Ordinance No. 2020-006, 5/22/20 (Section 2-2-500))

 

ARTICLE 6. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Article 6, Vehicle Stickers, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 91-022, 11/18/91)

 

ARTICLE 7. EXEMPTIONS
2-2-700 RESERVED.
 

2-2-705 LIMITED GROSS INCOME.
    Any person who submits, together with the license application, documentary evidence adequate to prove that the gross receipts from the business for which the license application is submitted was, for the immediately preceding license period, Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) or less, shall be exempt from one-half of the license fee which would otherwise be levied pursuant to Section 2-2-500.

 

2-2-710 PREEMPTION.
    This Chapter shall not apply to any business exempt from payment of business license taxes or fees by virtue of the Constitution of the United States or the State of California.

 

2-2-715 DISABLED VETERANS.
    Any veteran who is unable to perform manual labor due to any physical disability may peddle goods and merchandise without payment of the fee prescribed in Section 2-2-500.

 

2-2-720 NONPROFIT ACTIVITIES.
    This Chapter shall not apply to any institution, corporation, organization or association which currently has an exemption from the payment of Federal income taxes under Section 501 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code as amended from time to time and/or exemption from the payment of State income taxes under Section 23701 et seq., of the California Revenue and Taxation Code as amended from time to time.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 72-066, 11/27/72; Ordinance No. 73-021, 2/26/73; Ordinance No. 73-026, 4/9/73; Ordinance No. 73-028, 4/16/73; Ordinance No. 78-054, 11/6/78; Ordinance No. 81-018, 4/14/81; Ordinance No. 82-029, 5/3/82; Ordinance No. 87-022, 12/7/87; Ordinance No. 93-027, 12/20/93 (Sections 2-2-700—2-2-720); Ordinance No. 94-027, 12/5/94 (Sections 2-2-700—2-2-720); Ordinance No. 95-020, 11/6/95 (Sections 2-2-700—2-2-720))

CHAPTER 2-3 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-008. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
Note
*Editor’s Note: Chapter 3, previously contained herein, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 89-018. Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 67-59, 82-029 and 87-027.

 

2-3-100 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
    This Chapter may be cited as the “City of San Leandro Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance.” The tax imposed under this Chapter is solely for the purpose of raising revenue for the usual and current expenses of the City. This Chapter is not enacted for regulatory purposes. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 130 of the Charter of the City of San Leandro.

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 2-3-105 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
    (a)   A tax is hereby imposed on each transfer by deed, instrument or writing, by which any lands, tenements or other real property located in the City, are sold or granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, a purchaser or purchasers thereof, or any other person or persons at or by the direction of said purchaser or purchasers, when the value of the consideration exceeds One

Hundred Dollars, said tax to be at the rate of Six Dollars ($6.00) for each One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or fractional part of One Thousand Dollars of the value of the consideration.

    As used herein, “value of the consideration” means the total consideration, paid or delivered or contracted to be paid or delivered in return for the transfer or any lands, tenements or other real property, including the amount of any indebtedness, existing immediately prior to the transfer which is secured by a lien, deed of trust or other encumbrance on the property conveyed and which continues to be secured by such lien, deed or trust or encumbrance after said transfer, and also including the amount of any indebtedness which is secured by a lien, deed of trust or encumbrance given or placed upon the property in connection with the transfer to secure the payment of the purchase price or any part thereof which remains unpaid at the time of the transfer. “Value or the consideration” also includes the amount of any special assessment levied or imposed upon the lands, tenements or other real property by a public body, district or agency, where said special assessment is a lien or encumbrance on the property and the purchaser or transferee agrees to pay such special assessment or takes the property subject to the lien of such special assessment. The value of any lien or encumbrance of a type other than those which are hereinabove specifically included, existing immediately prior to the transfer and remaining after said transfer, shall not be included in determining the value of the consideration. If the value of the consideration cannot be definitely determined, or is left open to be fixed by future contingencies, “value of the consideration” shall be deemed to mean the fair market value of the property at the time of transfer after deducting the amount of any lien or encumbrance if any of a type which would be excluded in determining the value of the consideration pursuant to above provisions of this section.

 

2-3-110 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 2-3-105 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.

 

2-3-115 EXEMPTION—WRITTEN SECURITY INSTRUMENT.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

 

2-3-120 EXEMPTION—UNITED STATES, STATE OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.
    Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

 

2-3-125 EXEMPTION—BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation approval or change.

 

2-3-130 EXEMPTION—INSTRUMENTS PURSUANT TO S.E.C. ORDER.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities Exchange Commission, but only if:

    (a)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

    (b)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and

    (c)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

 

2-3-135 EXEMPTION—PARTNERSHIPS.
    (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if:

    (1)  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code; and

    (2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

    (b)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

    (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

 

2-3-140 INSTRUMENTS IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply with respect to any transfer to a beneficiary or mortgagee which is taken in lieu of foreclosure.

 

2-3-145 INSTRUMENTS DIVIDING COMMUNITY PROPERTY.
    (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purposes of effecting a division of community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders.

    (b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection (a), the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption.

 

2-3-150 DEED, INSTRUMENT OR OTHER WRITING FOR CONVEYANCE OF REALTY BY STATE OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR AGENCY WITH AGREEMENT FOR PURCHASER TO RECONVEY.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the State of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency.

 

2-3-155 DEED, INSTRUMENT OR OTHER WRITING FOR CONVEYANCE OF REALTY BY STATE, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR AGENCY OF REALTY FINANCED BY OBLIGATIONS ISSUED BY NONPROFIT CORPORATION.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the State of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a government unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

 

2-3-156 SAME—PROPERTY.
    The tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall apply to the transfer of only one property in the instance of an exchange pursuant to Section 1031 of the Internal Revenue Code of like kind properties held for productive use in a trade or business or for an investment. For purposes of this section, the exchange of properties must be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date on which the taxpayer transfers and pays the tax on one of the properties relinquished in the exchange.

 

2-3-157 EXEMPTION—HISTORIC RESOURCES.
    Any tax imposed by this Chapter will not apply to the transfer of a historic resource, as that term is defined in Section 4-26-200(p) of this Code, where a deed restriction has been recorded on the historic resource that requires the owner of the historic resource to comply with Chapter 4-26 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. This deed restriction must be in a form approved by the City Attorney, and must have a term of at least five (5) years. This deed restriction must be recorded on the historic resource as part of the transaction to transfer the historic resource.

 

2-3-160 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
    The Finance Director of the City or designee (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as “Tax Collector”) shall collect the tax imposed under this Chapter and shall otherwise administer this Chapter. He or she may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the Chapter, as he or she may deem reasonably necessary or desirable to administer this Chapter. In the administration of this Chapter, the Tax Collector shall interpret its provisions consistently with those Documentary Stamp Tax Regulations adopted by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department which relate to the tax on conveyances, except that for purposes of this Chapter:

    (a)   The term “realty” as used in said regulations, shall be deemed to mean “real property” as such term is defined by and under the laws of the State;

    (b)  Those provisions of said regulations providing for deduction of the value of any lien or encumbrance existing before the sale and not removed thereby shall not apply;

    (c)   Those provisions of said regulations relating to the rate or the tax shall not apply;

    (d)  Those provisions of said regulations which conflict with the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply.

 

2-3-165 DUE DATES—DELINQUENCY—PENALTIES—INTEREST.
    The tax imposed under this Chapter is due and payable at the time the deed, instrument or writing effecting a transfer subject to the tax is delivered, and is delinquent if unpaid at the time of recordation thereof. In the event that the tax is not paid prior to becoming delinquent, a delinquency of ten percent (10%) of the amount of tax due shall accrue.

    In the event a portion of the tax is unpaid prior to becoming delinquent, the penalty shall only accrue as to the portion remaining unpaid. An additional penalty of ten percent (10%) shall accrue if the tax remains unpaid on the ninetieth day following the date of the original delinquency. Interest shall accrue at the rate of one-half of one percent (.5%) a month or fraction thereof, on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date the tax becomes delinquent to the date of payment. Interest and penalty accrued shall become a part of the tax.

 

2-3-166 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES AND FEES.
    Delinquent taxes (including penalties and interest) shall be made a lien upon the real property transferred and such lien shall continue until the taxes thereon are fully paid. During July of each year, the Tax Collector shall submit to the City Council a report of delinquent taxes. A time, date and place for hearing of the report and any objections or protests thereto shall be fixed by the City Clerk. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the Tax Collector shall mail written notice thereof to the owner of each of the properties affected thereby, using for this purpose the names and addresses which appear on the last equalized tax assessment roll.

    (a)   At said hearing the City Council shall hear any objections or protests of owners of property liable to be assessed for delinquent taxes. The City Council may make such revision or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which the report shall be confirmed by resolution. The delinquent taxes set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective property and are a lien on the property for the amounts of such delinquent taxes.

    (b)  Prior to August 10, a certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the County Auditor, who shall enter each assessment on the tax roll against the respective premises. Said assessment shall be collected at the same time in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case or delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessments.

    (c)   The lien created attaches upon recordation of a certified copy of the confirmed report in the office of the County Recorder and shall continue until the charges and fees are fully paid.

 

2-3-170 DECLARATION REQUIRED.
    The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be paid to the Tax Collector by the persons referred to in Section 2-3-175. Payment shall be accompanied by a declaration of the amount of tax due signed by the person paying the tax or by his or her agent. The declaration shall include a statement that the value of the consideration on which the tax due was computed includes all indebtedness secured by liens, deed of trust, or other encumbrances remaining or placed on the property transferred at the time of transfer, and also includes all special assessments on the property which the purchaser or transferee agrees to pay or which remain a lien on the property at the time of transfer. The declaration shall identify the deed, instrument or writing effecting the transfer for which the tax is being paid. The Tax Collector may require delivery to him or her of a copy of such deed, instrument or writing whenever he or she deems such to be reasonably necessary to adequately identify such writing or to administer the provisions of this Chapter. The Tax Collector may rely on the declaration as to the amount of the tax due, provided he or she has no reason to believe that the full amount of the tax due is not shown on the declaration.

    Whenever the Tax Collector has reason to believe that the full amount of tax due is not shown on the declaration or has not been paid, he or she may, by notice served upon any person liable for the tax, require him or her to furnish a true copy of his or her records relevant to the value of the consideration or fair market value of the property transferred. Such notice may be served at any time within three (3) years after recordation of the deed, instrument or writing which transfers such property.

 

2-3-175 DETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY.
    If on the basis of such information as he or she receives pursuant to the last paragraph of Section 2-3-170 and/or on the basis of such other relevant information that comes into his or her possession, he or she determines that the amount of tax due as set forth in the declaration, or as paid, is insufficient, the Tax Collector may recompute the tax due on the basis of such information.

    If the declaration required by Section 2-3-170 is not submitted, the Tax Collector may make an estimate of the value of the consideration for the property conveyed and determine the amount of tax to be paid on the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession.

    One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due with respect to any transfer.

 

2-3-180 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION.
    The Tax Collector shall give notice to a person liable for payment of the tax imposed under this Article of his or her determination made under Section 2-3-175. Such notice shall be given within three (3) years after the recordation of the deed, instrument or writing effecting the transfer on which the tax deficiency determination was made.

 

2-3-185 MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE.
    Any notice required to be given by the Tax Collector under this Chapter may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made by depositing the notice in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope with postage paid addressed to the person on whom it is to be served at his or her address as it appears in the records of the City or as ascertained by the Tax Collector. The service is complete at the time of the deposit of the notice in the United States mail, without extension of time for any reason.

 

2-3-190 PETITION FOR REDETERMINATION.
    Any person against whom a determination is made under this Chapter or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination within sixty (60) days after service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the sixty (60) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period.

 

2-3-195 CONSIDERATION OF PETITION—HEARING.
    If a petition for redetermination is filed within the sixty (60) day period, the Tax Collector shall reconsider the determination and, if the person has so requested in his or her petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing, and shall give him or her ten (10) days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Tax Collector may designate one or more deputies for the purpose of conducting hearings and may continue a hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

 

2-3-196 ACTIONS.
    Any action brought under this Chapter shall be commenced within six (6) months from and after the date that the City rejects a claim for refund in whole or in part. No action shall be commenced or maintained under this Chapter unless a claim for refund has first been filed in accordance with regulations duly adopted by the Tax Collector.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 89-018, 8/7/89; Ordinance No. 90-010, 5/7/90 (Sections 2-3-105, 2-3-156, 2-3-166, 2-3-196; Ordinance No. 93-09, 5/3/93; Ordinance No. 04-008, 5/3/04 (Section 2-3-157))

CHAPTER 2-4 UTILITY USERS TAX
Note
*Editor’s Note: Previous Chapter 2-4, previously contained herein, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 90-011 and further repealed by Ordinance No. 90-016. Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance No. 87-09.

 

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-4-100 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of the tax imposed hereby is to raise revenue for the current and usual expenses of the City.

 

2-4-105 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this Chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:

    (a)   “City” shall mean the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  “Cogenerator” shall mean any corporation or person employing cogeneration as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities Code for producing power for the generation of electricity for self-use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the Federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and regulations thereunder).

    (c)   “Electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” and “telephone corporation” shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 218, 222 and 234 respectively of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California. “Electrical corporation” and “gas corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality or public agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas to a service user.

    (d)  “Exempt wholesale generator” shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C.S. 79z-5a) and regulations thereunder.

    (e)   “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor.

    (f)   “Mobile telecommunications service” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

    (g)  “Month” shall mean a calendar month.

    (h)  “Non-residential user” shall mean any service user other than a residential user.

    (i)   “Non-utility service supplier” shall mean:

    (1)  A service supplier, other than a provider of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include but is not limited to any publicly owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, exempt wholesale generator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;

    (2)  An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a provider of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the City; and

    (3)  A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a provider of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the City.

    (j)   “Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal corporation (other than the City), municipal district, cooperative, or receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.

    (k)  “Place of primary use” means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. In the case of mobile telecommunications services, “place of primary use” must be within the licensed service area of the home service provider, and shall have the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 116 et. seq.) and the regulations thereunder.

    (l)   “Residential user” shall mean any service user of telephone services, electric energy or gas at a place of service which is a house, duplex, townhouse, apartment, or mobile home and is the primary residence of such service user.

    (m) “Service address” means the residential street address or the business street address of the gas, electric, water or video service user. For a telephone communication service user, “service address” means:

    (1)  The location of the telecommunications equipment to which a service user’s call is charged and from which the call originates or terminates, regardless of where the call is billed or paid; or,

    (2)  If the location in subsection (m)(1) of this section is unknown, the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.

    (n)  “Service supplier” shall mean any regulated or non-regulated entity, or person, including the City, that provides telephone communication, electric, or gas service to a user of such services within the City, and includes an entity or person required to collect, or self-collect under Section 2-4-215 of this Chapter, and remit a tax as imposed by this Chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric, gas, water or video service.

    (o)  “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this Chapter.

    (p)  “State” shall mean the State of California.

    (q)  “Tax Administrator” shall mean the Finance Director of the City or designee.

    (r)   “Telephone communication services” shall include “communications services” as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C.A.), and the regulations thereunder, and shall include teletypewriter exchange and similar data services, and any service that is capable of transmitting telephonic quality communications [including the use of internet protocol (IP) or other similar means], whether provided by analog, digital, electronic, radio or similar means through “interconnected service” with the “public switched network” [as these terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission—see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)] or over digital networks by which communications with a substantial portion of the public is available (e.g., voice using internet protocol or VoIP), and whether such transmission occurs by wire, teletypewriter, cable, cable modem or digital subscriber line (DSL), internet, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, switching facilities, satellite, radio wave [including, but not limited to, mobile telecommunications service, cellular service, commercial mobile service and commercial mobile radio service (see 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d)(1) and Part 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations), personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other similar services regardless of radio spectrum used], or any other similar facilities, and whether charges for such service are based on time, distance, or on any other basis.

    (s)   “Utility tax year” shall mean the twelve (12) month period commencing July 1, and ending June 30, of the next succeeding calendar year.

    (t)   “Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use and enjoyment of the video programming, to or from an address in the City, including to or from a business, home, condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors [as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)]; open video systems (OVS) suppliers; suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); direct broadcast satellite to the extent Federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.

    (u)  “Video services” means any and all services related to the providing of video programming (including origination programming), including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming, regardless of the content of such video programming or communications. “Video services” do not include services for which a tax is paid under Section 2-4-200 of this Article.

 

2-4-110 EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   The taxes imposed by this Chapter shall not apply to:

    (1)  Any person or service if imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California, or in violation of a Federal statute or State statute applicable to Charter Cities.

    (2)  The City. Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this Chapter described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, other than State and Federal agencies or their subdivisions with commonly recognized names, shall file an application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made upon a form supplied by the Tax Administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service providers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax Administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service providers so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new utility service provider of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user as a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the Tax Administrator, a service supplier or nonutility supplier, or their billing agents, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax.

    (b)  Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this Chapter described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, other than State and Federal agencies or their subdivisions with commonly recognized names, shall file an application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made upon a form supplied by the Tax Administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service providers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax Administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service providers so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new utility service provider of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user as a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the Tax Administrator, a service supplier or non-utility supplier, or their billing agents, shall provide a list of names and addresses of those customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax. A telephone communication service supplier shall, upon request of the Tax Administrator, provide a copy of the Federal exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the City that is served by such service supplier.

    The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 2-4-280 of this Chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Administrator pursuant to Section 2-4-280 of this Chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    (c)   The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish that one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility services otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this Chapter shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax.

    (d)  The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons and/or utility services that the Tax Administrator is aware are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 90-016, 9/4/90 (2-4-100—2-4-110); Ordinance No. 93-011, 6/7/93; Ordinance No. 94-011, 6/13/94 (Section 2-4-105); Ordinance No. 99-04, 2/16/99 (Sections 2-4-105, 2-4-110); Ordinance No. 04-014, 7/6/04 (Sections 2-4-105, 2-4-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. IMPOSITION OF TAX
2-4-200 TELEPHONE USERS TAX.
    (a)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City who uses telephone communication services, including intrastate, interstate and international telephone communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent (6%) of all charges made for such telephone communication services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax, regardless of where the telephone communication service may originate, terminate, or pass through. Charges for mobile telecommunications services are subject to taxation under this Chapter if the customer’s place of primary use is in the City, regardless of where the mobile telecommunications service may originate, terminate, or pass through.

    (b)  As used in this section, the term “telephone communication services” shall not include “private mobile radio service,” as defined in Part 20 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or “private mobile service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)(3), which is not interconnected with the public switched network or is not provided over digital networks by which communications with a substantial portion of the public is available (e.g., voice using internet protocol or VoIP). The tax imposed under subsection (a) of this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using telephone communication services to the extent that, pursuant to Sections 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code, the amounts paid for such communication services are exempt from or are not subject to the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. In the event that the Federal excise tax on “communication services” as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this Section 2-4-200 and in Section 2-4-105(r) to such law, including any related Federal regulations, private letter rulings, case law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any judicial or administrative decision interpreting such Federal excise tax law which is published or rendered after the date of repeal.

    (c)   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. The term “charges” shall also include charges to a service user by a hotel or motel for telephone communication services used in the City when such charges are incidental to the right of occupancy in such hotel or motel. The collection of the tax from the service user shall be the responsibility of the hotel or motel owner. “Charges” shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due. If a non-taxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable.

    (d)  The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to telephone communication service suppliers that are subject to the tax collection requirements of this Chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those telephone communication services that are subject to the tax of subsection (a) of this section and/or identifies the sourcing of such services for tax administration purposes. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2)(A). An administrative ruling shall not constitute a new tax or an increase in an existing tax if such administrative ruling is:

    (1)  Consistent with the existing ordinance language; and,

    (2)  Merely reflects a change in, clarification to, or new rendition of:

    (A)  The definition, interpretation, or application of substantial nexus by a court of competent jurisdiction or by preemptive State or Federal law, for purposes of taxation;

    (B)  The sourcing of taxable transactions, which furthers administrative efficiency and minimizes multi-jurisdictional taxation; or,

    (C)  The definition, interpretation, or application of the Federal excise tax rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to “communications services” (Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code) by the Internal Revenue Service, or by a State or local agency that assumes an interpretative role of those rules, regulations, and laws in the event that the Federal excise tax on “communications services” is repealed.

    (e)   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another State or City on such telephone communication service, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other State or City, provided, however, the amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section.

    (f)   The tax on telephone communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of the tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

 

2-4-205 ELECTRICITY USERS TAX.
    (a)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six (6%) percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the end-user, which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility supplier to a service user. The tax shall be paid by the person paying for such electricity or supplemental services.

    (b)  “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include: (1) energy charge; (2) distribution or transmission charge; (3) metering charge; (4) standby, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar charges for supplemental service; (5) customer charge, service charge, demand charge, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charge, independent system operator (ISO) charge, stranded investment or competitive transition charge (CTC), public purpose program charge, nuclear decommissioning charge, trust transfer amount (bond financing charge), franchise fee, franchise surcharge; and (6) all other annual and monthly charges or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are authorized by the City Council, the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. “Charges” shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.

    (c)   As used in this section, the term “using electricity” shall not be construed to mean the storage of electrical energy by a person in a battery that he or she owns or possesses for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the electricity was received; provided, however, the term shall include the receiving of such electricity for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries. The term shall not include electricity used in water pumping by water corporations; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electrical corporation or governmental agency at a point within the City for resale.

    (d)  The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by State or Federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or, (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) of this section.

    (e)   The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility supplier or an electric utility not under the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 2-4-215. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of the tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

 

2-4-210 GAS USERS TAX.
    (a)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the City, which is transported and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six (6%) percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas, and shall be paid by the person using such gas; provided, however, that the tax shall not apply to any charges for gas storage services when the service provider cannot, as a practical matter, determine the location where such stored gas is ultimately used. “Charges” as used in this section shall include: (1) the commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user, which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport; (2) gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges); and (3) capacity or demand charges, service charges, marketing charges, administrative charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges for gas services or programs, which are authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

    The “cost of gas owned by the service user” shall include the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas. “Charges” shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.

    (b)  The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; (2) charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business or; (3) charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by State or Federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) of this section.

    (d)  The tax that is calculated on charges for gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 2-4-215. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

 

2-4-215 SERVICE USERS RECEIVING DIRECT PURCHASE OF GAS OR ELECTRICITY.
    (a)   Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Sections 2-4-205 and 2-4-210 hereof, which produces gas or electricity for self-use, or which receives gas or electricity directly from a non-utility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this Chapter, or which otherwise is not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the City that is directly billed and collected by the service supplier or its billing agent, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the pattern payment of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

    (b)  The Tax Administrator may require said service user to identify its non-utility supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is excessive, the Tax Administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used had been provided by the service supplier, which is the primary provider of gas or electricity within the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City.

 

2-4-216 VIDEO USERS TAX.
    (a)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using video services in the City from a video service supplier. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent (6%) of the charges made for such video services.

    (b)  As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of video service; or, (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for video service by a local video service supplier to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

    (1)  Franchise fees and access fees (PEG), whether designated on the customer’s bill or not;

    (2)  Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;

    (3)  Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;

    (4)  Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

    (5)  All programming services (e.g., basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, and electronic program guide services);

    (6)  Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices); and,

    (7)  Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services.

    (c)   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the video services.

    (d)  The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the video service suppliers in the City to identify the various components of video service that are being offered to customers within the City, and the charges therefor. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such video service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components: (1) that are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of video service; or, (2) which currently are or historically have been included in a bundled rate for video service by a local distribution company. Charges for such components shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) of this section.

    (e)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, its billing agent, or a reseller of such services. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of the tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

 

2-4-217 EFFECT OF BUNDLING TAXABLE ITEMS WITH NON-TAXABLE ITEMS.
    Except as otherwise provided by State or Federal law, or as approved in writing by the Tax Administrator, if one or more non-taxable items are bundled or aggregated together with one or more taxable items (as provided for by this Chapter) under a single charge on a service user’s bill, the entire single charge shall be deemed taxable.

 

2-4-218 SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS/MINIMUM CONTACTS.
    For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this Chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by State and Federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment.

 

2-4-220 REMITTANCE OF TAX.
    Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this Chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal holiday.

 

2-4-221 FILING RETURN AND PAYMENT.
    Each person required by this Chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this Chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information exempt from disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act.

 

2-4-225 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
    Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this Chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the City as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this Chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and court costs. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C).

 

2-4-230 COLLECTION PENALTIES—SERVICE SUPPLIERS AND SELF-COLLECTORS.
    (a)   Taxes collected from a service user, or self-collected by a service user subject to Section 2-4-215 of this Chapter, are delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection, shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the City’s account on or before the following business day.

    (b)  If a service supplier, or a service user subject to Section 2-4-215 of this Chapter, fails to remit any tax collected, on or before the due date, said person shall pay a penalty for such delinquencies at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is delinquent in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.

    (d)  For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

 

2-4-231 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT—TAX APPLICATION ERRORS.
    (a)   The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to pay, collect or self-collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter has failed to pay, collect, self-collect and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges.

    (b)  The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the City. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the City.

    (c)   If the person requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be held within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

    (d)  At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 2-4-280 of this Chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 2-4-280 of this Chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    (e)   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen percent (15%) on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the City seeking payment of a tax assessed under this Chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection.

    (f)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.

 

2-4-235 ADDITIONAL POWER AND DUTIES OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
    (a)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office.

    (c)   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this Chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to Section 2-4-215 of this Chapter) so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter; or, (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and are voidable by the Tax Administrator or the City at any time.

    (d)  The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this Chapter. The Tax Administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three (3) years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 2-4-250 of this Chapter for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax Administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this Chapter, the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

    (e)   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this Chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five (45) days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

    (f)   The Tax Administrator, with the written approval of the City Attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this Chapter where the portion of the claim proposed to be released is less than the amount set by separate resolution of the City Council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the City and, with the approval of the City Attorney and the City Council, may compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is equal to or greater than the amount set by separate resolution of the City Council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the City.

    (g)  Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter to the contrary, the Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence.

 

2-4-240 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY—NON-PAYING SERVICE USE.
    (a)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this Chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the City with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that the Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

    (d)  If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the total tax that is owed.

 

2-4-245 RECORDS.
    (a)   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the City any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

    (b)  The City may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this Chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the City on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the City for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the City to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the City to conduct the inspection.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated representative, is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated representative, may request from a person providing transportation services of gas or electricity to service users within the City a list of the names and addresses, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the City pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public Utilities Code.

    (d)  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the City; and, (2) upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the City.

    (e)   If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or, (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this Chapter.

 

2-4-250 REFUNDS.
    (a)   The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this Chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant has submitted a written claim to the Tax Administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the City Council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935.) The City Council shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Code Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. It is the intent of the City Council that the one-year written claim requirement of this subsection be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the commencement of the one-year claims period of this subsection, and which are not otherwise barred by a then applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the Tax Administrator as provided in this subsection within ninety (90) days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

    (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this Chapter and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment.

    (c)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this Chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this Chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City.

    (d)  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier’s customary practice.

 

2-4-255 NONRESIDENTIAL USER REBATE.
    (a)   Effective July 1, 2004 any nonresidential user who has paid combined telephone, electric or gas utility user taxes in excess of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00), exclusive of interest and penalties, during the 2003-04 utility tax year shall be entitled to a rebate of a portion of such excess tax payments in accordance with the provisions of this section.

    (b)  Not later than ninety (90) days following the end of the 2003-04 utility tax year, such user may apply to the Tax Administrator for a rebate on forms and in the manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator.

    (c)   Upon timely presentation of evidence satisfactory to the Tax Administrator a rebate shall be made to the nonresidential user in an amount equal to the total utility user taxes paid minus the sum of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00), multiplied by .5. The Tax Administrator shall set off against such rebate any taxes, charges, interest or late payments then due and owing the City.

    (d)  No rebate shall be paid to any nonresidential service user who fails to apply for a rebate within the time prescribed by this section.

 

2-4-256 APPEALS.
    (a)   The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 2-4-250 of this Chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 2-4-250 of this Chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. [See Government Code Section 935(b).] Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

    (b)  If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to

Section 2-4-250 of this Chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator; he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

    (c)   The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the Tax Administrator, the City Manager, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

    (d)  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the City’s files, the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the City Manager fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the fourteen (14) day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Manager on the fourteenth (14th) day.

    (e)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third (3rd) calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.

 

2-4-257 NO INJUNCTION/WRIT OF MANDATE.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this City or against any officer of the City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted.

 

2-4-258 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
    All remedies and penalties prescribed by this Chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.

 

2-4-259 NOTICE OF CHANGES TO ORDINANCE.
    If a tax under this Chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the Tax Administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the Tax Administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the City’s utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the Tax Administrator.

 

2-4-260 SEVERABILITY.
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional.

 

2-4-261 FUTURE AMENDMENT TO CITED STATUTE.
    Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a State or Federal statute in this Chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time.

 

2-4-265 TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF UTILITY USERS TAX.
    The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the City Council.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 90-016, 9/4/90 (2-4-200—2-4-265); Ordinance No. 92-09, 5/18/92 (Section 2-4-200); Ordinance No. 93-011, 6/7/93 (Section 2-4-216); Ordinance No. 94-011, 6/13/94 (Sections 2-4-105, 2-4-200, 2-4-205, 2-4-210, 2-4-216); Ordinance No. 99-04, 2/16/99 (Sections 2-4-200, 2-4-205, 2-4-210, 2-4-215, 2-4-216, 2-4-230, 2-4-250); Ordinance No. 04-014, 7/6/04 (Sections 2-4-200—2-4-218, 2-4-221—2-4-245, 2-4-255—2-4-259, 2-4-261); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 2-4-256))

CHAPTER 2-5 MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
2-5-100 SHORT TITLE—MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS.
    This Chapter shall be known as the San Leandro Maintenance Assessment District Ordinance.

 

2-5-105 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
    This Chapter is an alternative to other provisions of this Code and to the general laws of the State of California. When the City Council elects to proceed under this Chapter, no other provisions of this Code or of the general laws shall apply to the proceedings except as specifically stated in this Chapter.

 

2-5-110 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
    This Chapter shall be construed liberally to effect its purpose. All findings and decisions made by the City Council pursuant to this Chapter shall be final.

 

2-5-200 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases as used in this Chapter shall have the meanings used in this section.

    (a)   CITY. “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  COSTS or EXPENSES. “Costs” or “expenses” means the cost of maintenance of an improvement, including without limitation direct costs and all associated and incidental costs such as supervisory, administrative, engineering and legal services, and costs of assessment collection and enforcement, performed by any person on behalf of the City.

    (c)   COUNTY. “County” means the County of Alameda.

    (d)  DISTRICT or MAINTENANCE DISTRICT. “District” or “Maintenance District” means a maintenance district formed pursuant to this Chapter.

    (e)   DIRECTOR. “Director” means the Director of Engineering and Transportation or any other person delegated the responsibility by the City Council to prepare the Engineer’s Report described in Section 2-5-405.

    (f)   FISCAL YEAR. “Fiscal year” means the fiscal year in effect from time to time for general fiscal matters of the City.

    (g)  IMPROVEMENT. “Improvement” means any public capital improvement of a local nature, including without limitation any improvement described in the Improvement Act of 1911 (Sections 5000 and following, California Streets and Highways Code), the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 (Sections 10000 and following, California Streets and Highways Code), and the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 (Sections 22500 and following, California Streets and Highways Code).

    (h)  MAINTENANCE. “Maintenance” means the maintenance, servicing, watering, fertilizing, trimming, mowing, weeding, draining, painting, graffiti removal, repair, replacement, rehabilitation, resurfacing or operation of Improvements as defined in this section, including without limitation the furnishing of fertilizer, water, power, heat and other resources and utilities as may be required, and any other actions of a similar nature which are reasonably related to preserving the subject Improvement in a serviceable condition and appearance or restoring the subject Improvement to a serviceable condition and appearance.

    (i)   NET AREA. “Net area” means the area of a parcel proposed to be assessed but excluding any portion thereof within a public easement, right-of-way or street or any portion thereof excluded by a line established pursuant to this Chapter to create one or more zones or benefit and shown on the assessment diagram for the maintenance district.

    (j)   OWNER. “Owner” means the owner of land within a maintenance district or proposed district as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for taxes of the County, or as known to the City Clerk or the Director.

 

2-5-300 MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE.
    Wherever in this Chapter notice is required to be given, it shall be given as follows:

    (a)   Notice by mail shall be given by depositing the notice in the United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, or to such other address of the owner as known to the City Clerk or the Director of Engineering and Transportation. At the discretion of the City, notice may instead be given by certified or registered mail, with or without return receipt requested, or by personal service. The notice shall be effective on the date of its deposit in the United States mail or the date of personal service.

    (b)  Notice by publication shall be given by publishing the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation published within the City.

    (c)   A copy of the notice shall also be posted by the City Clerk in a conspicuous public location customarily utilized by the City Clerk for the posting of public notices or the City.

    (d)  Upon the completion of the mailing, publishing and posting of the notice, the City Clerk shall file a certificate, setting forth the time and manner of the compliance with the requirements of this section for such publishing, posting, and mailing.

 

2-5-400 RESOLUTION OF INTENTION.
    Whenever the City Council determines to form a maintenance district pursuant to this Chapter, it shall adopt a resolution which:

    (a)   States the intention of the City Council to form a maintenance district pursuant to this Chapter, and assigns a distinctive name and address to the proposed maintenance district.

    (b)  Generally describes the Improvements to be maintained.

    (c)   Describes the proposed boundaries of the maintenance district. The boundaries may be described by reference to a map on file with the City Clerk. The boundaries need not be contiguous. Only land benefiting from the maintenance of the improvements or portions thereof shall be included within the boundaries.

    (d)  Directs the Director to prepare and file the Engineer’s Report described in this Chapter.

 

2-5-405 ENGINEER’S REPORT.
    As specified in the resolution of intention, the Director shall prepare an Engineer’s Report for the proposed maintenance district. The Engineer’s Report shall include the following:

    (a)   A description of the improvements to be maintained. The description may be by reference to plans included in the Engineer’s Report or referred to in the Engineer’s Report although separately bound.

    (b)  A budget for the first fiscal year commencing after formation of the maintenance district in accordance with Section 2-5-455 of this Chapter. The budget shall include a statement of the sources and uses of funds of the maintenance district and an estimate of the total costs and expenses of maintenance of the improvements during the first fiscal year after formation of the maintenance district. If maintenance of the improvements will commence during the fiscal year then in progress at the time of the formation proceedings, the budget may include the estimated costs and expenses of maintenance and of the improvements for that portion of the fiscal year then in progress, as well as the estimated costs and expenses of maintenance of the improvements for the first fiscal year after formation of the maintenance district.

    (c)   A statement of the formula or method by which the Director proposes to allocate the costs and expenses of maintenance among the parcels to be specially assessed. The costs and expenses may be apportioned by any method or formula which fairly and equitably distributes them on the basis of the estimated benefits to be received by each parcel from the maintenance of the improvements or portions thereof. For this purpose, the maintenance district may be divided into zones of benefit, the boundaries of which shall then be shown on the assessment diagram. The statement shall also include a statement of the formula or method by which the amount of the assessment to be levied upon parcels which are newly created after formation of the maintenance district (whether by recorded map or other lawful procedure recognized by the County Assessor for Assessor’s Parcel Map purposes) will be established.

    (d)  An assessment roll containing:

    (1)  The assessment number assigned on the assessment diagram to each parcel to be specifically assessed, which assessment number may be the County Assessor’s Tax Parcel Number;

    (2)  If the County Assessor’s Tax Parcel Number is not used as the assessment number, the assessment roll shall also contain the corresponding County Assessor’s Tax Parcel Number;

    (3)  The amount of each proposed assessment for the first fiscal year after formation of the maintenance district (which amount may include costs and expenses for the portion of the fiscal year then in progress during the formation proceedings); and

    (4)  The amount of the maximum annual assessment which may be levied upon parcels in the maintenance district in any fiscal year.

    (e)   An assessment diagram showing each parcel of land to be specifically assessed for the costs and expenses of the maintenance of the improvements. Each parcel on the assessment diagram shall be labeled with its assessment number, which may be the County Assessor’s Tax Parcel Number. The lines and dimensions of each parcel shall, as nearly as practicable, conform to the County Assessor’s parcel maps; or the assessment diagram may be derived from the County Assessor’s parcel maps. In the event that zones of benefit are being utilized, the assessment diagram shall indicate by distinctive lines and designations the respective zones of benefit. The assessment diagram may consist of one or more sheets and may be included in the Engineer’s Report in a reduced format to facilitate reproduction and distribution.

    (f)   A list of the names and addresses of the owners of the parcels to be assessed, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for Alameda County property taxes or as known to the City Clerk or the Director.

 

2-5-410 FILING AND ACCEPTANCE OF REPORT.
    Upon completion of the Engineer’s Report, the Director shall file the Engineer’s Report with the City Clerk for presentation to the City Council. The City Council may preliminarily accept the Engineer’s Report as submitted for purposes of hearing, may modify it and accept it preliminarily as modified, or may reject it.

    If the Engineer’s Report is preliminarily accepted, either as presented or as modified, the City Council shall set a date, time and place for each of two (2) hearings, namely an information hearing and a public hearing thereon, in conformity with the provisions or 54954.6 of the California Government Code, and shall direct the City Clerk to give notice of the hearings in the time and manner required by said Section 54954.6, as supplemented by Section 2-5-415 of this Chapter.

 

2-5-415 NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
    (a)   Notice of the hearings on the Engineer’s Report shall be mailed to each owner at least fifteen (15) days, and shall be published and posted at least ten (10) days, before the day set for the information hearing. The notice shall:

    (1)  State that the City Council intends to order formation of a maintenance district pursuant to this Chapter.

    (2)  Describe in general the location and boundaries of the maintenance district.

    (3)  Describe in general the Improvements to be maintained.

    (4)  State that the City Council intends to levy an annual special assessment on each parcel of land within the proposed maintenance district, not to exceed the maximum amount shown in the Engineer’s Report for each such parcel, to pay the costs and expenses of maintenance of the improvements and that such special assessment will be levied annually for an indefinite period, unless a finite period is specified in the resolution of intention, in which case the finite period shall be stated.

    (5)  State that the Engineer’s Report is on file with the City Clerk and is open to public inspection.

    (6)  State the date, time and place for each of the two (2) hearings and indicate that the first hearing is an information hearing and that the second hearing is a public hearing of protests.

    (7)  State the name and telephone number of a City employee who will be responsible for responding to questions about the proposed maintenance district.

    (8)  State that any owner, before the time set for the second hearing, may file a written protest with the City Clerk against the formation of the proposed maintenance district, the boundaries of the maintenance district, the performing of the maintenance therefor, the improvements to be maintained, the amount of the owner’s assessment or maximum annual assessment, or any other aspect of the proposed maintenance district.

    (9)  State that each written protest shall include the name of the owner, the address or description of the owner’s land sufficient to identify it and the specific grounds on which the protest is made,

    (10) State that any owner or other interested person, whether or not filing a written protest, may be. heard by the City Council at the second hearing.

    (11) Set forth the assessment number, the County Assessor’s Tax Parcel Number, the amount of the proposed first annual assessment and the proposed maximum annual assessment on the land of the owner to whom the notice is mailed.

 

2-5-420 WRITTEN PROTEST.
    Any owner may file a written protest with the City Clerk before the time set for the second hearing pursuant to Section 2-5-430. The City Clerk shall not be required to accept written protests after the time set for the opening of the second hearing. Any written protest may be withdrawn in writing by the owner at any time before the conclusion of the second hearing.

 

2-5-425 FIRST HEARING.
    At the time set for the first hearing, to be an information hearing, the Director shall present a summary of the contents of the Engineer’s Report. Following the Director’s presentation, any interested person may ask questions respecting the contents of the Engineer’s Report, and the Director will be directed to respond to all such questions. The City Council shall not be obligated to hear any statement of protest or objection at the first hearing.

 

2-5-430 SECOND HEARING.
    At the time set for the second hearing on the Engineer’s Report, the City Council shall consider all written protests and shall hear and consider all protests made orally by any interested person. The hearing may be continued from time to time. During the hearing or at its conclusion, the City Council may direct the Director to exclude land from the boundaries of the proposed maintenance district which the City Council determines is not specially benefited, may direct the Director to reduce the scope of improvements to be maintained, and may direct the director to decrease the amount of any assessment or maximum assessment, provided that any such reduction which is not made in the same proportion to all assessments shall be based upon the determination of the City Council that such non-proportional reduction is necessary to achieve an allocation of the costs and expenses or maintenance to the benefited parcels in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received.

 

2-5-435 MAJORITY PROTEST.
    If, at the conclusion of the hearing, written protests not withdrawn have been filed by the owners of more than fifty percent (50%) of the net area assessed, the City Council shall abandon the proceedings for the formation of the maintenance district and shall not reinstitute proceedings to form substantially the same maintenance district during the twelve (12) months following such abandonment, unless the protests have been overruled by the affirmative vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of all of the members of the City Council.

 

2-5-440 FORMATION OF DISTRICT.
    At the conclusion of the second hearing on the Engineer’s Report, unless proceedings for formation of the maintenance district have been abandoned, the City Council may order the formation of the maintenance district, approve the maximum annual assessments and levy the assessments for the ensuing fiscal year, as proposed or as modified by the City Council, on the City Council’s finding that the assessments are in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received by the respective parcels assessed from the maintenance of the improvements.

 

2-5-445 SUBSEQUENT ANNUAL LEVY.
    Following formation of the maintenance district and the levy of the first annual assessment, the Director shall annually file with the City Clerk the proposed budget, a proposed roll of assessments, and an assessment diagram for the ensuing fiscal year. The assessment diagram shall conform with the County Assessor’s Parcel Maps, as nearly as practicable, and shall reflect any newly-created parcels shown on the County Assessor’s Parcel Maps. The assessment diagram may be derived from a copy of the County Assessor’s Parcel Maps. The proposed roll of assessments shall reflect any changes made necessary by a change in the configuration of parcels within the maintenance district.

    Thereupon the City Council, before August 1 of each year, without further notice or public hearing, may by resolution levy an annual assessment on the parcels of land within the maintenance district in an amount not exceeding the maximum annual assessment for any parcel of land as determined by the City Council pursuant to Section 2-5-440.

 

2-5-450 FILING WITH COUNTY AUDITOR—COLLECTION.
    After formation of the maintenance district and annually thereafter following the levy of the annual assessments, the Director shall file with the Alameda County Auditor a copy of the annual assessment roll and assessment diagram, with the request that the assessments be posted to the County secured property tax roll. The annual assessment roll and assessment diagram shall be filed on or before August 1 of the fiscal year in which the assessments are to be collected. The assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general property taxes and shall bear the same proportionate penalties for delinquency in payment. After deduction of collection charges of the County, the net amount of assessments collected shall be remitted to the City for the account of the maintenance district.

 

2-5-455 DISTRICT BUDGET.
    For each maintenance district formed hereunder, a budget shall be established annually by the City Council as part of the regular budget approval process for the City as a whole. Each such maintenance district budget shall show the sources and uses of funds and the resulting total costs and expenses of maintenance to be assessed upon the parcels of land in the maintenance district. A surplus or a deficit in any maintenance district’s account at the end of each fiscal year shall be carried over to the following fiscal year.

    The City may make a contribution or loan to any maintenance district’s account at any time from other funds of the City lawfully available for such purpose. Any such loan shall be repaid in the manner determined by the City Council at the time the loan is approved. Interest earned on fund balances shall be credited to the account of the maintenance district.

 

2-5-460 CHANGES.
    From time to time the City Council may make changes to any maintenance district formed hereunder. The following changes shall be made only after the affected owners have been given notice and public hearings in the manner provided herein for the formation of the maintenance district:

    (a)   Annexation of land to the maintenance district, without written consent of the owners of all land to be annexed.

    (b)  A material change in the scope of improvements to be maintained.

    (c)   A change in the formula or method by which the costs and expenses of maintenance are distributed among the parcels of land in the maintenance district.

    (d)  An increase in the maximum annual assessment on any parcel.

    (e)   In the event that a finite period of time was authorized for the levy of assessments at the time of maintenance district formation, any extension of the period of years for which the levy of assessments is authorized.

    All other changes, including without limitation the dissolution of the maintenance district, annexation to the maintenance district with the consent of the owners of the annexed land, or consolidation of two (2) or more maintenance districts, may be made without further notice or hearing. Upon dissolution of a maintenance district, any amount remaining in the maintenance district fund may be transferred to the City’s General Fund, may be expended for maintenance district purposes until exhausted, or may be refunded to the owners pro rata to each assessment, as the City Council in its sole discretion may determine.

 

2-5-465 PERFORMANCE OF MAINTENANCE.
    The maintenance of the improvements may be performed by City forces to the extent allowed by the City’s Charter and Municipal Code and/or by one or more contractors retained by the City. The lettering of contracts for Maintenance shall be accomplished in accordance with general procedures and requirements for public works contracts of the City. The account of the maintenance district shall be charged for all direct costs, supervision and administration costs in accordance with normal and reasonable costs account standards and procedures, whether performed by the City and/or by a contractor,

 

2-5-470 CONSOLIDATION OF PROCEDURES.
    Procedures for the formation of a maintenance district pursuant to this Chapter may be consolidated with procedures for the construction or acquisition of the improvements pursuant to any other provision of this Code or pursuant to any law of the State of California, including without limitation the Improvement Act of 1911, the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, or the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972, or any other procedure of a similar nature under the general statutes of the State of California.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 96-05, 4/15/96 (Sections 2-5-100—2-5-470))

CHAPTER 2-6 HEALTH FACILITY REVENUE BOND LAW
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
2-6-100 HEALTH FACILITY REVENUE BOND LAW.
    This Chapter may be cited as the City of San Leandro Health Facility Revenue Bond Law.

 

2-6-105 PURPOSE.
    The City Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary, essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair for the City to be authorized to provide financing to health institutions within the City that provide essential services to residents of the City in order to aid such health institutions in containing costs and thereby to enable such health institutions to establish lower rates and charges than would otherwise prevail and to provide better service at such rates and charges. Unless the City intervenes to provide such financing, such rates and charges may increase at an ever accelerated pace because such health institutions cannot obtain financing at equivalent cost from private sources.

 

2-6-110 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   BONDS. “Bonds” means any bonds, notes, certificates, debentures or other obligations issued or entered into by the City pursuant to this Chapter and payable exclusively from revenues as in this Chapter defined and from any other funds specified in this Chapter upon which such obligations may be made a charge and from which they are made payable.

    (b)  CITY. “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   COST. “Cost” means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a participating health institution necessary or incident to the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement of a health facility, or the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance such acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement. Cost shall include all such costs which under generally accepted accounting principles are not properly chargeable as an expense of operation and maintenance, including, without limitation, the cost of all lands, structures, real or personal property, franchises, rights and interests acquired or used in connection with a health facility, the cost of demolishing or removing any structures (including the cost of acquiring any lands to which such structures may be moved), the cost of engineering, architectural, financial and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, surveys, estimates, administration expenses or other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility of or to acquiring, constructing, rehabilitating, improving or financing a health facility, including all costs of issuance of bonds for such purpose, reserves for debt service and for repairs, replacement, additions and improvements, and capitalized bond interest for such period as the City may determine.

    (d)  COUNCIL. “Council” means the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

    (e)   HEALTH FACILITY. “Health facility” means any facility, place or building within the City which is maintained and operated for the diagnosis, care, prevention and treatment of human illness, physical or mental, including convalescence, rehabilitation and care during and after pregnancy or for any one or more of these services, and which provides and will continue providing to residents of the City essential health care services designated as such in an agreement between the City and the participating health institution providing or operating such facility, place or building.

    Health facility includes a portion of one of the above types of facilities and includes the following facilities if operated in conjunction with one of the above types of facilities: a laboratory, laundry, a nurses’ or interns’ residence, a housing facility for patients, staff or employees and the families of any of them, an administration building, a research, maintenance, storage, utility or parking facility and all structures, facilities, equipment and furnishings related to any of the foregoing or required or useful for the operation of a health facility.

    Health facility shall not include any facility, place or building used primarily for sectarian instruction or study or as a place for devotional activities or religious worship.

    (f)   PARTICIPATING HEALTH INSTITUTION. “Participating health institution” means a private nonprofit corporation or association authorized by the laws of the State to provide or operate a health facility as defined in this Chapter and which, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, undertakes the financing of the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement of a health facility or undertakes the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance such acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement.

    (g)  REVENUES. “Revenues” means amounts received by the City as repayment of principal, interest, and all other charge with respect to a loan under this Chapter, any proceeds received by the City from mortgage, hazard or other insurance on or with respect to such a loan (or any property securing such loan), all other rents, charges, fees, income and receipts derived by the City from the financing of a health facility under this Chapter (whether by loan, lease, installment sale of or any other method authorized by this Chapter), any amounts received by the City as investment earnings on moneys deposited in any fund or account securing bonds, and such other moneys as the Council may, in its discretion, lawfully designate as revenues.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. FINANCING HEALTH FACILITIES
2-6-200 LOANS FOR FACILITIES.
    The City may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of, a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to any participating health institution for the cost of acquiring, constructing, rehabilitating or improving a health facility; provided, however, that no such loan shall exceed the total cost of such health facility as determined by the participating health institution and approved by the City.

 

2-6-205 REFINANCING LOANS FOR FACILITIES.
    The City may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the waking of a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to any participating health institution to refund or refinance outstanding obligations of such participating health institution incurred to finance the cost of acquiring, constructing, rehabilitating or improving a health facility, whether such obligations were incurred prior to or after the enactment of this Chapter, if the City finds that such refunding or refinancing is in the public interest and either alleviates a financial or operating hardship of such participating health institution or is necessary or appropriate in connection with other financing by the City for such participating health institution or may be expected to result in lower costs of health care than would otherwise prevail and a saving to third parties, including government, and to others who must pay for care, or any combination thereof.

 

2-6-210 ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION, SELLING AND LEASING OF FACILITIES.
    The City may acquire, construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish, equip, own, and lease as lessee a health facility for the purpose of selling or leasing such health facility to a participating health institution, and may designate such participating health institution as its agent to undertake to construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish and equip such health facility.

    The City may sell or lease, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to a participating health institution any health facility owned by the City under this Chapter, including a health facility conveyed to the City in connection with a financing under this Chapter, but not being financed or refinanced hereunder.

 

2-6-215 FEES.
    The City may charge participating health institutions application, commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all administrative and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred by this Chapter.

 

2-6-220 INSURANCE.
    The City may obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any department or agency of the United States or of the State of California or any private company, any insurance or guarantee as to, or of, or for the payment or repayment of, interest or principal, or both, or any part thereof, on any loan, lease or sale obligation or any instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter; and may accept payment in such manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a participating health institution, and may assign any such insurance or guarantee as security for bonds.

 

2-6-225 RENTS AND CHARGES.
    The City may fix rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates for financing under this Chapter and may agree to revise from time to time such rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates to reflect changes in interest rates on bonds, losses due to defaults or changes in other expenses related to this Chapter, including City administrative expenses.

 

2-6-230 SECURITY FOR LOANS.
    The City may hold deeds of trust or mortgages as security for loans under this Chapter and may pledge or assign the same as security or repayment of bonds. Such deeds of trust or mortgages may be assigned to, and held on behalf of the City by, any bank or trust company appointed to act as trustee by the City in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of bonds.

 

2-6-235 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
    The City may employ such engineering, architectural, financial, accounting, legal or other services as may be necessary in the judgment of the City for the purposes of this Chapter.

 

2-6-240 ADDITIONAL POWERS.
    In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this Chapter, the City may do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. BONDS
2-6-300 ISSUANCE OF BONDS/BONDS NOT DEBT OF CITY.
    (a)   The City may, from time to time, issue bonds for any of the purposes specified in Sections 2-6-200, 2-6-205 and 2-6-210. Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes, subject only to the provisions of such bonds for registration.

    (b)  Every issue of bonds shall be a limited obligation of the City payable from all or any specified part of the revenue and the moneys and assets authorized in this Chapter to be pledged or assigned to secure payment of bonds. Such revenues, moneys or assets shall be the sole source of repayment of such issue of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the City or a pledge of the faith and credit of the City but shall be payable solely from specified revenue, moneys and assets. The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the City to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment.

    All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement of the following effect:

    Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City is pledged to the payment of the principal of or premium or interest on this bond.

 

2-6-305 COST OF ISSUANCE.
    In determining the amount of bonds to be issued, the City may include all costs of the issuance of such bonds, reserves for debt service and for repairs, replacements, additions and improvements and capitalized bond interest for such period as the City may determine.

 

2-6-310 RESOLUTION AND BOND TERMS.
    Bonds may be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment bonds or pass-through certificates or any combination thereof. Bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the Council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America at such place or places, be subject to such terms of redemption and have such other terms and conditions as such resolution or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the City may provide. Bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the City shall determine. Pending preparation of definitive bonds, the City may issue temporary bonds which shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds when prepared.

 

2-6-315 BOND PROVISIONS.
    Any resolution authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds, or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the City, may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of such bonds:

    (a)   the terms, conditions and form of such bonds and the interest and principal to be paid thereon,

    (b)  limitations on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of sale of such bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of such proceeds to secure the payment of such bonds,

    (c)   limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds,

    (d)  the setting aside of reserved and sinking funds and the regulation and disposition thereof,

    (e)   the pledge or assignment of all or any part of the revenues and the use and disposition thereof, subject to such agreement with the holders of bonds as may then be outstanding,

    (f)   limitation on the use of revenues for expenditures for operating, administration or other expenses of the City,

    (g)  specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the City to holders of such bonds, and providing the right and remedies of such holders in the event of default, including any limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders,

    (h)  the appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the City and the holder of its bond, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds of trust, mortgages and any other contracts or agreement to such trustee and the rights of such trustee,

    (i)   the procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of such bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given, and

    (j)   any other provisions which the Council may deem reasonable and proper for the purposes of this Chapter and the security of the bondholders.

 

2-6-320 PLEDGES.
    Any pledge of revenues or other moneys or assets pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid and binding from the time such pledge is made. Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the City shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the City irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the City.

 

2-6-325 NO PERSONAL LIABILITY.
    Neither the members of the Council, the officers or employees of the City, nor any person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof.

 

2-6-330 PURCHASE OF BONDS BY CITY.
    The City shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to purchase its bonds. The City may hold, pledge, cancel, or resell such bonds, subject to and in accordance with agreement with the bondholders.

 

2-6-335 ACTION BY BONDHOLDERS.
    Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this Chapter or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, except to the extent the right thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture authorized thereby to be entered into by the City, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect or enforce any and all rights specified in law or in such resolution or indenture, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this Chapter or by such resolution or indenture to be performed by the City or by any officer, employee, or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of rates, fees, interest and charges authorized and required by the provisions of such resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged and collected.

 

2-6-340 REFUNDING BONDS.
    (a)   The City may issue bonds for the purpose of refunding any bonds then outstanding including the payment of any redemption premiums thereof and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or any subsequent date or dates of redemption, purchase, or maturity of such bonds.

    (b)  The proceeds of bonds issued for the purpose of refunding any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the City, be applied to the purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption of such outstanding bonds, either at their earliest or any subsequent redemption date or dates or upon the purchase or retirement at the maturity thereof and may, pending such application, be placed in escrow, to be applied to such purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption on such date or dates as may be determined by the City.

    (c)   Pending use for purchase, retirement at maturity or redemption of outstanding bonds, any proceeds held in escrow pursuant to subdivision (b) may be invested and reinvested as provided in the resolution or indenture. Any interest or other increment earned or realized on any such investment may be applied to the payment of the outstanding bonds to be refunded or to the payment of interest on the refunding bonds. After the terms of the escrow have been fully satisfied and carried out, any balance of such proceeds and any interest or increment earned on such proceeds and any interest or increment earned or realized from the investment thereof may be returned to the City to be used by it for any lawful purpose.

    (d)  All bonds issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as other bonds issued pursuant to this Chapter.

 

2-6-345 VALIDITY OF BONDS.
    The validity of the authorization and issuance of any bonds is not dependent on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by the City for the making of any loan or the entering into of any agreement, or by the failure to make any loan or enter into any agreement, for which bonds are authorized to be issued under this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
2-6-400 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
    This Chapter being necessary for the welfare of the City and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes.

 

2-6-405 OMISSIONS NOT TO AFFECT VALIDITY OF BONDS.
    If the jurisdiction of the Council to order the proposed act is not affected, any omission of any officer or the City in proceedings under this Chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate such proceedings or the bonds issued pursuant to this Chapter.

 

2-6-410 FULL AUTHORITY.
    This Chapter is full authority for the issuance of bonds by the City for the purposes specified herein.

 

2-6-415 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
    This Chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and bonds may be issued for any such purposes under this Chapter notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law.

 

2-6-420 CHAPTER CONTROLLING.
    To the extent that the provisions of this Chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed controlling.

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 80-14, 5/19/80)

CHAPTER 2-7 MARINA AND PARK AREA DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BOND LAW
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
2-7-100 TITLE.
    This Chapter may be cited as the City of San Leandro Marina and Park Area Development Revenue Bond Law.

 

2-7-105 PURPOSE.
    The City Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary, essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair for the City to be authorized to assist in the provision of financing for the improvement and development of the marina and park areas of the City in order to promote the general public’s use and enjoyment of such marina and park areas. The availability of financial assistance pursuant to this Chapter will insure the fulfillment of the City’s master plan for improvement and development of the marina and park areas at a lower cost to the municipal taxpayer. Moreover, without financing available pursuant to this Chapter, the fulfillment of such master plan would be in jeopardy. The construction and operation of the facilities eligible for financing hereunder will generate employment, add to the local tax base and otherwise increase commerce and the welfare and property of the City of San Leandro.

 

2-7-110 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   BONDS. “Bonds” means any bonds, notes, certificates, debentures or other obligations issued or entered into by the City pursuant to this Chapter and payable exclusively from revenues as in this Chapter defined and from any other funds specified in this Chapter upon which such obligations may be made a charge and from which they are made payable.

    (b)  CITY. “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   COST. “Cost” means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a participating party necessary or incident to the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement of a facility, or the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance such acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement. Cost shall include all such costs which under generally accepted accounting principles are chargeable to the facility’s capital account (whether or not actually so charged), including, without limitation, the cost of all lands, structures, real or personal property, machinery, equipment, fixtures, furnishings, franchises, rights and interests acquired or used in connection with a facility, the cost of demolishing or removing any structures (including the cost of acquiring any lands to which such structures may be moved), the cost of engineering, architectural, financial and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, surveys, estimates, administration expenses or other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility of or to acquiring, constructing, rehabilitating, improving or financing a facility, including all costs of issuance of bonds for such purposes, reserves for debt service and for repairs, replacements, additions and improvements, and capitalized bond interest for such period as the City may determine.

    (d)  COUNCIL. “Council” means the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

    (e)   FACILITY. “Facility” means any facility, place or building within a marina or park area in the City which the Council deems necessary or appropriate to provide for the full, complete and convenient public use and enjoyment of such marina or park area and which is approved by the City for financing pursuant to this Chapter.

    Such facility may be public, commercial or industrial and includes, without limitation, all real and personal property, land, buildings, structures, facilities, machinery, equipment, fixtures and furnishings related to, or required or useful for the operation of, a facility, but shall not include any facility, place or building used primarily for sectarian instruction or study or as a place for devotional activities or religious worship.

    (f)   PARTICIPATING PARTY. “Participating party” means any individual, association, corporation, partnership or other entity, which, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, undertakes the financing of the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement of a facility or undertakes the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance such acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement.

    (g)  REVENUES. “Revenues” means amounts received by the City as payment of principal, interest, and all other charges with respect to a loan under this Chapter, as payments under a lease, sublease or sale agreement with respect to a facility, as proceeds received by the City from mortgage, hazard or other insurance on or with respect to such a loan, lease, sublease or sale agreement, all other rents, charges, fees, income and receipts derived by the City from the financing or refinancing of a facility under this Chapter, any amounts received by the City as investment earnings on moneys deposited in any fund securing bonds, and such other legally available moneys as the Council may, in its discretion, lawfully designate as revenues.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. FINANCING FACILITIES
2-7-200 LOANS FOR FACILITIES.
    The City may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of, a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to any participating party for the costs of a facility.

 

2-7-205 REFINANCING LOANS FOR FACILITIES.
    The City may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to any participating party to refund or refinance outstanding obligations of such participating party incurred to finance the costs of a facility, including expenses incident to paying or otherwise discharging the obligations to be refunded or refinanced, whether such obligations were incurred prior to or after the enactment of this Chapter, if the City finds that such refunding or refinancing is in the public interest and alleviates a financial or operating hardship of such participating party.

 

2-7-210 ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION, SELLING AND LEASING OF FACILITIES.
    The City may acquire, construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish, equip, own, and lease as lessee a health facility for the purpose of selling or leasing as lessor such facility to a participating party, and may contract with such participating party to undertake on behalf of City to construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish and equip such facility.

    The City may sell or lease, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to a participating party any facility owned by the City under this Chapter, including a facility conveyed to the City in connection with a financing under this Chapter, but not being financed or refinanced hereunder.

 

2-7-215 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
    Any person may apply to the City for approval as a participating party, for approval of a facility for financing under this Chapter and for approval of the costs of such facility to be financed. Applications shall set forth such information as the City may require in order to enable the City to evaluate the applicant, the proposed facility and its proposed costs.

 

2-7-220 REGULATIONS.
    The City Manager may adopt rules or regulations establishing such standards, requirements and conditions applicable to the financing of facilities, the eligibility of participating parties and the costs of facilities as the City Manager deems necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this Chapter.

 

2-7-225 FEES.
    The City may charge participating parties application, commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all administrative and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred by this Chapter.

 

2-7-230 INSURANCE.
    The City may obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any department or agency of the United States or of the State of California or any private company, any insurance or guarantee as to, or of, or for the payment or repayment of, interest or principal, or both, or any part thereof, on any loan, lease or sale obligation of any instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter; and may accept payment in such manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a participating party, and may assign any such insurance or guarantee as security for bonds or loans.

 

2-7-235 RENTS AND CHARGES.
    The City may fix rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates for financing under this Chapter and may agree to revise from time to time such rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates to reflect changes in interest rates on bonds and loans, losses due to defaults or changes in other expenses related to this Chapter, including City administrative expenses.

 

2-7-240 SECURITY FOR LOANS.
    The City may hold deeds of trust, mortgages or security interests in personal property as security for loans and other obligations of participating parties under this Chapter and may pledge or assign the same as security or repayment of bonds. Such deeds of trust, mortgages or security interests may be assigned to, and held on behalf of the City by, any bank or trust company appointed to act as trustee by the City in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of bonds.

 

2-7-245 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
    The City may employ such engineering, architectural, contracting, financial, accounting, legal or other services as may be necessary in the judgment of the City for the purposes of this Chapter.

 

2-7-250 ADDITIONAL POWERS.
    In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this Chapter, the City may do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. BONDS
2-7-300 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
    The City may, from time to time, issue bonds for any of the purposes specified in Sections 2-7-200, 2-7-205 and 2-7-210. Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes, subject only to the provisions of such bonds for registration.

 

2-7-305 BONDS NOT DEBT OF CITY.
    Every issue of bonds shall be a limited obligation of the City payable from all or any specified part of the revenue and the moneys and assets authorized in this Chapter to be pledged or assigned to secure payment of bonds. Such revenues, moneys or assets shall be the sole source of repayment of such issue of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the City or a pledge of the faith and credit of the City but shall be payable solely from specified revenue, moneys and assets. The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the City to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment.

    All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement of the following effect:

    Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City is pledged to the payment of the principal of or premium or interest on this bond.

 

2-7-310 COST OF ISSUANCE.
    In determining the amount of bonds to be issued, the City may include all costs of the issuance of such bonds, reserve funds and capitalized bond interest.

 

2-7-315 RESOLUTION AND BOND TERMS.
    Bonds may be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment bonds or pass-through certificates or any combination thereof. Bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the Council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America at such place or places, be subject to such terms of redemption and have such other terms and conditions as such resolution or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the City may provide. Bonds may be sold at either public or private sale and for such prices as the City shall determine.

 

2-7-320 BOND PROVISIONS.
    Any resolution authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds, or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the City, may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of such bonds:

    (a)   the terms, conditions and form of such bonds and the interest and principal to be paid thereon,

    (b)  limitations on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of sale of such bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of such proceeds to secure the payment of such bonds,

    (c)   limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds,

    (d)  the setting aside of reserved and sinking funds and the regulation and disposition thereof,

    (e)   the pledge or assignment of all or any part of the revenues and the use and disposition thereof, subject to such agreement with the holders of bonds as may then be outstanding,

    (f)   limitation on the use of revenues for expenditures for operating, administration or other expenses of the City,

    (g)  specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the City to holders of such bonds, and providing the right and remedies of such holders in the event of default, including any limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders,

    (h)  the appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the City and the holder of its bond, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds of trust, mortgages and any other contracts or agreement to such trustee and the rights of such trustee,

    (i)   the procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of such bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given, and

    (j)   any other provisions which the Council may deem reasonable and proper for the purposes of this Chapter and the security of the bondholders.

 

2-7-325 PLEDGES.
    Any pledge of revenues or other moneys or assets pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid and binding from the time such pledge is made. Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the City shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the City irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the City.

 

2-7-330 NO PERSONAL LIABILITY.
    Neither the members of the Council, the officers or employees of the City, nor any person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof.

 

2-7-335 PURCHASE OF BONDS BY CITY.
    The City shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to purchase its bonds. The City may hold, pledge, cancel, or resell such bonds, subject to and in accordance with agreement with the bondholders.

 

2-7-340 ACTION BY BONDHOLDERS.
    Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this Chapter or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, except to the extent the right thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture authorized thereby to be entered into by the City, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect or enforce any and all rights specified in law or in such resolution or indenture, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this Chapter or by such resolution or indenture to be performed by the City or by any officer, employee, or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of rates, fees, interest and charges authorized and required by the provisions of such resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged and collected.

 

2-7-345 REFUNDING BONDS.
    (a)   The City may issue bonds for the purpose of refunding any bonds then outstanding including the payment of any redemption premiums thereof and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or any subsequent date or dates of redemption, purchase, or maturity of such bonds.

    (b)  The proceeds of bonds issued for the purpose of refunding any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the City, be applied to the purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption of such outstanding bonds, either at their earliest or any subsequent redemption date or dates or upon the purchase or retirement at the maturity thereof and may, pending such application, be placed in escrow, to be applied to such purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption on such date or dates as may be determined by the City.

    (c)   Pending use for purchase, retirement at maturity or redemption of outstanding bonds, any proceeds held in escrow pursuant to subdivision (b) may be invested and reinvested as provided in the resolution or indenture. Any interest or other increment earned or realized on any such investment may be applied to the payment of the outstanding bonds to be refunded or to the payment of interest on the refunding bonds.

    (d)  All bonds issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as other bonds issued pursuant to this Chapter.

 

2-7-350 BOND ANTICIPATION NOTES.
    In anticipation of the sale of bonds, the City may issue bond anticipation notes and may renew the same from time to time. Such notes shall be payable from any revenues or other moneys authorized by this Chapter to be pledged to secure payment of bonds which are not otherwise pledged, or from the proceeds of sale of the bonds in anticipation of which they were issued. Such notes shall be issued in the same manner as bonds. Such notes and the resolution or indenture providing for their issuance may contain any provisions, conditions or limitations which a bond, or resolution or indenture providing for the issuance thereof, may contain.

 

2-7-355 VALIDITY OF BONDS.
    The validity of the authorization and issuance of any bonds is not dependent on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by the City for the making of any loan or the entering into of any agreement, or by the failure to make any loan or enter into any agreement, for which bonds are authorized to be issued under this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
2-7-400 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
    This Chapter being necessary for the welfare of the City and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes.

 

2-7-405 OMISSIONS NOT TO AFFECT VALIDITY OF BONDS.
    If the jurisdiction of the Council to order the proposed act is not affected, any omission of any officer or the City in proceedings under this Chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate such proceedings or the bonds issued pursuant to this Chapter.

 

2-7-410 FULL AUTHORITY.
    This Chapter is full authority for the issuance of bonds by the City for the purposes specified herein.

 

2-7-415 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
    This Chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and bonds may be issued for any such purposes under this Chapter notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law.

 

2-7-420 CHAPTER CONTROLLING.
    To the extent that the provisions of this Chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed controlling.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 80-43, 9/15/80)

CHAPTER 2-8 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BOND LAW
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
2-8-100 TITLE.
    This Chapter may be cited as the City of San Leandro Economic Development Revenue Bond Law.

 

2-8-105 PURPOSE.
    The Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary and essential to the well-being of the City that it provide financial assistance to promote the economic development of the City. Such economic development will serve the following public purposes and municipal affairs of the City: (a) the full gainful employment of residents of the City; (b) the full and efficient utilization and modernization of existing industrial, commercial, and business facilities; (c) the development of new industrial, commercial and business facilities; (d) the growth of the City’s tax base through increased property values and purchasing power; (e) the reduction of the need for and costs of welfare and other remedial programs; (f) the reduction of urban ills, such as crime, attributable in part to inadequate economic opportunities; (g) the stability and diversification of the City’s economy; (h) the lowering of the cost to San Leandro consumers of necessary goods and services; (i) the environmentally optimum disposition of waste materials of the City; and (j) the enhancement of the general economic prosperity, health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City.

    The availability of financial assistance pursuant to this chapter will serve those purposes and the general plan of the City by providing private enterprises with new methods of financing capital outlays in the City and by ensuring that economic development within the City will reflect the local community’s needs and objectives and will be environmentally optimum with respect to both the physical and social environment of the City. The City can promote such public interests pursuant to this chapter without adversely affecting areas outside the City and without conflicting with efforts by the State of California to solve problems of statewide concern.

 

2-8-110 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   BONDS. “Bonds” means any bonds, notes, certificates, debentures or other obligations issued by the City pursuant to this chapter and payable as provided in this chapter.

    (b)  CITY. “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   COST. “Cost” means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a Participating Party to carry out all works and undertakings and to obtain all rights and powers necessary or incident to the acquisition, construction, installation, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of a Facility. “Cost” may include all costs of issuance of bonds for such purposes, costs for construction undertaken by a Participating Party as its own contractor, and working capital incident to the operation of a Facility.

    (d)  COUNCIL. “Council” means the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

    (e)   FACILITY. “Facility” means any facility, place or building within the City which is maintained and operated for industrial, commercial or business purposes, conforms to the general plan of the City and is approved by the City for financing pursuant to this chapter, such approval to be given only if the City finds and determines that such financing will substantially promote one or more of the public purposes listed in Section 2-8-105.

    (f)   PARTICIPATING PARTY. “Participating Party” means any individual, association, corporation, partnership or other entity which is approved by the City to undertake the financing of the Costs of a Facility pursuant of this chapter.

    (g)  REVENUES. “Revenues” means amounts received by the City as payments of principal, interest, and all other charges with respect to a loan under this chapter, as payments under a lease, sublease or sale agreement with respect to a Facility, as proceeds received by the City from mortgage, hazard or other insurance on or with respect to such a loan (or any property securing such loan), lease sublease or sale agreement, all other rents, charges, fees, income and receipts derived by the City from the financing of a Facility under this chapter, any amounts received by the City as investment earnings on moneys deposited in any fund securing bonds, and such other legally available moneys as the Council may, in its discretion, lawfully designate as Revenues.

 

2-8-115 NO LIMITATION ON APPROPRIATIONS.
    None of the Revenues, as defined by this chapter, shall be taken into account in any manner in determining the City’s compliance with Article XIIIB of the California Constitution.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. FINANCING FACILITIES
2-8-200 LOANS FOR FACILITIES.
    The City may use the proceeds of Bonds to make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of, a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to any Participating Party for the Costs of a Facility.

 

2-8-205 ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION, LEASING AND SELLING OF FACILITIES.
    The City may use the proceeds of Bonds, or other moneys provided by or on behalf of a Participating Party, to acquire, construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish, equip and lease as lessee a Facility solely for the purpose of selling or leasing as lessor such Facility to such Participating Party, and way contract with such Participating Party to undertake on behalf of the City to construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish and equip such Facility.

    The City may sell or lease, upon such terms and conditions as the City shall deem proper, to a Participating Party any Facility owned by the City under this chapter, including a Facility conveyed to the City in connection with a financing under this chapter but not being financed hereunder.

 

2-8-210 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
    Any person may apply to the City for approval as a Participating Party and for approval of a Facility for financing under this chapter. Applications shall set forth such information as the City may require in order to enable the City to evaluate the applicant, the proposed Facility and its proposed costs.

 

2-8-215 FEES.
    The City may charge Participating Parties application, commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all administrative and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred by this chapter. The Council may direct the City Clerk to transmit a letter agreement or contract to a Participating Party which will obligate such party to pay such fees as the Council may charge hereunder.

 

2-8-220 INSURANCE.
    The City may obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any department or agency of the United States or of the State of California or any private company, any insurance or guarantee as to, or of, or for the payment or repayment of, interest or principal, or both, or any part thereof, on any loan, lease or sale obligation or any instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and may accept payment in such manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a Participating Party, and may assign any such insurance or guarantee as security for Bonds.

 

2-8-225 RENTS AND CHARGES.
    The City may fix rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates for financing under this chapter and may agree to revise from time to time such rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates to reflect changes in interest rates on Bonds, losses due to defaults or changes in other expenses related to this chapter, including City administrative expenses.

 

2-8-230 SECURITY FOR LOANS.
    The City may hold deeds of trust or mortgages or security interests in personal property as security for loans under this chapter and may pledge or assign the same as security for repayment of Bonds. Such deeds of trust, mortgages or security interests, or any other interest of the City in any Facility, may be assigned to, and held on behalf of the City by, any bank or trust company appointed to act as trustee by the City in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of Bonds.

 

2-8-235 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
    The City may contract for such engineering, architectural, financial, accounting, legal or other services as may be necessary in the judgment of the City for the purposes of this chapter.

 

2-8-240 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY.
    The City shall require that contractors and subcontractors engaged in the construction of facilities finances under this chapter shall provide equal opportunity for employment, without discrimination as to race, marital status, sex, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. The City shall also require that Participating Parties engaged in the acquisition, construction, installation, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of facilities financed under this chapter shall submit and receive approval from the City of an affirmative action program prior to the issuance of Bonds for such Facility.

 

2-8-245 PUBLIC WORKS REQUIREMENTS INAPPLICABLE.
    Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the acquisition, construction, installation, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of a Facility financed under this chapter shall not be subject to any requirements relating to buildings, works or improvements owned or operated by the City, and any requirement of public competitive bidding or other procedural restriction imposed on the award of contracts for acquisition or construction of a City building, work or improvement or to the lease, sublease, sale or other disposition of City property shall not be applicable to any action taken under this chapter.

 

2-8-250 REGULATIONS.
    The City Manager may adopt rules or regulations establishing such standards, requirements and conditions applicable to the financing of Facilities and the eligibility of Participating Parties and Costs as the City Manager deems necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.

 

2-8-255 ADDITIONAL POWERS.
    In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this chapter, the City may do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter, provided, however, that the City shall not have the power to operate a Facility financed under this chapter as a business, except temporarily in the case of a default by a Participating Party.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. BONDS
2-8-300 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
    The City may, from time to time, issue Bonds for any of the purposes specified in Section 2-8-105. Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes, subject only to the provisions of such Bonds for registration.

 

2-8-305 BONDS NOT DEBT OF CITY.
    Every issue of Bonds shall be a limited obligation of the City payable from all or any specified part of the revenues and the moneys and assets authorized in this chapter to be pledged or assigned to secure payment of Bonds. Such revenues, moneys or assets shall be the sole source of repayment of such issue of Bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the City or a pledge of the faith and credit of the City but shall be payable solely from specified revenues, moneys and assets. The issuance of Bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the City to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment.

    All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect:

    Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City is pledged to the payment of the principal of or premium or interest on this bond.

 

2-8-310 COST OF ISSUANCE.
    In determining the amount of Bonds to be issued, the City may include all costs of the issuance of such Bonds, reserve funds, and capitalized bond interest.

 

2-8-315 RESOLUTION AND BOND TERMS.
    Bonds may be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment bonds or pass-through certificates or any combination thereof. Bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the Council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America at such place or places, be subject to such terms of redemption and have such other terms and conditions as such resolution, or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the City, may provide. Bonds may be sold at either public or private sale and for such prices as the City shall determine.

 

2-8-320 BOND PROVISIONS.
    Any resolution authorizing any Bonds or any issue of Bonds, or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the City, may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of such Bonds:

    (a)   The terms, conditions and form of such Bonds and the interest and principal to be paid thereon,

    (b)  limitations on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of sale of such Bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of such proceeds to secure the payment of such Bonds,

    (c)   limitations on the issuance of additional parity Bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding Bonds,

    (d)  the setting aside of reserves, sinking funds and other funds and the regulation and disposition thereof,

    (e)   the pledge or assignment of all or any part of the Revenues and of any other moneys or assets legally available therefor and the use and disposition of such Revenues, moneys and assets,

    (f)   limitation on the use of Revenues for operating, administration or other expenses of the City,

    (g)  specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the City to holders of such Bonds, and providing the rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default, including any limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders.

    (h)  the appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the City and the holders of its Bonds, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds of trust, mortgages, leases, subleases, sale contracts and other contracts to such trustee, and the rights of such trustee,

    (i)   the procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of such Bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given, and

    (j)   any other provisions which the Council may deem reasonable and proper for the purposes of this chapter and the security or the bondholders.

 

2-8-325 PLEDGE OF REVENUES, MONEY OR PROPERTY—LIEN.
    Any pledge of Revenues or other moneys or assets pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid and binding from the time such pledge is made. Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the City shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the City, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the City.

 

2-8-330 NO PERSONAL LIABILITY.
    Neither the members of the Council, the officers or employees of the City, nor any person executing any Bonds shall be liable personally on the Bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof.

 

2-8-335 PURCHASE OF BONDS BY CITY.
    The City shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to purchase its Bonds. The City may hold, pledge, cancel, or resell such Bonds, subject to and in accordance with agreements with the bondholders.

 

2-8-340 ACTIONS BY BONDHOLDERS.
    Any holder of Bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to any resolution authorizing the issuance of Bonds, except to the extent the rights thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture authorized thereby to be entered into by the City, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect or enforce any and all rights specified in law or in such resolution or indenture, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this chapter or by such resolution or indenture to be performed by the City or by any officer, employee, or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging arid collecting of rates, fees, interest, and charges authorized and required by the provisions of such resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged and collected.

 

2-8-345 REFUNDING BONDS.
    The City may issue Bonds for the purpose of refunding any Bonds then outstanding.

 

2-8-350 VALIDITY OF BONDS.
    The validity of the authorization and issuance of any Bonds is not dependent on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by the City for the approval of any financing or the entering into of any agreement, or by the failure to provide financing or enter into any agreement, for which Bonds are authorized to be issued under this chapter.

 

ARTICLE 4. SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
2-8-400 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
    This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the City and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes.

 

2-8-405 OMISSIONS NOT TO AFFECT VALIDITY OF BONDS.
    Any omission of any officer or the City in proceedings under this chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate such proceedings or the Bonds issued pursuant to this chapter.

 

2-8-410 FULL AUTHORITY.
    This chapter is full authority for the issuance of Bonds by the City for the purposes specified herein.

 

2-8-415 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
    This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional, and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of the bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and Bonds may be issued for any such purposes under this chapter notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law.

 

2-8-420 CHAPTER CONTROLLING.
    To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 80-59, 12/15/80)

CHAPTER 2-9 TAX COLLECTION
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-9-100 TAX COLLECTION, ETC., TO BE PERFORMED BY COUNTY.
    The functions of the City of San Leandro relating to the assessment of property for taxation, the equalization and correction of such assessments, the collection, payment, and enforcement of taxes, assessments, or penalties levied for municipal purposes, including delinquent taxes or assessments, the sale of property for the non-payment of municipal taxes, assessments, or penalties levied thereon, and the redemption thereof, and any and all of the powers or functions of any officers, boards, or commissions of said City of San Leandro relating to any or all of the matters aforesaid, shall be performed by the respective officers, boards, or commissions of Alameda County performing similar functions in respect to county taxes in said County of Alameda, excepting as hereinafter provided and the substance or procedure of such matters shall be governed by the general laws of the State unless otherwise provided. Said County officers, boards, or commissions shall have the same powers and duties in respect to said functions of the City of San Leandro that they have as provided by general law in the performance of similar functions in respect to county taxes in Alameda County except as hereinafter otherwise provided.

 

2-9-105 TAXES FOR VOTER-APPROVED INDEBTEDNESS.
    The Council may, by ordinance, fix an ad valorem tax rate or rates to pay the interest and redemption charges on any indebtedness approved by the voters prior to July 1, 1978, in the manner provided by law.

 

2-9-110 FORECLOSURE BY CITY.
    Upon written notice to the County, the City may institute and conduct proceedings for the sale of property for the non-payment of taxes, assessments or penalties.

 

2-9-115 AUDIT.
    The City may audit, in respect to the City of San Leandro, the books of the County officers, boards or commissions by whom any function of the City is performed.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance 82-13, 3/15/82)

CHAPTER 2-10 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-10-100 SHORT TITLE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax of the City.

 

2-10-105 DEFINITIONS.
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this Chapter:

    (a)   HOTEL. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof.

    (b)  OCCUPANCY. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

    (c)   OPERATOR. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity or owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

    (d)  PERSON. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

    (e)   RENT. “Rent” means the consideration charged whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

    (f)   TRANSIENT. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient uninterrupted periods of time extending both, prior and subsequent to, the effective date of this Chapter may be considered.

 

2-10-110 TAX IMPOSED—GENERALLY.
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, including, but not limited to, any inn, motel, or time-share facilities, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of fourteen (14) percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Finance Director may require that such tax be paid directly to the Finance Director.

 

2-10-115 TAX IMPOSED—EXCEPTIONS.
    No tax shall be imposed upon any person as to whom or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided.

    No exception shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Finance Director.

 

2-10-120 OPERATOR’S DUTIES.
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.

 

2-10-125 REGISTRATION.
    Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator or any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the Finance Director and obtain from him or her a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

    (a)   The name of the operator;

    (b)  The address of the hotel;

    (c)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

    (d)  “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax by registering with the Finance Director for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Finance Director. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”

 

2-10-130 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the Finance Director, make a return to the Finance Director, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Finance Director. The Finance Director may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Finance Director.

 

2-10-135 UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS—RELIEF OF OPERATOR FROM LIABILITY.
    Any operator is relieved from liability for the remission to the City of the tax imposed under this Chapter insofar as the measure of the tax is represented by accounts which have been found to be worthless and charged off for income tax purposes. If the operator has previously remitted the tax, he or she may, pursuant to procedures prescribed by the Finance Director, take as a deduction the amount of tax previously remitted for the worthless and charged off account. If any such accounts are thereafter in whole or in part collected by the operator, the amount so collected shall be included in the first return filed after such collection and the tax on such amount paid with the return.

 

2-10-140 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
    (a)   Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

    (b)  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.

    (c)   Fraud. If the Finance Director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.

    (d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

    (e)   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

 

2-10-145 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX—DETERMINATION OF TAX BY FINANCE DIRECTOR.
    If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax under this Chapter and to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report, and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this Chapter, the Finance Director shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Finance Director shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Chapter.

    In case such determination is made, the Finance Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Finance Director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made the Finance Director shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the Finance Director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 2-10-150.

 

2-10-150 APPEAL.
    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.

 

2-10-155 RECORDS.
    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Finance Director shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

 

2-10-160 REFUNDS.
    (a)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section; provided, that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Finance Director within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Finance Director.

    (b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Finance Director that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

    (c)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Finance Director, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Finance Director that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

    (d)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

 

2-10-165 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.

2-10-170 VIOLATIONS.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance Director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this Chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 83-033, 11/21/83; Ordinance No. 89-015, 7/17/89 (Section 2-10-110); Ordinance No. 94-012, 6/13/94 (Section 2-10-110); Ordinance No. 2016-026, 12/19/16 (Section 2-10-110))

CHAPTER 2-11 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-11-100 PUBLIC HEARING.
    Prior to the adoption of any ordinance or resolution by the City Council of the City of San Leandro, ordering the construction of any public improvement or the acquisition of any property for public use, or both, where the cost of such construction or acquisition is to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment or other special assessment taxes upon property, and it appears that the public convenience and necessity require such undertaking or improvement and that proceedings should be taken therefor, without complying with the provisions of the Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931 (Streets and Highways Code §§ 2800 et seq.) (herein called the “1931 Act”), a public hearing shall be held on said question of public convenience and necessity and notice of said hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided herein.

 

2-11-105 PROPOSED DISTRICT.
    Prior to the adoption of any ordinance or resolution ordering the construction of any public improvement or acquisition of any property for public use, or both, pursuant to any law or ordinance providing for the levy of special assessments upon property, a resolution of preliminary determination shall be passed and adopted describing the proposed improvement and the boundary lines of the district proposed to be assessed to pay therefor, and setting a time and place where and when any person who would be entitled to protest under the 1931 Act may file written objections and may appear and show cause, if any they have, why the City Council should not find and determine that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed improvement or acquisition without compliance with the 1931 Act.

 

2-11-110 NOTICE.
    Notice of the hearing above provided for shall be given to the owners of the property within the boundary lines of the proposed district to be assessed to pay for the costs of said acquisition or improvement as follows:

    (a)   Notice setting forth the time and place of the hearing on the public convenience and necessity of said improvement shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City, which publication shall be completed at least ten (10) days before the date fixed for said hearing. The City Clerk shall give said notice.

    (b)  Notice of the hearing shall be posted for ten (10) days on or near the door of the Council Chambers of the City Council of the City of San Leandro, State of California, the posting of which shall be completed at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing. The City Clerk shall post said Notice.

    (c)   Notice of the hearing shall be conspicuously posted along the line of the contemplated work, at not more than 300 feet in distance apart, but not less than three (3) in all, and along and upon all streets and alleys within the district to be benefited by the proposed improvement or work; said posting shall be completed at least seven (7) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing. The City Clerk, shall post said Notices.

    The above notices shall briefly describe the proposed improvement.

 

2-11-115 PROTESTS.
    Any person who would be entitled to protest under the 1931 Act may, on or before the time fixed for said hearing, file with the City Clerk written objections to undertaking said proceedings without first complying with the provisions of the Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931. Said objections shall bear the description of his or her property, and a statement of the nature of his or her objection. If no objections are filed as provided for herein, or when said objections shall have been heard and overruled, the City Council may by a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote adopt a resolution finding and determining that public convenience and necessity require the proposed acquisition of improvement, or both, and that the 1931 Act shall not apply.

 

(Legislative History: )

CHAPTER 2-12 UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALL BUILDINGS ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-12-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to establish a method whereby the cost of all improvements, renovations and repairs to public and privately owned Property as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of Article IIA of Title VII, Chapter 5 of the San Leandro Municipal Code Relating to Unreinforced Masonry Wall Buildings may be assessed to property which is receiving special benefit therefrom.

 

2-12-105 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE.
    Any proceedings taken or assessment levied pursuant to this Article shall not be held invalid for failure to comply with the provisions of this Article, provided such failure is not a constitutional defect.

 

2-12-110 NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT PROCEDURES AUTHORIZED.
    Any procedure not expressly set forth in this Article but deemed necessary or convenient to carry out any of its purposes is authorized.

 

2-12-115 NONEXCLUSIVENESS OF REMEDIES.
    The remedies provided in this Article for enforcement of any assessment levied pursuant to this Article are not exclusive, and additional remedies may be provided at any time.

 

2-12-120 ABANDONMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
    Proceedings under this Article may be abandoned at any time prior to the confirmation of the assessments.

 

2-12-125 EFFECT UPON OTHER LAW.
    This Article does not affect other law relating to the same or any similar subject, but provides an alternative authority and procedure for the subject to which it relates. When proceeding under this Article, its provisions only need be followed.

 

2-12-130 CONSTRUCTION.
    This Article is to be liberally construed.

 

2-12-135 INCORPORATION OF THE MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 1913.
    The Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 (Division 12 of the California Streets and Highways Code), as amended from time to time, is incorporated in and made a part of this Article. Except as otherwise provided by this Article, the mode and manner for making improvements and for levying and collecting assessments shall be as prescribed in the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913.

 

2-12-140 COMPLIANCE WITH THE UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS ORDINANCE.
    Whenever the public interest or convenience requires, the City may use the powers of this Article to pay, or make funds available to enable the owners of lots or parcels of real property within the district to pay, for all work deemed necessary by the City to bring real property or buildings, including privately owned real property or buildings, into compliance with Article IIA relating to unreinforced masonry wall buildings. Any financing for such work on a residential structure containing units rented by households specified in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code shall be subject to a regulatory agreement that will ensure that the number of those units in the structure will not be reduced and will remain available at affordable rents pursuant to Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code as long as any assessments levied pursuant to this section on the parcel on which the structure is located remain unpaid. No lot, parcel, or building shall be included in the district without the owner’s consent.

    The City Council hereby declares that the use of public funds pursuant to this section for compliance with Article IIA constitutes a public purpose resulting in a public benefit. The use of funds pursuant to this section shall not be construed to be gifts of public funds in violation of Section 6 of Article XVI of the California Constitution. A district created to finance work under this Article may include areas of territory that are not contiguous, and shall be subject to the provisions of subsections (c) through (f) of Section 10100.2 of California Streets and Highways Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 96-03, 3/4/96 (Sections 2-12-100—2-12-140))

CHAPTER 2-13 EMS TAX
2-13-100 TITLE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “EMS Tax Ordinance” of the City of San Leandro.

 

2-13-110 FINDINGS.
    (a)   The City Council of the City of San Leandro does hereby determine that the cost to provide emergency medical services at a level required to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of its residents exceeds the amount of funds and revenues generated from all other sources of income available for such purpose. The City Council does further determine that the imposition of an emergency medical services tax on occupants of real property throughout the City as set forth below is necessary to maintain an adequate level of emergency medical services.

    (b)  The imposition of an emergency medical services tax will allow the City to continue to provide paramedic level of service. The County of Alameda, in an effort to deal with the rising costs or maintaining the transport ambulance system throughout Alameda County, has had to increase the response times for the paramedic transport ambulances. The City of San Leandro established the paramedic engine company program in an effort to ensure that the residents or San Leandro would receive a timely response of paramedics to all medical emergencies within the City. The emergency medical services tax will also enable the City to continue funding the following programs which support the paramedic program:

 

    EMS Quality Assurance/Quality Improvement (QA/QI)

    EMS coordinator

    EMS equipment

    EMS certification

    EMS training

    EMS related community training

    Paramedic services authorized

    First responder defibrillation

    Improved dispatch

    Emergency medical dispatch

    Records management systems

    Traffic control systems

    Vehicles for specific EMS purposes

    Disaster rescue and medical equipment

    Communications equipment improvements

 

    (c)   The Council recognizes that occupants of different categories of property use different amounts of emergency medical services. The tax rates established by this Chapter are intended to be proportional to and based on estimates of typical use of and benefit from essential services. The rates are not tailored to individual use within categories of property both because such tailoring is not administratively feasible and because the City must make emergency medical services available to all residents equally.

    (d)  The tax is based on a “benefit unit” with different land uses assigned a different number of “benefit units.” The weighted land use classification system was developed in 1983 by the Alameda County Emergency Medical Services District (“EMS District”) and the Alameda County Assessor. Under this classification system, “benefit units” were assigned to various land use types based on a County-wide survey of the demand for service generated by the land use. Nonresidential uses are assigned “benefit units” based on use ranging from two (2) to seven (7).

    (e)   Individual occupants typically do not choose whether or when to avail themselves of emergency medical services which are relied on in emergencies or unexpected circumstances. The value of such services is in their availability to all residents and it would be unfair to charge their costs only to those residents who actually use the services.

    (f)   Each occupant of property derives value from the availability of emergency medical services. Even if such services are not presently used by an occupant, the services may be used in the future and, in any event, their availability benefits each occupant. Such services enhance the health, safety, welfare and environment of all residents of San Leandro and improve their quality of life both directly and indirectly.

    (g)  Parcels which are unimproved contain no occupants who may avail themselves of emergency medical services. Accordingly, the Council has determined that owners of unimproved parcels are not subject to the tax.

    (h)  Parcels which are improved but vacant contain no occupants who may avail themselves of emergency medical services. Accordingly, the Council has determined that owners of vacant improved parcels may receive a refund of the tax if they can prove that the parcel was vacant rot more than six (6) months during the twelve (12) month tax period.

    (i)   Approximately fifty-eight and one-half percent (58.5%) of San Leandro’s residential units are owner-occupied. Because these percentages are so high, the overall tax impact is not significantly different if the tax is imposed on occupants as opposed to owners. However, nothing in this Chapter-is intended to preclude owners from recovering the tax from the occupant. Whether the occupant is charged depends solely upon the terms of the occupancy agreement. Moreover, nonpayment will not be a lien on the property, but a personal obligation of the occupant or owner.

    (j)   It is not feasible for San Leandro to collect the tax from the non-owner occupants on whom it is imposed because the records available to the City do not include the names of non-owner occupants. Therefore, the only practical way to collect a tax imposed on occupants is to collect it from the owners of the occupied properties.

    (k)  The tax imposed by this Chapter is a tax on the privilege or using and the use of emergency medical services. It is not an ad valorem tax on real property, nor is it any other kind of tax on property or the ownership of property. It is not a transaction or sales tax on the sale or real property. Finally, because the tax proceeds are deposited in a special fund and the fund is restricted for emergency medical services, the tax is a special tax.

 

2-13-120 DEFINITIONS.
    As used herein the following definitions shall apply:

    (a)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES shall mean and include salaries (including benefits), equipment and training required to provide “first-in” response by fire personnel to provide basic and advanced life support to persons suffering medical emergencies.

    (b)  OCCUPANT shall mean the person or persons who rent, lease, reside in or otherwise occupy the real property to which emergency medical services are available.

    (c)   OWNER shall mean the owner of the real property to which emergency medical services are available as shown on Alameda County’s most recent assessment roll.

    (d)  YEAR shall mean the period from July 1 to the following June 30.

 

2-13-130 TAX IMPOSED.
    An annual emergency medical services tax (“tax”) in the amounts set forth in Section 2-13-140 is hereby imposed on occupants of real property within the boundaries of the City of San Leandro.

    The tax is imposed on the occupant as of July 1 of each year; provided, however that if any building or structure on any parcel is unoccupied on that date, the tax is imposed on the first occupant occupying the building or structure during the year.

    Notwithstanding the tax liability of the occupant, the owner of each parcel giving rise to tax liability under this Chapter shall be responsible for the collection and/or remittance of the tax due and payable hereunder. The tax required to be collected by the owner constitutes a debt owed by the owner to the City.

 

2-13-140 AMOUNT OF TAX.
    The tax per “benefit unit” (BU) is Eighteen Dollars and Seventy-Two Cents ($18.72) per year. The number of benefit units shall be determined by the use to which the owner or occupant has put the property, as follows:

 

Property Use

Benefit Units

One living unit

1 BU

Two to five living units

3 BU

Six or more living units

1 BU per unit

One-story stores

2 BU

Store first floor w/office/apartments above

4 BU

Miscellaneous commercial

2 BU

Department stores

5 BU

Discount houses

5 BU

Restaurants

4 BU

Shopping centers

7 BU

Supermarkets

4 BU

Comm/industrial condominiums

4 BU

Warehouses

2 BU

Light industry

4 BU

Heavy industry

6 BU

Miscellaneous industrial

2 BU

Nurseries

2 BU

Quarries

2 BU

Wrecking yards

2 BU

Terminals, trucking

2 BU

Improved government-owned property

2 BU

Golf courses

2 BU

Schools

5 BU

Churches

4 BU

Other institutions

3 BU

Lodge halls

7 BU

Clubhouses

4 BU

Car washes

2 BU

Commercial garage/auto repair

2 BU

Service station

2 BU

Funeral homes

2 BU

Nursing/boarding homes

6 BU

Hospitals

5 BU

Hotel

5 BU

Motel

5 BU

Mobile home parks

5 BU

Banks

4 BU

Medical-dental offices

4 BU

1-3 story offices

4 BU

Over 3 story offices

7 BU

Bowling alleys

4 BU

Theaters, walk-in

4 BU

Theaters, drive in

4 BU

 

    In order to accommodate the increased costs of providing emergency medical services, the annual tax per “benefit unit” shall be adjusted annually by an amount not to exceed the Consumer Price Index (All-Urban Consumers, San Francisco-Bay Area) unless the City Council finds and determines that said adjustment would result in the tax exceeding the cost of providing the services. Under no circumstances shall the total adjustment provided for herein exceed Five Dollars and Twenty Cents ($5.20) per benefit unit.

 

2-13-150 EXEMPTIONS.
    The occupant or owner of real property that is unimproved is exempt from payment of the tax.

    The tax imposed hereby shall not apply to the occupant or owner of any property who, for any reason, is legally exempt therefrom.

 

2-13-160 DETERMINATION OF LAND USE.
    The records of the County Assessor of the County of Alameda as of January 1 of each year and the records of the City of San Leandro may be used to determine the actual use of each parcel of real property for purposes of determining the tax hereunder.

 

2-13-170 COLLECTION.
    The tax levied and imposed by this Chapter shall be due on July 1 of each year, but it may be paid in two (2) installments due no later than December 10 and April 10. The tax shall be delinquent if not received on or before the delinquency date set forth in the notice mailed to the owner’s address as shown on the most current assessment roll of the Alameda County Tax Collector and shall be collected from the owner in such manner and at such times as the Council may provide. The tax due may, at the option of the Council, be collected by Alameda County in conjunction with and at the same time and in the same manner as the County’s collection of property taxes, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to impose a tax lien on the property to secure payment of the tax.

    Nonpayment of the tax results in personal liability of the person liable for the tax and the person liable for collection of the tax, and the tax obligation may be enforced by any lawful means available to the City for collection of personal obligations owed to the City.

 

2-13-180 USE OF TAX PROCEEDS.
    All proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a special fund designated for use for emergency medical services only.

 

2-13-190 APPROPRIATIONS LIMITATION.
    In no case shall the revenues generated by the tax levied and imposed by this Chapter exceed the limitation established by Article XIIIB of the Constitution of the State of California.

 

2-13-200 UNTIMELY OR UNPAID TAXES.
    A one-time penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax due is hereby imposed on all taxpayers who fail to pay the tax provided by this Chapter when due. The penalty shall become a part of the tax debt herein required to be paid. In addition, if the tax remains unpaid as of July 1 of the following year, an additional penalty of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month shall accrue on all amounts unpaid.

    The amount of any tax or penalty imposed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. Any person owing money under the provisions of this Chapter shall be personally liable for such amount in any action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of the amount owed. The City will be entitled to recover from the person against whom such an action is brought its costs incurred in connection with such action including its reasonable attorney’s fees.

 

2-13-210 ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATION.
    The Council may, by resolution adopt guidelines for administrative matters related to the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter. Such guidelines may establish new uses or may modify uses listed in Section 2-13-140 provided that the maximum number of benefit units for any use can be no more than seven (7).

 

2-13-220 REFUNDS—IMPROVED PARCELS.
    The occupant or owner of improved parcels which were unoccupied for at least six (6) months of the year shall receive a refund of any tax paid, provided an application in a form satisfactory to the City Manager is filed no later than August 1 for the preceding year for which a refund is sought.

 

2-13-230 REFUNDS—GROUNDS NOT SPECIFIED.
    Any person claiming a refund of the tax for any reason not provided herein shall first file a claim pursuant to the San Leandro Municipal Code. All claims must be filed by the person who paid the tax or his or her guardian, conservator or the executor of his or her estate. No claim may be filed on behalf of other taxpayers or a class of taxpayers.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 97-007, 3/3/97 (Sections 2-13-100—2-13-230); Ordinance No. 06-009, 7/1/06 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2007-011, 6/4/07 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2008-005, 5/19/08 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2009-005, 5/18/09 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2010-010, 5/17/10 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2011-009, 5/16/11 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2012-009, 5/21/12 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2013-005, 5/20/13 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2014-006, 5/19/14 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2015-006, 5/18/15 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2016-004, 5/16/16 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2017-011, 5/15/17 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2018-009, 5/21/18 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2019-007, 5/20/19 (Section 2-13-140); Ordinance No. 2020-004, 6/1/20 (Section 2-13-140))

CHAPTER 2-14 SAN LEANDRO DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
2-14-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to establish a method whereby funds are collected to operate a Business Improvement District.

 

2-14-105 DEFINITIONS.
    In order to distinguish between district businesses, and for the purpose of calculating and applying the amount of assessments owed, the following definitions shall apply:

    (a)   Retail Businesses: All businesses not covered by other definitions set out in this section, at least fifty percent (50%) of whose gross income is derived from “retail sales” as that term is defined under the California Sales and Use Tax Law. The fact that a substantial part of its business consists of sales other than retail sales does not exclude said business from this classification so long as such other business component does not account for more than fifty percent (50%) of said business’ gross income.

    (b)  Restaurants: Cafés, eating establishments, sandwich shops, dinner houses, restaurants and fast food services, and other similar businesses.

    (c)   Lodging: Inns, hotels, motels, RV parks, and other similar businesses.

    (d)  Service: General office, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, personal care facilities and outlets, entertainment uses, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, renting and leasing businesses, utilities, vending machine businesses, household finance companies, and other similar businesses not otherwise included in subsection (a), (b), (c), (e), or (f) of this section.

    (e)   Professional: Attorneys; architects; accountants; engineers; surveyors; physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors, and others in a medical/health service field; consultants; real estate brokers; financial advisors; laboratories (including dental and optical); hearing aid services; artists; and designers.

    (f)   Financial: Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, etc.

    (g)  Calendar Year: January 1 to and including December 31 of the same year.

    (h)  Billing Period: January 1 to and including December 31 of the same year.

 

2-14-110 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES.
    A Business Improvement District is hereby established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of the district shall be as set forth on Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this Chapter and incorporated in this section by reference. This district shall be known as the “San Leandro Downtown Business Improvement District” (“district”).

 

2-14-115 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
    There shall be a Board of Directors (“Board”) of the district to administer the affairs of the district. Said Board shall be constituted of businesses within the district. Within the Board there shall be a President, Vice-President, Secretary, and Treasurer elected by the membership, and such other officers as deemed necessary by the Board. Such other officers shall be appointed by the Board at its discretion. All voting within the district regarding election of Board Members and any actions regarding the normal and routine conducting of district business shall be based on one vote per assessed dollar, and said business must be current in payment of their district assessment(s) to participate in such votes.

 

2-14-120 ESTABLISHMENT OF BENEFIT ASSESSMENT.
    All businesses, trades, and professions located within the district boundaries shown on Exhibit A shall, commencing January 1, 2000, pay an annual benefit assessment to the district in the following amounts:

 

 

Zone A

Zone B

Retailers and Restaurants:

 

 

(1-3 emp.)

$150.00

$75.00

(4-6 emp.)

300.00

150.00

(7+ emp.)

450.00

225.00

Service Businesses

125.00

62.00

Professional Businesses

100.00

50.00

Financial institutions

500.00

500.00

Lodging:

 

 

(Bed and Breakfast)

200.00

 

(Hotels, Motels)

300.00

 

 

Note: Retail and restaurant businesses will be assessed a benefit fee according to number of full-time employees (based on two thousand (2,000) annual hours) or the equivalent number of accumulated hours worked by all full- and part-time employees.

 

 

 

2-14-125 PURPOSE AND USE OF BENEFIT ASSESSMENTS.
    The types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on businesses in the district are as follows:

    (a)   The acquisition, construction, installation, or maintenance of any tangible property with an estimated useful life of five (5) years or more including, but not limited to, the following improvements:

    (1)  Benches;

    (2)  Trash receptacles;

    (3)  Decorations;

    (4)  Facade improvements;

    (5)  Permanent landscaping.

    (b)  Activities including, but not limited to, the following:

    (1)  Promotion of public events which benefit businesses in the area and which take place on or in public places within the area;

    (2)  Furnishing of music in any public place in the area;

    (3)  Activities which benefit businesses located and operating in the area, including, but not limited to, commercial shopping and promotional programs.

 

2-14-130 EXCLUSIONS FROM BENEFIT ASSESSMENT.
    No person or business shall be required to pay an assessment based on: (a) a residential use of the property within the district, or (b) a nonprofit organization as defined by Section 501 (C)(3) or (C)(6) of the Internal Revenue Service Code located within the district.

 

2-14-135 NEW BUSINESS ASSESSMENT WAIVER.
    Any new business established within the district shall not be required to pay an assessment for the billing period during which said business is initiated, The business will have been considered initiated on the date of issuance of the business license. This waiver shall not apply to an existing business that has changed ownership or location within the district. City agrees to supply the district with timely information regarding new businesses initiated within the district.

 

2-14-140 COLLECTION OF BENEFIT ASSESSMENT.
    The benefit assessment authorized by this Chapter for San Leandro businesses shall be billed and collected each billing year on March 1. City will bill and collect the assessments and forward all funds collected to the district within thirty (30) days of said collections. The City may delegate the administrative functions of billing and collection by resolution.

 

2-14-145 BENEFIT ASSESSMENT NOT A LIABILITY.
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, businesses not paying the annual fee will not incur a liability for the benefit assessment and will therefore not be included in the district nor any district-sponsored improvements and activities provided in Section 2-14-125 of this Chapter.

 

2-14-150 ANNUAL BUDGET PROCESS.
    Pursuant to the Act, it shall be necessary for the district Board of Directors to present an annual budget for City Council review and approval prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. The purpose of this process is to comply with the Act provisions regarding public notice and hearing prior to establishing the benefit assessments for the following fiscal year. City shall not adopt, modify, or otherwise amend any fiscal year budget of the district that is inconsistent in any way with said fiscal year’s budget as agreed to and presented by the district Board except in the case of a written majority protest (regarding elimination or modification of any specific budget item) from business owners which will pay fifty percent (50%) or more of the assessments proposed to be levied as to any specific budget item pursuant to Streets and Highways Code Section 36525(b). In such case the written protest regarding any specific budget item shall be grounds to eliminate or modify said expenditure from the district’s proposed budget pursuant to the written protest.

 

2-14-155 DECISIONS REGARDING EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
    Decisions of the district Board regarding expenditure of all finds generated under this program shall be final.

 

2-14-160 DISTRICT PROCEEDS DO NOT OFFSET CITY SERVICES.
    City specifically finds and declares that the funds derived from the district shall not be used to offset or diminish current maintenance. capital improvement programs, including but not limited to, public property and sidewalk cleaning, street cleaning and maintenance, tree maintenance, restroom cleaning, and maintenance. The City declares its intent to provide at least the same level and standard of maintenance and repair of public property within the district providing City funds are available from year to year.

 

2-14-165 DISESTABLISHMENT OF THE DISTRICT.
    Proceeding to disestablish the district shall be initiated by the City Council following the presentation of a petition to the City Council signed by business owners paying fifty percent (50%) or more of the assessments levied in the district. Proceedings to disestablish the district shall follow the procedures set forth in Streets and Highways Code Section 36550. The City Council shall disestablish the district if, following the public hearing prescribed in Section 36550(b), written protests are not withdrawn as to reduce the protests below the fifty percent (50%) level. In the event of disestablishment of the district, remaining revenues of the district shall be refunded to paying business owners in a pro-rata manner calculated in the same manner as was used to establish the most recent assessments applied in the district.

 

 

2-14-170 DISTRICT BALLOT.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2-14-165, the Board shall conduct a neutral ballot of all businesses within the district no later than March 31, 2001, to determine whether or not the district shall be disestablished. The results of the ballot shall be presented to the City Council.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 99-030, 10/18/99 (Sections 2-14-100—2-14-170))

CHAPTER 2-15 SHUTTLE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2014-023 repealed and replaced Ch. 2-15 in its entirety.

 

Sections:

2-15-010        PURPOSE.

2-15-020        ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DISTRICT.

2-15-030        AMENDMENTS.

2-15-040        ASSESSMENT.

2-15-050        PROTESTS TO FORMATION.

2-15-060        REVIEW OF ANNUAL REPORT.

2-15-070        USE OF ASSESSMENTS.

2-15-090        EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF ASSESSMENT.

2-15-100        IMPOSITION OF ASSESSMENT.

 

2-15-010 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the West San Leandro Shuttle Business Improvement District.

 

2-15-020 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DISTRICT.
    Pursuant to the Act, a business improvement district area is hereby created and established and designated as the “West San Leandro Shuttle Business Improvement District” for the area located within one-quarter mile of the West San Leandro Shuttle route excepting therefrom that area within one-half mile of the San Leandro BART Station, as shown on the map at the end of this Chapter.

 

2-15-030 AMENDMENTS.
    All businesses within the boundaries of the district established by this Chapter shall be subject to any amendments of the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, codified as California Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq.

 

2-15-040 ASSESSMENT.
    The assessment is to be levied on all businesses, existing and future, within the BID in the City of San Leandro based upon a fee of Twenty-One Dollars ($21.00) per employee per year per business. Annually, the assessment may be increased in an amount up to the increase, if any, of the Cost of Living Index for San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, All Urban Consumers. Businesses that have a Home Occupation Permit, businesses with three (3) or less employees, businesses that have received Internal Revenue 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status, and businesses that are exempt from local assessments under State or Federal law are exempt from the assessment.

 

2-15-050 PROTESTS TO FORMATION.
    All protests, both written and oral, are overruled and denied and the City Council finds that there is not a majority protest within the meaning of Section 36525 of the Act.

 

2-15-060 REVIEW OF ANNUAL REPORT.
    All of the assessments imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be reviewed by the City Council annually based upon the annual reports prepared by the advisory board appointed pursuant to Sections 36530 and 36533 of the California Streets and Highways Code. Pursuant to Section 36533(c), the City Council may approve the report as filed by the advisory board or may modify any particular contained in the report and approve it as modified.

 

2-15-070 USE OF ASSESSMENTS.
    No portion of the revenues from the assessments within the district shall be used to provide improvements outside of the district for any purpose. The assessments shall be used exclusively to fund the West San Leandro Shuttle, other related transportation activities, and the administrative costs of collecting the assessment, or as modified by the City Council pursuant to compliance with Sections 36534 and 36535 of the California Streets and Highways Code.

 

2-15-090 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF ASSESSMENT.
    The assessment imposed by this Chapter shall remain in effect for fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, unless sooner terminated, as provided in the Act.

 

2-15-100 IMPOSITION OF ASSESSMENT.
    The assessment imposed by this Chapter is levied on an annual basis upon all businesses within the district and the owner of each business shall be solely responsible for paying all assessments when due. The assessment will be collected annually at the same time, and in the same manner, as the business license tax imposed by Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code. If a new business opens in the district before January 1 of any year in which an assessment is collected, that business will be responsible for paying the full amount of the assessment. If a new business opens in the district after January 1 of any year in which an assessment is collected, that business will be responsible for paying fifty percent (50%) of the assessment. Failure to pay the assessment when due shall be deemed a delinquency, and collection of such delinquency shall be in a manner consistent with the collection of delinquent business license taxes.

 

 

 



Figure 1: LINKS Route and BID Area

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 04-013, 6/21/04 (Sections 2-15-010—2-15-100); Ordinance No. 04-021, 10/18/04 (Section 2-15-100); Ordinance 2005-017, 10/3/05; Ordinance No. 2009-002, 4/6/09; Ordinance No. 2014-023, 12/15/14)

 CHAPTER 2-16 RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Chapter 2-16, Emergency Communication System Access Fee, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance No. 04-015, was repealed by Ordinance No 2008-018, 12/15/08 (Sections 2-16-200—2-16-286))

CHAPTER 2-17 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-17-100 SHORT TITLE.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Communication Users’ Tax Law” of the City of San Leandro.

 

2-17-105 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this Chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

    (a)   “Ancillary telecommunication services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services:

    (1)  “Conference bridging service” means an ancillary service that links two (2) or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.

    (2)  “Detailed telecommunications billing service” means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

    (3)  “Directory assistance” means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information.

    (4)  “Vertical service” means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.

    (5)  “Voice mail service” means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service

    (b)  “Ancillary video services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to electronic program guide services, recording services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video services.

    (c)   “Billing address” shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

    (d)  “City” shall mean the City of San Leandro.

    (e)   “Communication services” means: “telecommunications services,” “ancillary telecommunication services,” “video services” and “ancillary video services.”

    (f)   “Mobile telecommunications service” has the meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

    (g)  “Month” shall mean a calendar month.

    (h)  “Paging service” means a “telecommunications service” that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds.

    (i)   “Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the City) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.

    (j)   “Place of primary use” means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.

    (k)  “Post-paid telecommunication service” means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.

    (l)   “Prepaid telecommunication service” means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.

    (m) “Private telecommunication service” means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i. e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).

    (n)  “Service address” means either:

    (1)  The location of the service user’s communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or,

    (2)  If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.

    (3)  For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the location associated with the service number.

    (o)  “Service supplier” shall mean any entity or person, including the City, that provides communication service to a user of such service within the City.

    (p)  “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this Chapter.

    (q)  “State” shall mean the State of California.

    (r)   “Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement” means the multi-state agreement commonly known and referred to as the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, as it is amended from time to time.

    (s)   “Tax Administrator” shall have the Finance Director, or designee.

    (t)   “Telecommunications service” means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is functionally integrated with “telecommunication services.” “Telecommunications services” include, but are not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service).

    (u)  “Video programming” means those programming services commonly provided to subscribers by a “video service supplier” including but not limited to basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, origination programming, or any other similar services, regardless of the content of such video programming, or the technology used to deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed.

    (v)  “Video services” means “video programming” and any and all services related to the providing, recording, delivering, use or enjoyment of “video programming” (including origination programming and programming using Internet Protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or more channels by a “video service supplier,” regardless of the technology used to deliver, store or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes ancillary video services, data services, “telecommunication services,” or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with “video services.”

    (w)  “Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides or sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential address in the City, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)); open video systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); video services using internet protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on demand), direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video services (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.

    (x)  “VoIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol)” means the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet Protocol network.

    (y)  “800 Service” means a “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name “800,” “855,” “866,” “877,” and “888” toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

    (z)   “900 Service” means an inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. “900 service” does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the “telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed under the name “900” service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

 

2-17-110 CONSTITUTIONAL, STATUTORY, AND OTHER EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a Federal or State statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State.

    (b)  Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this Chapter pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall file an application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a State or Federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the Tax Administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all communication service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax Administrator timely written notice of any change in communication service suppliers so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new communication service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of a communication users’ tax collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.

    The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 2-17-160 of this Chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 2-17-175 of this Chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    (c)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified period of time.

 

2-17-115 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX.
    (a)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five and seven-tenths percent (5.7%) of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the City, are used, in whole or in part, within the City’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this Chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services.

    (b)  “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this Chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including but not limited to post-paid communication services, prepaid communication services, and private communication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi jurisdictional taxation (e.g., Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement).

    (c)   The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this Chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection (a) above.

    (d)  As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. “Telecommunication services” shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services,” such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products.

    (e)   Charges for communication services (video) shall include, but are not limited to, charges for the following:

    1.    Regulatory fees and surcharges, franchise fees and access fees (PEG);

    2.    Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;

    3.    Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;

    4.    Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

    5.    Video programming and video services;

    6.    Ancillary video services (e.g., electronic program guide services, recording functions, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of video services);

    7.    Equipment leases (e.g., remote, recording or search devices, converters, remote devices); and,

    8.    Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services.

    (f)   To prevent actual multi jurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section.

    (g)  The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month.

 

2-17-120 BUNDLING TAXABLE ITEMS WITH NON-TAXABLE ITEMS.
    If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and non-taxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and non-taxable services.

 

2-17-125 SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS/ MINIMUM CONTACTS.
    For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this Chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the communication users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by State and Federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the City, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this Chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the City for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the City, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the City by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the City on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the City or distributed from a location with the City; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the City or through materials distributed in the City by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the City on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and maintain a market in the City for the provision of communication services that are subject to a tax under this Chapter.

 

2-17-130 NONRESIDENTIAL USER REBATE.
    Nonresidential users of communication services (telecommunications) shall be entitled to a rebate as provided in Section 2-4-255 of Chapter 2-4 to the extent that the maximum tax is reached, as provided therein.

 

2-17-135 DUTY TO COLLECT—PROCEDURES.
    (a)   Collection by Service Suppliers: The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be performed as follows:

    (1)  The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 2-17-155 shall apply.

    (2)  The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.

    (b)  Filing Return and Payment: Each person required by this Chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this Chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act.

 

2-17-140 COLLECTION PENALTIES—SERVICE SUPPLIERS.
    (a)   Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the City’s account on the following business day.

    (b)  If the person required to collect and/or remit the communication users’ tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, the Tax Administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.

    (d)  For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

    (e)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tax Administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this Chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public agencies imposing a utility users tax, or otherwise legally established, to create a central payment location or mechanism.

 

2-17-145 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
    Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this Chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the City as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this Chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U. S. CA. Section 507(a)(8)(C).

 

2-17-150 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT—TAX APPLICATION ERRORS.
    (a)   The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the Tax Administrator institute proceedings under this Section 2-17-150 if, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

    (b)  The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the City. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the matter.

    (c)   If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the City. If the person requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

    (d)  At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 2-17-160 of this Chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 2-17-175 of this Chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    (e)   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen percent (15%) on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the City seeking payment of a tax assessed under this Chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection (e).

    (f)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.

 

2-17-155 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY—NON-PAYING SERVICE USERS.
    (a)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this Chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the City with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this Chapter. Nothing herein shall require that the Tax Administrator institute proceedings under this Section 2-17-155 if, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

    (b)  In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that the Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

    (d)  If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the total tax that is owed.

 

2-17-160 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
    (a)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2). A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office. To the extent that the Tax Administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that determination shall be considered an exercise of the Tax Administrator’s discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 or otherwise. The Tax Administrator is not authorized to amend the City’s methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 and the City does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the communication users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.

    (c)   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this Chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter; or, (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and are voidable by the Tax Administrator or the City at any time.

    (d)  The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this Chapter. The Tax Administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three (3) years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 2-17-150 of this Chapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax Administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this Chapter, the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

    (e)   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this Chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five (45) days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent (0.75%) per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

    (f)   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this Chapter.

    (g)  Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter to the contrary, the Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence.

 

2-17-165 RECORDS.
    (a)   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the City any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

    (b)  The City may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this Chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the City on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the City for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the City to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the City to conduct the inspection.

    (c)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7.

    (d)  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: 1) provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the City; and, 2) upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the City.

    (e)   If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following: 1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or, 2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this Chapter.

 

2-17-170 REFUNDS.
    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this Chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be refunded as provided in this section as follows:

    (a)   Written Claim for Refund: The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this Chapter from a person or service supplier, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the Tax Administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this subsection.

    (b)  Compliance with Claims Act: The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the City pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. The Tax Administrator, or the City Council where the claim is in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the Tax Administrator/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The Tax Administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

    (c)   Refunds to Service Suppliers: Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (a) of this Section, the Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this Chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the City upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the Tax Administrator, provided that: 1) such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax; 2) the Tax Administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and, 3) in the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the City, the Tax Administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit.

    (d)  Overpayments as Credits: Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (c) above, a service supplier shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment whenever such overpayment has been received by the City within the three (3) years next preceding a deficiency determination or assessment by the Tax Administrator in connection with an audit instituted by the Tax Administrator pursuant to Section 2-17-160(d). A service supplier shall not be entitled to said credit unless it first clearly establishes, to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator, the right to the credit by written records showing entitlement thereto. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a credit against an underpayment pursuant to this subsection qualify a service supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the one-year written claim requirement of this section.

 

2-17-175 APPEALS.
    (a)   The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 2-17-170 of this Chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 2-17-170 of this Chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b)). Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

    (b)  If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 2-17-170 of this Chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator; he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

    (c)   The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent hearing officer selected by the City Manager, no more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the Tax Administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

    (d)  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the City’s files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

    (e)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.

 

2-17-180 NO INJUNCTION/WRIT OF MANDATE.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this City or against any officer of the City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted.

 

2-17-185 NOTICE OF CHANGES TO ORDINANCE.
    If a tax under this Chapter is added repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799.

 

2-17-190 EFFECT OF STATE AND FEDERAL REFERENCE/ AUTHORIZATION.
    Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a State or Federal statute in this Chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a State or Federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of a communication service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent.

    To the extent that the City’s authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this Chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in State or Federal law, no amendment or modification of this Chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this Chapter.

 

2-17-195 INDEPENDENT AUDIT OF TAX COLLECTION, EXEMPTION, REMITTANCE, AND EXPENDITURE.
    The City shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this Chapter have been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with this Chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed.

 

2-17-200 INTERACTION WITH PRIOR TAX.
    (a)   Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users: Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Section 2-17-115 of this Code with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Sections 2-4-200 and 2-4-216 of this Code with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to April 1, 2009, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Section 2-4-200 and 2-4-216 of this Code with respect to any charge for a service subject to taxation pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Section 2-17-115 of this Code with respect to that charge. The intent of this paragraph is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior telephone users tax and cable television users tax to the new communication users’ tax (which transition period ends April 1, 2009) and to permit communications service providers, during that transition period, to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.

    (b)  Collection of Tax by Service Providers: Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter as soon as feasible after the effective date of the Chapter, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code.

    (c)   Judicial Determinations: In the event that a final court order should determine that the election enacting this Chapter 2-17 is invalid for whatever reason, or that any tax imposed under this Chapter 2-17 is invalid in whole or in part, then the taxes imposed under Sections 2-4-200 and 2-4-216 (unless repealed) shall automatically continue to apply with respect to any service for which the tax levied pursuant to this Chapter has been determined to be invalid. Such automatic continuation shall be effective beginning as of the first date of service (or billing date) for which the tax imposed by this Chapter is not valid. However, in the event of an invalidation, any tax (other than a tax that is ordered refunded by the court or is otherwise refunded by the City) paid by a person with respect to a service and calculated pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to satisfy the tax imposed under Sections 2-4-200 and 2-4-216 on that service, so long as the tax is paid with respect to a service provided no later than six months subsequent to the date on which the final court order is published.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-017, 12-15-08)

CHAPTER 2-18 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM ACCESS TAX
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
2-18-200 TITLE/PURPOSE.
    (a)   In order to ensure and improve the performance of the City’s 911 communication system, the City must impose a tax. This Chapter shall be known as the “Emergency Communication System Access Tax Ordinance” and the tax imposed herein shall be known as the “Emergency Communication System Access Tax.”

    (b)  The purpose of this Chapter is to require subscribers to telephone service in the incorporated area of the City to pay for the improvements to and operation of the 911 communication system that will be financed by tax revenues.

    (c)   The Emergency Communication System Access Tax is the most practical and equitable revenue mechanism to finance the acquisition and construction of equipment, software, and facilities and other resources that are needed to provide an adequate and reliable 911 communication system. The tax is intended to recover the majority of the costs related to the benefits the 911 system will provide to nonexempt telephone subscribers.

    (d)  The tax imposed by the provisions of this Chapter is intended solely to provide revenue for eligible project costs and eligible operating costs, as defined in this Chapter. Tax revenues shall be deposited by the Finance Director in the Emergency Communication System Access Fund established pursuant to Section 2-18-235 of this Chapter.

 

2-18-201 DEFINITIONS.
    Except where the context or particular provisions require otherwise, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

    (a)   “911 communication system” means an enhanced emergency telephone service which automatically, or through a third-party intermediary, connects a person dialing the digits 9-1-1 to an answering point established by the City, and shall incorporate all aspects of the call delivery system, the call processing system and the call dispatch system, including, but not limited to, selective routing, automatic number identification (ANI), automatic location identification (ALI), wireless 911, and the computer aided dispatch (CAD) system. “911 communication system” includes the functions of the San Leandro Police dispatch centers; however, it does not include the City Police Department staff who respond to requests for assistance by traveling to a site to which they are dispatched as a result of an emergency call. 911 communication system also includes the cost of the fire dispatch service provided to the City under contract with the County of Alameda.

    (b)  “Access line” means any connection from a customer location within the City to a provider of local telephone service offered to the public for compensation. Within the meaning of this Chapter, and without limitation, access lines include connections providing residential basic exchange service, business basic exchange service, PBX service (private branch exchange), foreign exchange service, VoIP service (Voice over Internet), private communication service, cable provided voice telephone communication and Centrex service. “Access line” also includes a connection from a single mobile telephone to a commercial mobile radio service, as defined in Section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations as this section existed on October 1, 2002, and which has as its place of primary use, as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Section 124(8), a location within the City of San Leandro. Notwithstanding the foregoing, “access line,” does not include any connection from a customer location within the City to a provider of local telephone service when for any reason a customer cannot use, or as demonstrated by the customer to the City’s satisfaction the customer does not use for purposes of two-way voice telephony, that connection to dial the digits 9-1-1 to reach the 911 communication system within the City at an answering point within the City.

    (c)   “Eligible operating costs” means the portion of operating costs attributable to the operation of the 911 communication system to telephone subscribers who are required to pay the tax imposed by the provisions of this Chapter on access lines, trunk lines, and super trunk lines subject to the tax. Eligible operating costs shall not include exempt operating costs.

    (d)  “Exempt operating costs” means the portion of operating costs attributable to the operation of the 911 communication system to telephone subscribers who are exempted from the tax by Section 2-18-215 of this Chapter or are otherwise not required to pay any tax imposed by the provisions of this Chapter.

    (e)   “Eligible project costs” means the portion of project costs attributable to a project to modify the 911 communication system to telephone subscribers who are required to pay the tax imposed by the provisions of this Chapter on access lines and trunk lines subject to the tax, and the portion of project costs related to implementation of a new CAD system. Eligible project costs shall not include exempt project costs.

    (f)   “Exempt project costs” means the portion of project costs attributable to a project to modify the 911 communication system to telephone subscribers who are exempted from the tax by Section 2-18-215 of this Chapter or are otherwise not required to pay any tax imposed by the provisions of this Chapter.

    (g)  “Tax” means the Emergency Communication System Access Tax imposed under the provisions of this Chapter.

    (h)  “Super trunk line” shall mean a trunk line with a capacity of at least twenty-four (24) channels over a high capacity service, such as a 1.544 Mb, T-1, or Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) Primary Rate Interface (PRI) line. Notwithstanding the foregoing, “Super trunk line,” does not include any trunk line that does not come within the definition of Section 2-16-201(q) of this Chapter.

    (i)   “Lifeline service” means discounted telephone service available to eligible low-income residential customers.

    (j)   “Local telephone service” means access to a local telephone system, providing two-way telephonic quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone or radio telephone stations constituting a part of the local telephone system, whether or not the service uses transmission wires. “Local telephone service” shall include wireless telephone service. “Local telephone service” shall also include service provided through any technology currently existing, or that may exist in the future, allowing a person within the City of San Leandro to access the 911 Communication System using that technology. For the purposes of the Emergency Communication System Access Tax, a person shall be construed to subscribe to “local telephone service” within the City of San Leandro if he or she has a “place of primary use,” as such term is defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Section 124(8), within the geographic boundaries of the City of San Leandro. “Local telephone service” does not include any system that is expressly excluded from the definition of “access line,” “trunk line,” or “super trunk line.”

    (k)  “Operating costs” mean any costs to operate, repair or maintain the 911 communication system or backup 911 communication system, including, but not limited to, costs for personnel, planning, training, software and hardware maintenance and upgrades, facility maintenance and repair, depreciation equipment replacement, technical infrastructure, attorney’s fees, and associated administrative overhead costs.

    (l)   “Project costs” mean any costs of acquiring, refinancing and installing computerized call delivery processing and dispatch equipment and software, and/or any other acquisition necessary to house 911 communication system equipment and staff in a seismically safe and fire retardant facility, including any debt service payments related thereto, as well as any associated administrative overhead costs.

    (m) “Service location” means the premises of a telephone subscriber at which a working service point or primary station set provides the subscriber with basic exchange service and to which extension services are charged. For wireless telephone service, “service location” is the “place of primary use,” as such term is defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Section 124(8).

    (n)  “Service supplier” means any person supplying local telephone service, pursuant to authority granted by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Communications Commission, to any telephone subscriber at a location within the City of San Leandro. Service suppliers may include, without limitation, local exchange carriers, interexchange carriers, competitive access providers, cable television providers offering telecommunications services, providers of wireless telephone service, and any other entity offering direct connections between premises and the premises of telephone subscribers. Service suppliers also include any person supplying local telephone service who is exempt from California Public Utilities Commission or Federal Communications Commission regulation.

    (o)  “Telephone corporation” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 234 of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California or the most comparable successor definition. It also includes any person or corporation providing wireless telephone service.

    (p)  “Telephone subscriber” means any person who receives local telephone service, or its functional equivalent regardless of the technology used to provide the service.

    (q)  “Trunk line” means a line between a service suppliers’ switching device and a private branch exchange, automatic call distributing system, or other similar device, at a telephone subscriber location and having a capacity of seven and one-half (7-1/2) times the capacity of a single line. Notwithstanding the foregoing, “trunk line,” does not include any line between a service suppliers’ switching device and a private branch exchange, automatic call distributing system, or other similar device, at a telephone subscriber location when for any reason a customer cannot use, or is demonstrated by the customer to the City’s satisfaction the customer does not use for purposes of two-way voice telephony, that line to dial the digits 9-1-1 to reach the 911 communication system within the City at an answering point within the City.

    (r)   “Wireless telephone service” means commercial mobile radio service, as defined in Section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations as this section existed on October 1, 2002.

2-18-205 FINDINGS.
    (a)   The 911 communication system provides immediate access to emergency services for telephone subscribers. The life saving importance of an up to date and modernized emergency response system was acknowledged by the Federal September 11 Commission in its investigation finding that deficiencies that existed resulted in impaired response. Subscribers to telephone service derive significant benefit from ongoing operation of the modernized integrated system installed at the San Leandro Police Department and Alameda County Fire Department. Telephone subscribers will benefit from operating, maintaining, and upgrading the 911 communication system so it continues to operate at a state-of-the-art level. A portion of the costs associated with operating, maintaining and upgrading the 911 communications system and facility should be allocated among all telephone subscribers because telephone subscribers will reap this significant benefit.

    (b)  Every telephone access line can provide independent access to the 911 communication system. Therefore, allocating operating costs on a per line basis fairly distributes these costs according to the benefit telephone subscribers derive from availability of a modernized 911 communication system.

    (c)   The concentration of a large number of access lines in a single location diminishes the marginal benefit of improved access provided by each additional access line; therefore, it is appropriate to place a cap on the number of access lines per account per service location on which the tax is charged.

    (d)  Subscribers who maintain super trunk lines derive more benefit, in terms of access to emergency communication service, from each telephone line than other subscribers and should pay a higher tax. Based on information from the California Public Utilities Commission and the Federal Communications Commission, the City Council finds that, on average, a super trunk line provides up to twenty-four (24) times the benefit provided by a single access line, and a trunk line provides up to seven and a half (7-1/2) times the benefit provided by a single access line.

    (e)   The portion of operating costs reflecting the benefits estimated to be provided by operation of the 911 communication system to telephone subscribers who are subject to the tax (“Eligible Operating Costs”) may be financed from Emergency Communication System Access Tax revenues. The portion of operating costs reflecting the benefits estimated to be provided by operation of the 911 communication system to telephone subscribers who are exempted from the tax may not be financed from Emergency Communication System Access Tax revenues.

 

2-18-210 IMPOSITION OF EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM ACCESS TAX.
    The amount of the tax imposed by this section shall be established by this ordinance as set forth below and shall be paid on a per-line basis, by the person paying for such local telephone service:

 

Description

Tax Rate

Single Access Line

$2.72

Trunk Line

$19.02

Super Trunk Line

$66.70

 

    No subscriber will be required to pay a tax in excess of Thirteen Thousand, Two Hundred, Twenty-Eight Dollars and Ninety-Six Cents ($13,228.96) per account per service location in any fiscal year. The above described tax rates and this cap shall be adjusted annually by the City Council by the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI): All Urban Consumers for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (“CPI-W”) for the San Francisco Bay Area published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

 

2-18-215 EXEMPTIONS.
    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon the access lines of:

    (a)   A lifeline customer of a service supplier;

    (b)  A telephone corporation;

    (c)   Coin-operated telephones;

    (d)  A nonprofit hospital which is exempt from Federal income tax under Section 501(a) of the United States Code;

    (e)   A nonprofit educational organization which is exempt from Federal income tax under Section 501 (a) of the United States Code;

    (f)   Any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would violate the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of California, or preemptive Federal or State law; or

    (g)  Any governmental office.

 

2-18-220 ANNUAL REPORT.
    (a)   The Finance Director shall identify data required and make appropriate requests to each service supplier for information sufficient to identify the number of access lines maintained by that service supplier, including separate identification of the number of trunk lines and super trunk lines that are “access lines” for purposes of this Chapter, as well as the number of exempt lines as specified in Section 2-18-215 of this Chapter. Upon a request by any service supplier, the Finance Director shall provide the requesting service supplier with a non-disclosure, confidentiality agreement on behalf of the City of San Leandro and shall remain under a continuing duty to protect all information provided by service suppliers subject to such agreement from any use other than that described in this section, and from disclosure to any third parties including, but not limited to, other service suppliers.

    (b)  No later than March 1 of each year and using the data provided by the service suppliers pursuant to the immediately preceding subsection, the Finance Director shall estimate the percentage of access lines that are subject to payment of the Emergency Communication System Access Tax as of December of the prior calendar year as reported by service suppliers under Section 2-18-245(b). The Finance Director’s report shall also identify the amount of the tax rate and tax cap adjusted by the CPI-W as established by subsection (b) of Section 2-18-210 of this Chapter that will apply in the following fiscal year.

    (c)   Eligible operating costs and eligible project costs, along with exempt operating costs and exempt project costs, will be determined and reported annually in the Annual Report based on the current year’s budget.

    (d)  No later than March 1 in each odd numbered year, the Finance Director will evaluate information from industry sources, regulatory bodies, and City experience to determine whether the tax rates for trunk lines and super trunk lines continue to reasonably reflect the increased estimated access to the 911 communication system provided to trunk line subscribers relative to access line subscribers.

 

2-18-230 COLLECTION OF TAX.
    (a)   The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be billed to the telephone subscriber by the service supplier with its regular bill otherwise in accordance with the service supplier’s normal billing procedures, and service suppliers shall be required to collect such taxes as are remitted from telephone subscribers so billed, on behalf of the City of San Leandro. Tax revenues remitted to service suppliers by telephone subscribers shall be held for the City and service suppliers shall remit the tax revenues collected to the City Finance Director on a monthly basis on or before the last day of the month following the month in which they were collected.

    (b)  The tax required to be collected by service suppliers under this Chapter shall be added to the service supplier’s billings to subscribers. The tax shall be stated separately as the City of San Leandro Emergency Communication System Access Tax on billings by service suppliers whose billing systems as presently configured are capable of such programming, and the Finance Director shall otherwise enter into such Administrative Agreements as may be required to accommodate appropriate billing of the tax as provided in Section 2-18-270 of this Chapter. Where authorized by Federal or State law, the Finance Director may require reasonable modifications to a service supplier billing system platform to accommodate requirements of this subsection provided an administrative agreement for recovery of all one-time costs incurred by the service supplier to comply is executed as provided by Section 2-18-270 of this Chapter.

    (c)   In the event a telephone subscriber makes partial payment of the total charges billed for service and the Emergency Communication System Access Tax that have accrued for the billing period, absent express written direction by the telephone subscriber identifying those charges in dispute, such partial payment shall be applied to satisfy, in order: (1) charges due and owing to the service supplier for services and products; (2) applicable Federal and State sales and use taxes; (3) authorized pass-through expenses, costs and other charges for which the service supplier may be directly liable for payment to Federal and State governments including, but not limited to, Universal Service Fee (USF) charges; and (4) charges for which service suppliers are acting as mere conduits for collection and remittance including the City of San Leandro Emergency Communication System Access Tax. Service suppliers shall pursue the normal course of collection efforts for deficiencies in payment of the tax from telephone subscribers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a telephone subscriber shall not be relieved of the duty to pay the tax to the service supplier in any dispute of other items billed except in cases in which the dispute arises from claims of interruption or impairment of service on the access line on which the tax under this Chapter is assessed.

    (d)  The duty to collect the tax from a telephone subscriber shall commence with bills issued on or after December 1, 2008; provided that, however, within five (5) days of the effective date of the Chapter, City officials provide to service suppliers written notice of their responsibility to bill and remit taxes collected. In the event that notice is not sent within five (5) days of the Chapter’s effective date, service suppliers’ duty to bill and remit taxes collected shall commence no later than ninety (90) days after receipt of notice from the City.

    (e)   The service supplier, at its option, may assess a service charge of up to one-eighth of one percent (.125%) of Emergency Communication System Access Tax actually collected by the service supplier and remitted to the City at the time of remission. The service charge may be deducted from the Emergency Communication System Access Tax remitted to the City at the time of remission.

 

2-18-235 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM ACCESS FUND.
    (a)   Establishment of Fund: The Emergency Communication System Access Fund is established to receive all monies collected pursuant to this Chapter, and any other monies transferred into the fund.

    (b)  Use of Fund: The fund shall be used solely for eligible project costs and eligible operating costs.

    (c)   Administration of Fund: Expenditures and encumbrances from this fund shall be subject to the budget and fiscal provisions of the City.

 

2-18-240 LIABILITY FOR TAX.
    (a)   Any tax imposed on a telephone subscriber under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the telephone subscriber to the City until it has been paid to the City, except that payment to a service supplier is sufficient to relieve the subscriber from further liability for the tax.

    (b)  Any tax collected under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City of San Leandro by the person required to bill and remit such tax. The service supplier’s service charge may be removed from the collection prior to remitting said tax.

    (c)   With the exception of the requirement to bill telephone subscribers for the tax and to pursue the normal course of collection efforts for deficiencies in payment by telephone subscribers as provided by Section 2-18-230 of this Chapter, nothing in this Chapter shall impose any duty on a service supplier to enforce the collection of the tax hereinabove imposed. However, whenever a service supplier remits funds collected as an Emergency Communication System Access Tax to the City, the service supplier shall also provide the City with the name and address of any telephone subscriber who has not paid the tax for four (4) or more billing periods and shall state the amount of such tax remaining unpaid. A service supplier in compliance with this paragraph shall, following the provision of its report, be relieved of any further duty under this Chapter for billing and attempts to collect uncollected taxes from the telephone subscribers identified in the report identified in this subsection for the stated periods. The Finance Director may, at his or her discretion, then assume the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods, in which case the Finance Director shall notify the telephone subscriber that the Finance Director has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and may demand payment from the telephone subscriber of such taxes.

    (d)  A service supplier shall be obligated to bill and remit taxes collected consistent with the provisions of Section 2-18-230. In the event a service supplier willfully refuses to bill or to remit those taxes collected in due course, the service supplier shall be liable to the City in the amount of taxes that were to be collected, as determined by the Finance Director pursuant to Section 2-18-255.

    (e)   Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable in any action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.

    (f)   No telephone subscriber or service supplier owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter may be denied access to the 911 communications system due to their non-payment of the tax imposed by the Chapter.

 

2-18-245 REGISTRATION, REPORTING AND REMITTING.
    (a)   Each service supplier providing local telephone services to subscribers within the City shall register with the Finance Director upon a form prescribed by the Finance Director and shall set forth the name under which the service supplier transacts or intends to transact business, together with identification of the service supplier’s registered agent for process, or such other agent the service supplier designates, to whom notices pursuant to this Chapter shall be directed. All notices and communications required by this Chapter must be directed to the agent designated in the service supplier’s registration in order to be effective notice.

    (b)  Each service supplier shall, on or before the last day of each month, make a return to the Finance Director, on forms provided by the Finance Director, stating the amount of taxes collected by the service supplier during the preceding month, and provide a report of the number of single access lines, trunk lines, and super trunk lines that are subject to this tax, as well as the number of exempt lines as specified in Section 2-18-215. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Finance Director, less any amount retained as a service charge consistent with Section 2-18-230(e) of this Chapter. The Finance Director may require further readily attainable information in the return. Returns and remittances are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Service suppliers must maintain records of taxes collected and remitted to the City for a period of at least three (3) years after the date the tax is remitted.

    (c)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to conduct audits of service suppliers including inspection, auditing, and copying relevant records and material during the service supplier’s regular business hours, upon written request giving not less than five (5) business days’ notice in order to review compliance with this Chapter. If the Finance Director determines based on an audit under this subsection that a service supplier has failed to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter, the Finance Director may require the service supplier to pay for the cost of the audit.

 

2-18-250 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
    (a)   Service Suppliers:

    (1)  Taxes collected from a telephone subscriber that are not remitted to the Finance Director by the service supplier by the due dates provided in this Chapter or that a service supplier willfully refuses to bill or remit pursuant to Section 2-18-230 are delinquent.

    (2)  Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any taxes collected pursuant to Section 2-18-230 shall attach and be paid by the service supplier required to remit at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total taxes collected for which remittance is delinquent.

    (3)  The Finance Director shall have power to impose additional penalties upon service suppliers required to collect and remit tax amounts under the provisions of this Chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting up to one hundred percent (100%) of the amount of the taxes collected or as recomputed by the Finance Director.

    (4)  Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this Section shall become a Chapter of the taxes required to be remitted.

    (5)  In addition to the penalties imposed in this subsection, any service supplier who willfully refuses to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter, except as provided in Section 2-18-240(c), shall pay interest on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until payment in full is received by the Finance Director. Interest shall be paid at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof.

    (6)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, taxes collected and not timely remitted by service suppliers to the Finance Director in cases of unintentional errors and omissions, or events outside the control of the service supplier, shall not be subject to the interest and penalties of this Chapter if the service supplier provides written notice of such an event to the Finance Director and makes the required remittance as soon as reasonably practical.

    (b)  Telephone Subscribers:

    (1)  In addition to provisions of Section 2-18-240(c), whenever the Finance Director determines that a telephone subscriber has willfully withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts remitted to a service supplier or that a telephone subscriber has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of four (4) or more billing periods, or whenever the Finance Director deems it is in the best interest of the City, he or she shall relieve the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this Chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods and collect the taxes directly from the telephone subscriber.

    (2)  Telephone subscribers who willfully withhold the amount of the tax owed from the amounts remitted to a service supplier or who fail to pay any taxes imposed by this Chapter to the service supplier within four (4) billing periods shall pay a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of taxes owed.

    (3)  In addition to the penalties imposed in this subsection, any telephone subscriber who fails to remit taxes and penalties within thirty (30) days of the date the City of San Leandro mails notification that the City has assumed responsibility for the collection of taxes due for specified billing periods, shall pay interest on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent to the service supplier until payment in full is received by the Finance Director, plus an additional collection charge for each delinquent account in an amount to be determined by rules and regulations of the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall establish collection charges which reimburse the costs incurred by the City for collecting delinquent taxes. Interest shall be paid at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof.

    (4)  The penalties, interest and collection charges imposed in this subsection shall not be collected by the service supplier, but shall be determined and collected by the City.

    (5)  Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a Chapter of the tax herein required to be paid.

 

2-18-255 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX—DETERMINATION OF TAX BY FINANCE DIRECTOR.
    If any service supplier willfully refuses to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of taxes collected from telephone subscribers or any portion thereof required by this Chapter, the Finance Director may inspect, audit, and copy records relevant and material to the service supplier’s willful failure during the service supplier’s regular business hours, upon written request and not less than five (5) business days’ notice. As soon as the Finance Director is able to procure facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter collected by any service supplier who has willfully refused to make such report and remittance, the Finance Director shall proceed to determine and assess against such service supplier the tax, interest and penalties provided by this Chapter. In case such determination is made, the Finance Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service supplier to its registered agent for service of process in the State of California. The service supplier may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the service supplier for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any determined by the Director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Director shall give not less than ten (10) business days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the service supplier to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the service supplier may appear and offer evidence and/or legal authority as to why the specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed.

    After such hearing, the Finance Director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the service supplier in the manner prescribed herein of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable within fifteen (15) days.

 

2-18-260 REFUNDS.
    (a)   The Finance Director shall refund any tax collected by the service supplier in excess of the above annual limit described in Section 2-18-210(b). In order to be eligible for a refund the telephone subscriber must provide a written request for the refund along with of proof of payment by the subscriber. Such claims and proof of payment must be submitted to the Finance Director within ninety (90) days of the end of the calendar year. Service suppliers are not authorized to provide refunds.

    (b)  Whenever the amount of any tax payment not provided for under Section 2-18-210(b) has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded to the tax payer provided a claim in writing stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed by the tax payer with the Finance Director within one year of the date of payment along with proof of payment. No refund may be made except upon a written claim verified by the person who paid the tax or by his or her guardian or conservator or the executor or administrator of his or her will or estate.

    (c)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

    (d)  All claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1-8 of the San Leandro Municipal Code relating to the presentation of claims against the City. No suit for money, damages, or a refund may be brought against the City until a written claim therefor has been presented to the City and has been acted upon or has been deemed to be rejected by the City, in accordance with this section. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such a suit and if another person should do so, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff.

 

2-18-270 ADMINISTRATIVE AGREEMENTS.
    The Finance Director may make administrative agreements with service suppliers to vary the strict requirements of this Chapter so that collection of any tax imposed herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as the overall result of said agreements results in billing of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter. A copy of each agreement shall be on file and available for public examination in the Finance Director’s office, except that portions of such agreements that may be designated as proprietary and confidential by the service supplier shall be excluded from the public records maintained by the Finance Director’s office, and shall be subject to a duty of confidentiality and non-disclosure by those representatives of the City of San Leandro who may have a need to review and obtain knowledge of those portions of said agreements designated proprietary and confidential.

 

2-18-275 APPEALS OF DECISION OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR.
    (a)   Who May Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director regarding the amount of tax or penalty owed or the duty or obligation to collect, report or pay a tax pursuant to this Chapter may appeal the decision of the Finance Director by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of such decision. The notice of appeal shall set forth in writing the grounds for the appeal and shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and shall state the grounds for the appeal. Once a notice of appeal is received, the Finance Director shall request the City Manager to appoint a Hearing Officer and to schedule a day, time, and place for the hearing. The City Manager or a delegee of the City Manager shall provide written notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall mail such notice to appellant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The form and substance of the notice shall be in accordance with the rules and policies promulgated by the City Manager. At the hearing, the Appellant bears the burdens of production and persuasion to establish the factual and legal issues upon which the appeal is based.

    (b)  Hearing: A hearing to consider the appeal shall follow those procedures required to afford the appellant full due process of law. The Hearing Officer shall, at the conclusion of the hearing, make findings of fact based upon the evidence submitted and determine whether grounds exist for denial of the appeal or for adjustment of amounts owed. The person appealing shall be notified of the Hearing Officer’s decision in writing. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be final. Any appellant who requests a hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that the hearing was properly noticed.

    (c)   Due Date of Tax: The amount of any tax finally determined as provided in this section shall be due and payable as of the date the original tax, together with any penalties that may be due thereon; provided, however, that if the amount of such tax is fixed in accordance with the original statement of the appellant no penalty shall attach by reason of any delinquency.

 

2-18-280 CALIFORNIA PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION JURISDICTION.
    Nothing contained in this Chapter is intended to conflict with applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of any service supplier subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. In the event of any conflict, the provisions of those rules, regulations and tariffs shall control.

 

2-18-281 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
    The Finance Director may promulgate regulations and issue rules, determinations, and interpretations consistent with this Chapter as may be necessary or appropriate for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax and to apply this Chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder in a lawful manner. The Finance Director shall agendize any proposed rule or regulation for the City Council’s approval. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the Office of the City Clerk. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated by the Finance Director shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter.

 

2-18-282 SEVERABILITY.
    In the event any section or portion of this Chapter shall be determined invalid or unconstitutional, such section or portion shall be deemed severable and all other sections or portions hereof shall remain in full force and effect.

 

2-18-283 HOLD HARMLESS.
    Service suppliers shall not be liable to any telephone subscriber for billing, collecting, or remitting the tax on behalf of the City and the service supplier shall not be responsible for investigating the validity of the tax or assisting in the refunding of any tax determined to be invalid or improperly imposed, pursuant to an administrative or judicial ruling, order or determination.

 

2-18-284 EFFECTIVE DATE.
    This Chapter, if approved by the electorate of the City of San Leandro at the General Municipal Election of November 4, 2008, shall become effective immediately upon the declaration of the results of that election by the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

 

2-18-285 AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
    (a)   Chapter 2-18 of the San Leandro Municipal Code may be repealed or amended by the City Council without a vote of the people. However, as required by Article XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment provision that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this Chapter. The people of the City of San Leandro affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:

    (1)  The annual adjustment of the tax rate by the percentage of the Consumer Price Index (“CPI-W”) as set forth in Section 2-18-210(b);

    (2)  The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this Chapter, if the City Council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax;

    (3)  An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as such interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this Chapter;

    (4)  The establishment of a class of persons that is exempt or excepted from the tax or the discontinuation of any such exemption or exception (other than the discontinuation of an exemption of an exemption or exception specifically set forth in this Chapter); and

    (5)  The collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, even if the City had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax.

    (b)  Upon adoption of this Chapter, the Emergency Communication System Access Tax as codified in Chapter 2-16 of the San Leandro Municipal Code shall be repealed.

 

2-18-286 SEVERABILITY.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this Chapter shall nonetheless remain in full force and effect. The people hereby declare that they would have adopted each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions of this Chapter be declared invalid or unenforceable.

2-18-287 RATIFICATION OF PRIOR FEE.
    The people of the City of San Leandro hereby ratify and approve the past collection of the Emergency Communication System Access Fee Ordinance Chapter 2-16 of the San Leandro Municipal Code as it existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

 

2-18-288 EXECUTION.
    The Mayor is hereby authorized to attest to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter by the voters of the City by signing where indicated below.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-018, 12/15/08; Ordinance No. 2010-009, 5/17/10 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2011-008, 5/16/11 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2012-008, 5/21/12 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2013-004, 5/20/13 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2014-005, 5/19/14 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2015-007, 5/18/15 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2015-010, 9/8/15 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2015-014, 12/7/15 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2016-005, 5/16/16 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2017-010, 5/15/17 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2018-008, 5/21/18 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2019-008, 5/20/19 (Section 2-18-210); Ordinance No. 2020-005, 6/1/20 (Section 2-18-210))

CHAPTER 2-19 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
2-19-100 TITLE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the City of San Leandro Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of San Leandro hereinafter shall be called “City.” This Chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City.

 

2-19-105 OPERATIVE DATE.
    “Operative Date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, the date of such adoption being November 4, 2014.

 

2-19-110 PURPOSE.
    The ordinance codified in this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    (a)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance, which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

    (b)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (c)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

    (d)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter.

 

2-19-115 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
    Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax Chapter; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract.

 

2-19-120 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of 0.5% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

 

2-19-125 PLACE OF SALE.
    For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

 

2-19-130 USE TAX RATE.
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 0.5% of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

 

2-19-135 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.

 

2-19-140 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

    (a)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

    (1)  The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

    (2)  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter.

    (3)  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

    (A)  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

    (B)  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provision of that Code.

    (4)  In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (b)  The word “City” shall be substituted for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

 

2-19-145 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this Chapter.

 

2-19-150 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
    (a)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any State-administered transactions or use tax.

    (b)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

    (1)  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

    (2)  Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:

    (A)  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

    (B)  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

    (3)  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

    (4)  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

    (5)  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    (c)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:

    (1)  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

    (2)  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

    (3)  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

    (4)  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

    (5)  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    (6)  Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer.

    (7)  “A retailer engaged in business in the City” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City.

    (d)  Any person subject to use tax under this Chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax.

 

2-19-155 AMENDMENTS.
    All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this Chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this Chapter.

 

2-19-160 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.

 

2-19-165 CITIZENS OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
    There shall be a five (5) person committee of members of the public to review and report on the revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax adopted by this Chapter. Prior to the operative date, the City Council shall adopt a resolution establishing the composition of the committee and defining the scope of its responsibilities. Also prior to the operative date, the City Council shall appoint at least a quorum of the members of the committee; the City Council shall complete the appointment of members of the committee by the end of fiscal year 2015.

 

2-19-170 TERMINATION DATE.
    The authority to levy the tax imposed by this Chapter shall expire on the thirtieth (30th) anniversary of the last day of the calendar quarter following the operative date.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-012, 11/4/14)

CHAPTER 2-20 COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICTS
2-20-010 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to enhance the ability of the City and property owners to establish property and business improvement districts pursuant to the Property and Business Improvement District Law of 1994 (Streets and Highways Code Section 36600 et seq.) by: (a) reducing the percentage of property owners whose signatures are required to initiate formation of, or petition for disestablishment of, a property and business improvement district (“property BID”) from fifty percent (50%) of the weighted property owners, as authorized by the Property and Business Improvement District Law of 1994, to thirty percent (30%) of the weighted property owners; (b) extending the period for which a property BID may exist from five (5) years, as authorized by the Property and Business Improvement District Law of 1994, to twenty (20) years; and (c) authorizing the reimbursement of formation costs.

 

2-20-020 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES.
    (a)   The procedures established in this Chapter shall be additional to any other procedure established by ordinance or State law, and are intended to supplement those procedures.

    (b)  In forming assessment districts to fund activities and improvements that confer a special benefit on property, the City Council may elect to use the procedures set forth in the Property and Business Improvement District Law of 1994 (Streets and Highways Code Section 36600 et seq.) (the “PBID Law”), as modified by this Chapter. The City Council shall be bound by, and comply with, applicable State law governing the establishment and operation of property and business improvement districts in all respects not inconsistent with this Chapter.

    (c)   An assessment district established pursuant to this Chapter shall be denominated as a “community benefit district” or “district” and the assessment levied in connection with such a district shall be denominated as a “community benefit assessment.”

    (d)  Except where otherwise provided in this Chapter, “community benefit district” shall have the meaning given to “property and business improvement district” by Section 36611 of the PBID Law and each reference in the PBID Law to a “property and business improvement district” or a “district” shall be deemed also a reference to a “community benefit district.”

    (e)   Except where otherwise provided in this chapter, “community benefit assessment” shall have the meaning given to “assessment” by Section 36606 of the PBID Law and each reference in the PBID Law to an “assessment” shall be deemed also a reference to a “community benefit assessment.”

 

2-20-030 PETITION REQUIREMENT.
    Upon the written petition, signed and acknowledged, of the property owners in the proposed district who will pay more than thirty percent (30%) of the assessments proposed to be levied, the City Council may initiate proceedings to form a community benefit district by adopting a resolution expressing its intention to form a community benefit district. The amount of assessment attributable to property owned by the same property owner that is in excess of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of all assessments proposed to be levied shall not be included in determining whether the petition is signed by property owners who will pay more than thirty percent (30%) of the total amount of assessments proposed to be levied.

 

2-20-040 ADVANCE AND REIMBURSEMENT OF FORMATION COSTS.
    (a)   The City Council may authorize a district formed pursuant to this Chapter to recover through assessments the costs incurred in forming the district, including:

    (1)  The costs of preparation of the management plan and engineer’s report required by State law;

    (2)  The cost of circulating and submitting the petition to the City Council seeking establishment of the district;

    (3)  The costs of printing, advertising and the giving of published, posted or mailed notices;

    (4)  Compensation of any engineer or attorney employed to render services in proceedings under this chapter or the PBID Law; and

    (5)  Costs associated with any ballot proceedings required by law for approval of a new or increased assessment. If the District will be authorized to recover these costs, the management plan required pursuant to Streets and Highways Code Section 36622 shall specify the formation costs eligible for recovery through assessments, the schedule for recovery of those costs, and the basis for determining the amount of the additional assessment for recovery of costs, including the maximum amount of the additional assessment, expressed either as a dollar amount, or as a percentage of the underlying assessment.

    (b)  The City may advance funds for the first year of a district so that the district can commence work prior to the initial collection of the assessments. The funds advanced will not exceed the total assessment for the first year. The funds advanced shall be repaid, with interest, within five (5) years of the collection of the first annual assessment.

 

2-20-050 DURATION OF A COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICT.
    A community benefit district established pursuant to this Chapter may have a duration of up to twenty (20) years, if so specified in the resolution of intention.

 

2-20-060 DISESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICT.
    (a)   Any community benefit district established or extended pursuant to the provisions of this part, where there is no indebtedness, outstanding and unpaid, incurred to accomplish any of the purposes of the district, may be disestablished by resolution by the City Council in either of the following circumstances:

    (1)  If the City Council finds there has been misappropriation of funds, malfeasance, or a violation of law in connection with the management of the district, it shall notice a hearing on disestablishment.

    (2)  During the operation of the district, there shall be a thirty (30) day period each year in which assessees may request disestablishment of the district. The first such period shall begin one year after the date of establishment of the district and shall continue for thirty (30) days. The next such thirty (30) day period shall begin two (2) years after the date of the establishment of the district. Each successive year of operation of the district shall have such a thirty (30) day period. Upon the written petition of the owners of real property or of businesses in the area who pay thirty percent (30%) or more of the assessments levied, the City Council shall pass a resolution of intention to disestablish the district. The City Council shall notice a hearing on disestablishment.

    (b)  The City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish the district prior to the public hearing required by this section. The resolution shall state the reason for the disestablishment, shall state the time and place of the public hearing, and shall contain a proposal to dispose of any assets acquired with the revenues of the assessments levied within the property and business improvement district. The notice of the hearing on disestablishment required by this section shall be given by mail to the property owner of each parcel subject to assessment in the district, as appropriate. The City shall conduct the public hearing not less than thirty (30) days after mailing the notice to the property or business owners. The public hearing shall be held not more than sixty (60) days after the adoption of the resolution of intention.

    (c)   Upon the disestablishment of the community benefit district, any remaining revenues, after all outstanding debts are paid, derived from the levy of assessments, or derived from the sale of assets acquired with the revenues, or from bond reserve or construction funds, shall be refunded to the owners of the property or businesses then located and operating within the district in which assessments were levied by applying the same method and basis that was used to calculate the assessments levied in the fiscal year in which the district is disestablished. All outstanding assessment revenue collected after disestablishment shall be spent on improvements and activities specified in the management district plan.

    (d)  If the disestablishment occurs before an assessment is levied for the fiscal year, the method and basis that was used to calculate the assessments levied in the immediate prior fiscal year shall be used to calculate the amount of any refund.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2012-014, 12/3/12 (Sections 2-20-010—2-20-060))

CHAPTER 2-21 CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
2-21-100 SHORT TITLE.
    This Chapter is known as the City of San Leandro cannabis business tax ordinance.

 

2-21-200 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    This Chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation.

 

2-21-300 DEFINITIONS.
    “Annual gross receipts” means the gross receipts produced by the cannabis business during the twelve (12) month period between issuance and renewal of the business license for the cannabis business.

    “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and designed for the shelter or housing of any person, chattel or property of any kind, or anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.

    “Business improvements” means square footage used, on a regular basis, for the operation of a nonprofit organization as defined in Article XIII, Section 26 of the California Constitution, or a for profit organization organized in a manner that is recognized by the California Secretary of State regardless of whether it is owned or leased.

    “Cannabis business” means any business or activity including, but not limited to, planting, cultivation, harvesting, transporting, manufacturing, extracting, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, testing, or wholesale and/or retail sales of marijuana, any part of the Cannabis plant, as defined by California Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5, as that section may be amended from time to time, or any of its derivatives, and specifically excludes the activity of cultivating medical cannabis or any of its derivatives on personal property for personal consumption in accordance with the provisions of the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act of 2015 by the owner, lawful occupant, or other lawful resident or guest of the private property owner, or lawful occupant.

    “Discontinued, dissolved or otherwise terminated” means the date the cannabis business is no longer in operation. The City’s Finance Director, using all evidence, including evidence provided by the cannabis business licensee, will make the determination as to whether a cannabis business has been discontinued, dissolved or otherwise terminated.

    “Gross receipts” means the total of the amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in conjunction with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in gross receipts are all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind without deduction of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from gross receipts are the following:

    (1)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

    (2)  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

    (3)  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

    (4)  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchases upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit.

    “Licensee” or “cannabis business licensee” means a person who has been issued a special permit or license for operation of a cannabis business within the City.

    “Nonprofit organization” means any association, corporation or other entity that is exempt from taxation measured by income or gross receipts under Article XIII, Section 26 of the California Constitution.

 

2-21-400 TAX IMPOSED.
    In addition to any requirements imposed elsewhere in the San Leandro Municipal Code, for the privilege of operating a cannabis business in the City, an annual tax is hereby imposed on each licensee operating a cannabis business as follows:

    (a)   Every cannabis business must pay an annual tax of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.

    (b)  The City Council may impose the tax authorized by this section at a lower rate. No action taken by the City Council under this subsection to reduce the tax rate will prevent it from subsequently increasing the tax rate for cannabis business to the maximum rate specified in this section.

 

2-21-450 DECLARATION STATEMENT REQUIRED.
    At the time of payment of the taxes imposed by this Chapter, each cannabis business licensee must file with the City Finance Department a statement, under oath, showing the true and correct amount of annual gross receipts derived from the cannabis business allowed by the special permit or license issued to the licensee. A signed declaration must be attached to the statement included therein, which will be in substantially the same form as: “I hereby declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.” The City has the right to audit the matters reported in the statement to determine the accuracy of the figures contained therein.

 

2-21-500 PAYMENT—TIMING.
    (a)   All taxes imposed by this Chapter on a cannabis business whether it is a nonprofit organization or a for-profit business must be paid to the City’s Finance Department on or before the fifteenth (15th) day after the close of the month for which the tax is due. Licensees or operators of cannabis businesses must file a monthly report with the City, even if there are no taxes currently due. The report will show the annual gross receipts to date as of the close of the prior month and will be used to calculate the amount of tax due. Payment will accompany the form. The form will be provided by the City and the City may revise the report without advance notice from time to time. Payment of taxes imposed by this Chapter must be in the correct amount of taxes due and owing. Such sums correctly reflecting taxes will be accepted by the City, subject, however, to the City’s right to conduct an audit.

    (b)  If any licensee or operator of a cannabis business is liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this Chapter, and he or she sells or otherwise disposes of the business, his or her successors or assigns must withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient to cover such amount until the former licensee or operator produces from the City either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due.

    (c)   If the purchaser of a cannabis business fails to withhold a sum from the purchase price as required in subsection (b) of this section, he or she will be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price.

 

2-21-600 AUDIT OF DECLARATION STATEMENT AND PAYMENT.
    (a)   The City has the right to audit the matters referred to in the declaration statement, and to determine the correctness of the figures set forth in such statement, and the amount payable to the City.

    (b)  The books, records and accounts of any licensee may be inspected and audited by the City.

    (c)   Such an inspection and audit may be performed by the City’s Finance Director or designee, a qualified accountant, a City official selected by the Finance Director, or a consultant selected by the Finance Director.

    (d)  To facilitate such audits, the licensee must keep complete records of all transactions related to the receipt or disbursement of funds arising out of or related to cannabis business operations during the preceding three-year period. All such records must be made available to the City for audit at the licensee’s place of doing business or such other place that the City may designate during normal business hours after reasonable prior notice.

    (e)   Any failure or refusal of any licensee to make and file a declaration statement within the required time period, or to pay such sums by way of taxes when the same are due and payable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or to permit such inspection of such books, records and accounts of such licensee will be and constitute full and sufficient grounds for suspension or revocation of any special business license or permit for operation of a cannabis business.

 

2-21-700 NOTICE NOT REQUIRED BY CITY.
    The City is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this Chapter, and failure to send such notice or bill will not affect the validity of any tax, interest or penalty due under the provisions of this Chapter.

 

2-21-800 TAX DEEMED DEBT TO CITY.
    The amount of any tax, penalties and interest imposed by the provisions of this Chapter will be deemed a debt to the City, and any licensee carrying on any business without having paid to the City the tax under this Chapter will be liable to an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the tax, and penalties and interest imposed on such business.

 

2-21-900 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS.
    (a)   If the Finance Director is not satisfied that a declaration statement filed, as required under the provisions of this Chapter, is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, the Finance Director may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the declaration statement or upon the basis of any information in the City’s possession or that may come into the City’s possession.

    (b)  The City may make more than one deficiency determination of the amount of tax due for a period or periods.

    (c)   In the case of a cannabis business which is discontinued, dissolved or otherwise terminated, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due.

    (d)  Whenever a deficiency determination is made, the City will provide fifteen (15) calendar days’ notice to the licensee.

 

2-21-1000 TAX ASSESSMENT—NONPAYMENT—FRAUD.
    (a)   Under any of the following circumstances, the finance director may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a cannabis business under this Chapter:

    (1)  If the licensee has not filed any declaration statement required under the provisions of this Chapter;

    (2)  If the licensee has not paid any tax due under the provisions of this Chapter;

    (3)  If the licensee has not, after demand by the Finance Director, filed a corrected declaration statement or furnished to the Finance Director adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement of revenue already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  The notice of assessment will separately set forth the amount of any tax known or estimated by the Finance Director to be due, after full consideration of all information within his or her knowledge concerning the cannabis business activities of the person or licensee assessed and will include the amount of any penalties, costs or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment.

 

2-21-1100 TAX ASSESSMENT—NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
    The notice of assessment will be served upon the licensee either by personal service on the licensee, or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the licensee at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the business license(s) issued under Title 2 to the licensee, or to such other address as the licensee registers with the Finance Director for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this Chapter. For the purposes of this section, service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail.

 

2-21-1200 TAX ASSESSMENT—HEARING.
    (a)   Within ten (10) days after the date of service of a notice issued under Section 2-21-1100, the licensee may apply in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the assessment.

    (b)  If application for a hearing before the Finance Director is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the Finance Director will become final and conclusive.

    (c)   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the Finance Director will cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her not later than thirty (30) days after the date of application, unless a later date is agreed to by the Finance Director and the licensee requesting the hearing.

    (d)  Notice of such hearing will be given by the Finance Director to the licensee requesting such hearing not later than five (5) days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, said licensee may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the Finance Director should not be confirmed and fixed as a tax.

    (e)   After such hearing, the Finance Director will make a written determination and may at his or her discretion reassess the proper tax to be charged and will give written notice thereof to the licensee.

 

2-21-1300 REMEDIES FOR CHAPTER VIOLATION—TAXES NOT WAIVED.
    (a)   Nothing in this Chapter limits the City from using any remedy legally available for violations of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the penalties under Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    (b)  The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax will not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction.

    (c)   No civil action will prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any State law requiring the payment of all taxes.

 

2-21-1400 AMENDMENTS OF CHAPTER.
    The City Council may amend this Chapter at any time as long as the amendments do not increase the tax or, change the method of calculating the tax.

 

2-21-1500 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
    The City Manager may adopt administrative regulations as needed to implement this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-024, 12/19/16)

TITLE 3 HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 3-1 COMMUNITY PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 3-2 WEED ABATEMENT
CHAPTER 3-3 RESERVED
CHAPTER 3-4 DISASTER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3-5 RESERVED
CHAPTER 3-6 DISCARDING AND COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND GREEN WASTE
CHAPTER 3-7 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS WASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 3-8 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 3-9 AIRCRAFT
CHAPTER 3-10 TRAILER PARKS
CHAPTER 3-11 FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 3-12 FEED LOTS
CHAPTER 3-13 WELLS
CHAPTER 3-14 UNIFORM WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3-15 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
CHAPTER 3-16 GRAFFITI
CHAPTER 3-17 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
CHAPTER 3-18 ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 3-19 GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY BUILDING PROJECTS
CHAPTER 3-20 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
CHAPTER 3-21 VERY HIGH FIRE SEVERITY ZONES
CHAPTER 3-22 BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY PROJECTS
CHAPTER 3-23 MANAGEMENT OF PCBS DURING BUILDING DEMOLITION PROJECTS

CHAPTER 3-1 COMMUNITY PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
Note
*Editor’s Note: Prior Ordinance codified herein includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 86-040 and 89-01.

 

ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
3-1-100 ABATE.
    “Abate” shall mean to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer in his or her judgment determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

 

3-1-105 BUILDING.
    “Building” shall mean any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

 

3-1-110 JUNK.
    “Junk” shall mean any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material.

 

3-1-115 MAJOR VEHICLE REPAIRS.
    Major repairs include pulling an engine block, repair or replacement of transmissions and front and rear axles, major body repair, dismantling, and similar work associated with automobiles, boats or other motorized or non-motorized vehicle repair.

 

3-1-120 MINOR VEHICLE REPAIRS.
    Minor repairs include routine maintenance such as changing oil and tires; replacement of water pump, alternator, brakes, shocks, oil and air filters, and spark plugs; and similar work associated with automobiles, boats or other motorized or non-motorized vehicle repair.

 

3-1-125 OWNER.
    “Owner” shall mean any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for City taxes or the lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property.

 

3-1-130 PERSON.
    “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other organization, however formed.

 

3-1-135 ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
    “Zoning Enforcement Official” shall mean the Zoning Enforcement Official and his/her designees.

 

3-1-140 PROPERTY.
    Property shall mean all real property, including, but not limited to, the entire premises, parking lots, sidewalks, gutter, driveways, walkways and shall include any building and structure located on such property.

 

3-1-145 REGISTERED/REGISTRATION.
    A current, valid California Registration for a vehicle conforming to California Vehicle Code Sections 4000 or 9840 et seq. for boats.

 

3-1-150 STREET.
    “Street” shall mean the full width or the right-of-way of any public or private street accessible to the public, whether publicly or privately maintained and whether or not such street has been accepted as and declared to be part of the City system of streets, including streets forming a part of the State Highway System. “Street” also includes any easements where the City is the grantee of the easement and property owned by the City of San Leandro, the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro or the Parking Authority of the City of San Leandro.

 

3-1-155 VEHICLE.
    “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, road or body of water, and for the purposes of this Chapter shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, recreational vehicles, campers, boats, motorcycles and mopeds.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Sections 3-1-100—3-1-155); Ordinance No. 2002-033, 12-9-02 (Sections 3-1-135, 3-1-150))

 

ARTICLE 2. NUISANCES
3-1-200 UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE—PRIVATE PROPERTY.
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of private property in the City to maintain or to allow to be maintained such property in such manner that any of the following conditions which are visible from the street are found to exist thereon, except as may be allowed by this Code.

    (a)   Unlawful Outdoor Storage:

    (1)  The accumulation of abandoned, discarded, or dilapidated objects, including but not limited to junk; abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles; vehicle parts and equipment; machine parts, scrap material, appliances, furniture, household equipment and furnishings, shopping carts, containers, packing materials, scrap metal, wood, plant cuttings, rubbish and debris or similar matter which constitutes a threat to the health or safety of any person or renders any premises unsightly and detrimental to the general public welfare.

    Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the orderly outdoor storage of business related materials and inventory where permitted by applicable zoning designation and/or conditional use permit.

    (2)  The accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, litter, debris or other similar material on the property which is visible from the street.

    (3)  Attractive nuisances visible from a street, dangerous to those members of the public unable to discover the nuisance condition, or recognize its potential danger, including, but not limited to abandoned, broken, neglected or unsupervised vehicles, machinery, equipment, refrigerators and freezers, pools, ponds and excavations.

    (4)  Materials or other items stacked in a manner as to be visible from the street above any fence. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the orderly outdoor storage of business related materials and inventory above fence height where permitted by applicable zoning designation and/or conditional use permit.

    (5)  The placement of items of business inventory, refuse containers, equipment, vehicles, or obstruction on the street or sidewalk.

    (6)  Materials stored or stacked on commercial or industrial property in a disorderly manner in view of the street in Zoning Districts where outdoor storage is permitted.

    (7)  Boats, trailers, recreation vehicles, vehicle parts or other articles of personal property which are left in a state of partial construction, dilapidation or disrepair for an unreasonable period of time in locations which are visible from the street.

    (8)  Camper shells which are left for an unreasonable period of time in front yards, driveways, side yards, sidewalks or walkways and are visible from the street.

    (9)  Packing boxes, pallets, lumber, junk, trash, salvage materials, or other debris kept on the property for an unreasonable period and visible from the street.

    (10) Clotheslines or clothes hanging in front yards, side yards, porches or balconies and visible from a street.

    (11) The storage of firewood or other flammable materials used for heating purposes in excess of standards relating to the safe storage of combustible materials as determined by the City of San Leandro Fire Department and the Uniform Fire Code.

 

    (b)  Landscaping/Vegetation:

    (1)  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds or other vegetation constituting unsightly appearance, dangerous to public safety and welfare or detrimental to neighboring property or property values.

    (2)  Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances causing detriment to neighboring properties or property values, growing into the public right-of-way, obstructing the necessary view of drivers on streets or private driveways and visible from the street.

    (3)  Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in any City zoning approval or permit applicable to the premises.

    (c)   Trash, Litter, Trimmings, Oil and Debris:

    (1)  The accumulation of litter, debris, trimmings or trash on any property, including sidewalks, gutter, driveways, parking lots or the public right-of-way, which is generated on, or as a consequence of the use or maintenance of the property.

    (2)  Pooled oil, water, or other liquid accumulation, flowing onto the street, or excessive accumulations of grease or oil on paved surfaces.

    (d)  Trash Containers:

    (1)  Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such containers stored in view of the street, unless stored in a side yard location flush with or further distant from the street then that portion of the front wall of the residence or main structure nearest to such container, and so long as the lid for such container is closed. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the placement of such receptacles adjacent to the street for pick-up by the City’s franchised waste hauler on normal trash and recycling pick-up days, nor prohibit the outdoor storage of any type of trash receptacle if said receptacle is screened from view from the street or any public right-of-way in a manner approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official or his/her designee.

    (2)  Any property without regular and adequate trash pick-up service.

    (3)  Trash containers without secure, firmly fitting covers or evidencing an overflow of trash and/or other debris.

    (e)   Buildings and Structures:

    (1)  Buildings which are dilapidated, abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, have broken windows or broken windows secured with wood or other materials or which are left in a state of partial construction for an unreasonable period of time, buildings subject to demolition pursuant to applicable permit or other authority, for which demolition has not been diligently pursued, and such buildings which are unpainted or where the paint on the building exterior is cracking, peeling, chalking or mostly worn off.

    (2)  Unsecured buildings constituting hazardous conditions or inviting or permitting trespassers and malicious mischief.

    (3)  Awnings, covers, canopies, umbrellas, screens or other window coverings or building structures which are damaged, torn, severely faded, rusted, bent, unpainted or in some other state of disrepair.

    (f)   Fences and Gates:

    (1)  Fences or other structures on private property abutting, fronting upon, or visible from any street, which is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, extending into the public or private right-of-way, or other dilapidated or unsafe condition.

    (g)  Graffiti:

    (1)  Graffiti or other words, lettering or drawings which remain on the exterior of any building or fence for an unreasonable period of time.

    (h)  Parking Limitations:

    (1)  Vehicles, whether motorized or non-motorized, parked upon any lawn or other unpaved surface lying within any front yard or street corner side yard, unless the vehicle is parked on a paved driveway which provides access to a required parking space or parking lot.

    (2)  Vehicles, whether motorized or non-motorized, parked within any required setback or on any surface which has not previously been approved for parking purposes pursuant to applicable Building and/or Zoning Code provisions.

    (3)  Vehicles, whether motorized or non-motorized, parked parallel to any residence unless the vehicle is parked on a legal circular driveway.

    (4)  Industrial and commercial properties that fail to post adequate notice prohibiting unauthorized vehicle parking on all such properties in accordance with the requirements of the San Leandro Police Department.

    (5)  Vehicles which exceed the following dimensions: twenty (20) feet in length or seven (7) feet in width or seven (7) feet in height, or any single vehicle or combination of vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more parked upon any paved or unpaved surface lying within any front yard, street corner side yard, or backyard of any residential property which are visible from the street or visible from adjacent private property, upon receipt of consent to inspect from any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of such adjacent private property. Recreational vehicles as defined by California Vehicle Code Sections 242, 243, 324, and 362 are exempt from this provision. However, at no time shall more than one such recreational vehicle be stored on any residential property at any time.

    (i)   Residential Vehicle Repair:

    (1)  The performance of major repairs or dismantling of any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, boat, or part thereof, in a location visible from the street. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the registered owner of a motorized or non-motorized vehicle or boat, or part thereof, from performing minor repair of said vehicle in the driveway or other paved surface of a residence, provided that the vehicle or boat is registered to someone living in the residence.

    Proof of registration of any vehicle or boat on which minor repairs are occurring shall be provided to any San Leandro police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer upon request.

    (j)   Parking Strips:

    (1)  Allowing an accumulation of junk, rubbish, debris, or dead, decayed or overgrown vegetation in that area between the property line and the street line of a given parcel, commonly known as a “parking strip.”

    This section is intended to supplement and not conflict with the provisions of Chapter 22, Division 7, Part 3 of the Streets and Highways Code, entitled “Maintenance of Sidewalks,” and Title 5, Chapter 5 of the City of San Leandro Administrative Code, entitled “Community Development Sidewalk Repair Program.”

    (k)  Miscellaneous:

    (1)  Any other condition or use of property which gives rise to a reasonable determination that said condition or use represents some threat to the health and welfare of the public by virtue of its unsafe, dangerous or hazardous nature, or which is so out of harmony with the standards of properties in the vicinity so as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such properties.

 

3-1-205 UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE—PUBLIC PROPERTY.
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any private property in the City to use, maintain or allow to be maintained such property for any purposes so as to create any of the following conditions on adjacent or contiguous public property, except as may be allowed by this Code:

    (a)   Outdoor Storage, Operations or Encroachment:

    (1)  The tracking of mud, dirt, sand, gravel, and concrete onto the street or public right-of-way.

    (2)  The spilling of debris, including trash, paper, wood, plant cuttings and other vegetation, onto the street or other public right-of-way.

    (3)  Vehicles and/or other materials associated with business activity stored on the street or in the public right-of-way.

    (b)  Miscellaneous:

    (1)  Any other condition or use of property which gives rise to a reasonable determination that the effect of said use or condition on adjacent public property represents some threat to the health and welfare of the public by virtue of its unsafe, dangerous or hazardous nature, or which is so out of harmony with the standards of properties in the vicinity so as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such properties.

 

3-1-210 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    Any private property, or use of private and/or public property found to be maintained in violation of the forgoing sections is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Sections 3-1-200—3-1-210); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 3-1-210); Ordinance No. 2002-033, 12/9/02 (Section 3-1-200); Ordinance No. 2003-003, 3/17/03 (Section 3-1-200); Ordinance No. 2007-04, 2/20/07 (Section 3-1-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Sections 3-1-300—3-1-350); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 3 (Sections 3-1-300—3-1-350)

 

ARTICLE 4. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Sections 3-1-400—3-1-420); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 4 (Sections 3-1-400—3-1-420))

 

ARTICLE 5. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Section 3-1-500—3-1-505); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 5 (Sections 3-1-500—3-1-505)

 

ARTICLE 6. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Sections 3-1-600—3-1-605); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 6 (Sections 3-1-600—3-1-605))

 

ARTICLE 7. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 92-018, 9/8/92 (Section 3-1-700); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 7 (Section 3-1-700))

CHAPTER 3-2 WEED ABATEMENT
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
3-2-100 CITY MANAGER.
    The “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager or designee.

 

3-2-102 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17)
 

3-2-103 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17)
 

3-2-105 OWNER.
    “Owner” shall mean any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for City taxes or the lessee, tenant or other person having charge or possession of the property.

 

3-2-110 PERSON.
    “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other organization, however formed.

 

3-2-115 PROPERTY.
    “Property” shall mean all real property, including, but not limited to, front yards, side yards, back yards, driveways, walkways, sidewalks, parkway strips, curbs, the area between the back of the sidewalk and the property line, parking lots, and shall include any building located on such property.

 

3-2-120 WEEDS.
    “Weeds” shall mean as defined in California Government Code Section 39561.5, as it may be amended.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2009-009, 11/16/09 (Sections 3-2-102, 3-2-103); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Sections 3-2-100—3-2-120))

 

ARTICLE 2. REMOVAL PROCEDURE
3-2-200 SIDEWALKS.
    No owner of property within the City of San Leandro shall permit or allow grass, weeds or other vegetation to obstruct the sidewalk or street abutting such property.

 

3-2-205 PRIVATE PROPERTY AND PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
    No owner of property within the City of San Leandro shall permit or allow grass over a height established by the City Manager in the Administrative Code, weeds, rubbish or any material dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of the public to remain on such property. The City Manager may establish in the Administrative Code such height limitation for abatement of weeds as he or she deems necessary or desirable.

 

3-2-210 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    Any property within the City of San Leandro maintained in violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12.

 

3-2-215 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17)
 

3-2-220 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02)
 

3-2-225 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02)
 

3-2-230 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02)
 

3-2-235 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

3-2-240 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

3-2-245 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

3-2-250 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

3-2-255 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

3-2-260 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

3-2-265 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17).
 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-01, 2/15/01 (Sections 3-2-210, 3-2-225); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Sections 3-2-210—3-2-230); Ordinance No. 2009-009, 11/16/09 (Sections 3-2-210, 3-2-235—3-2-265); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Sections 3-2-250—3-2-260); Ordinance No. 2017-013, 6/19/17 (Sections 3-2-200—3-2-265))

 

ARTICLE 3. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-01, 2/5/01 (Sections 3-2-300, 3-2-305); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 3 (Sections 3-2-300—3-2-315))

 

ARTICLE 4. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-085, 11/15/82; Ordinance No. 78-55, 11/28/78, Ordinance No. 541, N.S.; Ordinance No. 2001-01, 2/5/01 (Section 3-2-400); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 repealed Article 4 (Section 3-2-400))

CHAPTER 3-3 RESERVED
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Chapter 3-3, Uniform Fire Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 99-09, 6/21/99; 2001-04, 3/19/01, 2002-025, 9/16/02; 2002-030, 12/9/02; 2007-023, 11/5/07 and 2010-020, 11/15/10, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2013-018, 11/18/13, and repealed by Ordinance No. 2016-023, 12/5/16.

CHAPTER 3-4 DISASTER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-4-100 PURPOSES.
    The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.

 

3-4-105 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   A “local emergency” exists when duly proclaimed, where conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of this City are or are likely to be beyond the control on this City and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions. Such a “local emergency” may be caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the Governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake or other conditions, other than a labor controversy.

    (b)  A “state of emergency” exists, upon proclamation by the Governor where conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the State are or are likely to be beyond the control of any single county or city and will require the forces of a mutual aid region or response. This “state of emergency” may be caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the Governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than a labor controversy or a “state of war” emergency.

    (c)   A “state of war” emergency exists, with or without proclamation, whenever California or the United States is attacked or on warning from the Federal government that such an attack is probable or imminent.

 

3-4-110 DISASTER COUNCIL—MEMBERSHIP.
    The City of San Leandro Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

    (a)   The Mayor, who shall be Chairperson;

    (b)  The Vice Mayor;

    (c)   The Director of Emergency Services;

    (d)  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;

    (e)   One City Council member, who shall be appointed by the City Council;

    (f)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this Chapter;

    (g)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council.

 

3-4-115 DISASTER COUNCIL—POWERS AND DUTIES.
    It shall be the duty of the City of San Leandro Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, mutual aid plans and agreements and plans for meeting any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency. Such plans shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources within the City, both public and private. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson or, in the Chairperson’s absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Vice Chairperson.

 

3-4-120 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.
    There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services and shall appoint the Assistant Director.

 

3-4-124 PROCLAMATION OF A LOCAL EMERGENCY.
    (a)   The Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to request the City Council to proclaim the existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session.

    (b)  Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the local emergency will not remain in effect.

    (c)   The City Council shall review the need for continuing a local emergency at each regularly scheduled meeting until the local emergency is terminated. In no event shall a review take place more than twenty-one (21) days after the previous review. The City Council shall proclaim the terminating of such local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant.

 

3-4-125 POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.
    (a)   Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

    (b)  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter.

    (c)   Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

    (d)  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.

 

3-4-130 POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES UPON PROCLAMATION OF A LOCAL EMERGENCY.
    In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” the Director is hereby empowered:

    (a)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency including rules or regulations imposing a curfew when necessary to preserve order and safety; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council. Such rules and regulations must be in writing and shall be given widespread publicity and notice;

    (b)  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other property found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

    (c)   To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” or the existence of a “state of war emergency” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster service workers;

    (d)  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and

    (e)   To execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this Chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

 

3-4-135 ORDER OF SUCCESSION.
    The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency.

 

3-4-140 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR—POWERS.
    The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance or emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.

 

3-4-145 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
    All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 3-4-130 (c) of this Chapter, be charged with duties incidental to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of San Leandro.

 

3-4-150 EMERGENCY PLAN.
    The Director of Emergency Services shall be responsible for the development of the City of San Leandro Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.

 

3-4-155 EXPENDITURES.
    Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of San Leandro.

 

3-4-160 VIOLATIONS.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, during an emergency, to:

    (a)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement on any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this Chapter.

    (b)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property or inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;

    (c)   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State.

3-4-165 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
    All laws, ordinances or regulations in conflict herewith are hereby repealed; provided that it is the intent of the City Council in enacting this Chapter that it shall be considered a revision and continuation of the ordinance repealed by this Chapter, and the status of volunteers shall not be affected by such repeal; nor shall civil defense and disaster mutual aid plans and agreement, rules and regulations or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed ordinance be affected by such repeal until amended modified, or superseded as provided in this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 71-18, 6/28/71; Ordinance No. 78-54, 11/6/78; Ordinance No. 82-022, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 89-023, 12/4/89; Ordinance No. 98-013, 10/15/98 (Section 3-4-110); Ordinance No. 2006-006, 2/6/06 (Section 3-4-110); Ordinance No. 2007-040, 1/7/08 (Section 3-4-110); Ordinance No. 2009-010, 11/16/09 (Section 3-4-124))

CHAPTER 3-5 RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Chapter 3-5, Animals, Poultry, Etc., previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 771 N.S; 985 N.S.; 79-6, 4/16/79; 82-021, 4/19/82; and 98-01, 2/17/98 was repealed by Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13. (Sections 3-5-100—3-5-110))

CHAPTER 3-6 DISCARDING AND COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND GREEN WASTE
Note
*Editor’s Note: Chapter 3-6, consisting of Sections 3-6-100 through 3-6-350 as derived from Ordinance No. 2000-022, 11/6/00, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2005-12, 8/1/05. Previous Chapter 3-6, Garbage, consisting of Sections 3-6-100 through 3-6-250, as derived from Ordinance No. 98-016, 11/16/98, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2000-022, 11/6/00. Previous Chapter 3-6, consisting of Sections 3-6-100 through 3-6-250, as derived from Ordinance Nos. 70-31, 80-41, 81-045, 82-021, 82-033, 82-048, 93-014, 94-024 and 97-029, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 98-016.

 

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-6-100 DEFINITIONS.
    The following definitions shall govern the construction of this Chapter, unless context requires otherwise, or the term is more specifically defined within:

    (a)   BULKY WASTE. “Bulky waste” includes, but is not limited to, discarded materials such as large household appliances, furniture, tires, carpets, mattresses, tree trunks, and similar large items that require special handling because of their size.

    (b)  COMMERCIAL. “Commercial” means industrial or manufacturing facilities, warehouses, wholesale and retail stores, service establishments, professional offices and other business establishments, and other government facilities and schools.

    (c)   CUSTOMER. Customer” means a person located within the City that subscribes or is required to subscribe to the applicable services provided by the City’s franchisee.

    (d)  DEBRIS BOX. “Debris box” means a container of ten (10) cubic yards or larger in size that is picked up in its entirety by a dedicated truck for emptying at a separate location.

    (e)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. “Food establishment” means any room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging, transporting, salvaging, or otherwise handling of food at the retail level as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113870, or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time.

    (f)   GREEN WASTE. “Green waste” means all tree and plant trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, branches, and similar materials; provided, however, that larger items such as tree stumps and intact dead trees are bulky waste.

    (g)  HAZARDOUS WASTE. “Hazardous waste” shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 3, Article 4, Section 17225.32 and Health and Safety Code Section 25117, or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time.

    (h)  HOLIDAY. “Holiday” shall mean Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s Day.

    (i)   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. “Household hazardous waste” shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 7, Article 1.1, Section 18502, or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time.

    (j)   MEDICAL AND INFECTIOUS WASTE. “Medical and infectious waste” means biomedical waste generated at hospitals, public or private medical clinics, dental offices, research laboratories, pharmaceutical industries, blood banks, mortuaries, veterinary facilities, and other similar establishments.

    (k)  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE. “Multi-family residence” means any building or structure, or portion thereof used for residential purposes and having two (2) or more distinct living units.

    (l)   OCCUPANT. “Occupant” means and includes every tenant or person who is in possession of, is the inhabitant of, or has the care and control of, an inhabited residence or a place of business.

    (m) OWNER. “Owner” means the person holding the legal title or having a right to possession to the real property to which franchise services are provided.

    (n)  PERSON. “Person” means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, governmental entity, or any other legal person domiciled, located, present or operating within the city.

    (o)  PUBLIC CONTAINERS. “Public containers” means containers designated and approved by the City for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, or green waste and located in public places and rights-of-way.

    (p)  PUTRESCIBLE WASTES. “Putrescible wastes” means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by micro-organisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances because of odors, gases or other offensive conditions, and include materials such as food wastes, offal and dead animals as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 3, Section 17225.52 or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time.

    (q)  RECYCLE, RECYCLING, RECYCLED. “Recycle,” “recycling,” and “recycled” mean all the activities necessary to the collection, processing and marketing of recyclable materials which would other-wise be disposed of in a landfill or incinerator in order to return them to the economy in the form of raw materials for new, reused, repaired, refabricated, remanufactured, or reconstituted products. The collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste not intended for, or capable of, reuse is not recycling.

    (r)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. “Recyclable materials” or “recyclables” means discarded materials intended for and capable of being recycled, and that are separated, set aside, handled, packaged or offered for collection in a manner different from solid waste. Recyclables include newspaper (including inserts, coupons, and store advertisements); chipboard; corrugated cardboard; mixed waste paper (including office paper, computer paper, magazines, junk mail, catalogs, Kraft bags and Kraft paper, paperboard, egg cartons, phone books, brown paper, grocery bags, colored paper, construction paper, envelopes, legal pad backings, shoe boxes, cereal and other similar food boxes); glass containers (including brown, clear, and green glass bottles and jars); aluminum (including beverage containers, foil, food containers, small scrap metal); steel or tin cans; waste oil; oil filters; and PETE and HDPE plastic containers (natural and colored).

    (s)   RECYCLING CENTER. “Recycling center” means a facility that accepts recyclable materials to be processed and prepared for marketing.

    (t)   REFUSE. “Refuse” means waste material intended for disposal and including: (1) all putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, whether in solid or liquid form, except liquid-carried industrial wastes or sewage hauled as an incidental part of septic tank or cesspool-cleaning service; (2) garbage (i.e., putrescible animal, fish, food, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter, or any thereof, resulting from the preparation, storage, handling or consumption of such substances); (3) rubbish (such as printed materials, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded clothing, packaging materials, ashes, floor sweepings, glass, and other waste materials).

    (u)  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. “Single-family residence” means any attached or detached building or structure, or portion thereof that is used for residential housing purposes and has one distinct living unit not including in-law units.

    (v)  SOLID WASTE. “Solid waste” means waste as defined in California Public Resources Code, Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2, Section 40191 and regulations promulgated thereunder and without limitation includes the following: (1) solid waste; (2) bulky wastes; (3) special wastes; (4) construction and demolition debris; (5) street sweeping waste; and (6) vehicle parts as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Division 3, Chapter 15, Sections 2520(d)(3) and 2523(c). Excluded from the definition of solid waste are hazardous, medical and infectious waste, and recyclable materials, green waste, and special wastes that cannot be disposed of in Class III landfills within the County system. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, “solid waste” may include de minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and amount normally found in residential solid waste after implementation of programs for the safe collection, recycling, treatment and disposal of household hazardous waste in compliance with Section 41500 and 41802 of the California Public Resources Code.

    (w)  SPECIAL CHARGES. “Special charges” are specific service-related reasonable residential and commercial charges that may be billed by the City or its franchisee for special services.

    (x)  SPECIAL WASTES. “Special wastes” include flammable waste; waste transported in a bulk tanker; liquid waste; sewage sludge; pollution control process waste; residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of chemical substances, commercial products or any other special wastes; contaminated soil, waste, residue, debris and articles from the cleanup of a site or facility formerly used for the generation, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation, or disposal of any other special wastes; dead animals; manure; waste water; explosive substances; and radioactive substances.

 

3-6-110 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
    The City Council of the City of San Leandro finds that the accumulation, preparation, storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of municipal solid waste, recyclables, and green waste from all properties in the City must be handled in a safe, sanitary, routine, and efficient manner so as to maximize the reduction, reuse, recycling, and composting of materials in accordance with state law; to maintain the good condition, cleanliness and safety of City rights-of-way; to prevent the harboring and breeding of rodents, insects, and other pests; to prevent the spread of diseases associated with unsanitary conditions; to reduce potential fire hazards; and to prevent unsightliness and other public nuisance which may result in the depreciation of property values and otherwise interfere with the quality of life within the City.

 

Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-012, 8/1/05 (Sections 3-6-100—3-6-110))

 

 

ARTICLE 2. DISCARDING OF SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND GREEN WASTE
3-6-200 REQUIRED USE OF SERVICE OFFERED BY THE CITY’S FRANCHISEE.
    (a)   Every person who owns or occupies or is in possession or control of any property in the City where solid waste, recyclables, and green waste are produced or accumulated shall discard such materials through the regular collection service of the City’s franchisee.

    (b)  The owner or occupant of any property shall start service within fifteen (15) days of occupancy of such property. If the owner or occupant does not initiate service within fifteen (15) days, the City or City’s franchisee may give the owner written notification that service is required. If the owner fails to initiate service within fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing of the written notification, then the City may require the franchisee to initiate and continue collection services for said property.

 

3-6-210 FEE FOR PROVISION OF SERVICE BY CITY’S FRANCHISEE.
    (a)   Every person who uses the collection services of the City’s franchisee shall pay a fee for the services, as established in a resolution adopted by the City Council or in the franchise agreement.

    (b)  The City’s franchisee shall bill customers directly for service.

    (c)   The City’s franchisee shall reconcile payments by customers against amounts billed to verify any delinquency in payment by customers. The franchisee shall provide two delinquency notices to customers but may not discontinue service to their properties. The franchisee shall make good faith efforts to collect on delinquent accounts. If the franchisee fails to collect on such accounts, the City may place liens on the property associated with the accounts and foreclose on the liens.

 

3-6-220 EXEMPTIONS FROM USE OF SERVICES PROVIDED BY CITY OR ITS FRANCHISEE.
    (a)   No person shall be required to use the collection services provided by the City’s franchisee if that person can establish any one of the following:

    (1)  That all such materials produced or accumulated at the property are disposed of by agreement with and through the use of the approved container of a person subscribing to the services provided by the City’s franchisee; or

    (2)  That all such materials are self-hauled to an authorized disposal or recycling facility, as provided for in Section 3-6-320.

    (b)  The following types of properties may not be exempt from the collection services provided by the City’s franchisee under any circumstances:

    (1)  Single-family residences that are occupied;

    (2)  Multi-family residences that are occupied; or

    (3)  Food establishments in operation.

    (4)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the property owner from establishing combined collection services for all tenants at a commercial and/or multi-family residential property.

    (c)   To obtain an exemption, the person must:

    (1)  Send a written exemption request to the City’s franchisee within fifteen (15) days of occupying the property or within fifteen (15) days of notification from the City or its franchisee that collection services are required; and

    (2)  Provide sufficient written documentation that they are disposing of all solid waste, recyclables, and green waste in a manner provided in Section 3-6-220(a). Sufficient documentation includes, but is not limited to, disposal facility receipts, recycling center receipts, written agreements to share services provided by the City’s franchisee, and written agreements from persons collecting and transporting materials at no charge as provided in Section 3-6-320(a).

    (d)  The City may revoke the exemption at the request of the City’s franchisee in the event that one of the following occurs:

    (1)  That the person is found to be in violation of Chapter 3-1 or any other applicable provisions of this Code; or

    (2)  That the property changes ownership and/or occupancy.

 

3-6-230 LIMITATIONS ON DISCARDING SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND GREEN WASTE.
    (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall discard solid waste, recyclables, and green waste by:

    (1)  Placing a container for such materials or allowing such a container to remain in any public place;

    (2)  Burying any such materials, except as part of home composting;

    (3)  Collecting, removing, disposing of, or hauling such materials without first obtaining a franchise or permit from the City;

    (4)  Burning any such materials;

    (5)  Hindering access of employees of the City or its franchisee to a container for such materials;

    (6)  Permitting any such material to be dumped or deposited on or in any street, sidewalk, gutter or storm drain, or in a manner that such material or runoff from it would end up in any storm drain, in accordance with Chapter 3-15 of this Code;

    (7)  Placing any hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, medical and infectious waste, or special waste, as defined herein, in any container for solid waste, recyclables, or green waste; or

    (8)  Placing any material originating from a private property in, on top of, or alongside the City’s public containers; provided, however, that pedestrians or other persons using the streets or public places shall be permitted to deposit in said containers miscellaneous small articles of waste materials carried by them.

    (b)  No person shall discard any solid waste, recyclables, or green waste except at a duly authorized disposal site or transfer station. The foregoing shall not, however, prevent the discarding of earth, rock, concrete, cement, gravel, sand, ashes, clay, loam, and other noncombustible inorganic refuse when used for purposes of fill as part of a construction project, if such material is not otherwise dangerous to health and safety, such that it violates Chapter 3-1 or any other applicable provision of this Code. Furthermore, such operations may not block or impede natural drainage channels, drain ditches, canals, or drainage outlets and may not result in pollution, fire hazards, or contamination of water.

    (c)   No person shall:

    (1)  Store or accumulate any putrescible waste, or permit the storage or accumulation of putrescible waste within or upon any property owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person’s possession or control for a period longer than seven (7) days; or

    (2)  Place any putrescible waste in or upon any property in the city other than the property where such waste is generated, except as provided for in Section 3-6-220(a)(1).

 

3-6-240 FREQUENCY OF REMOVAL.
    All putrescible waste produced and accumulated on any property, whether public or private, shall be removed at least once every seven (7) days or more often as required by the City’s franchisee or as provided for in Section 3-6-320.

 

3-6-250 USE OF APPROPRIATE CONTAINERS.
    (a)   Every person that owns, occupies, or is in possession or control of any property in the City where solid waste is produced or accumulated shall deposit such materials in one or more leak-proof containers of sufficient size and quantity to adequately service the property. In all events, discarded materials stored prior to collection and/or disposal shall be contained in a manner so as to discourage disturbance by, or harboring of, animals or pests; to prevent fire or other safety hazards; and to prevent odors or unsightliness amounting to a nuisance.

    (b)  Persons subscribing or required to subscribe to services provided by the City’s franchisee shall deposit solid waste, recyclables, and green waste in the respective containers designated by and available from the franchisee, locating such containers where the franchisee can easily access them, and not overloading such containers.

    (1)  Single-family and multi-family residential customers shall use containers provided free of charge by the City’s franchisee.

    (2)  Commercial customers shall use containers agreeable to or provided by the City’s franchisee;

    (3)  Both residential and commercial customers may elect to use a debris box container provided by the City’s franchisee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2000-022, 11/6/00 (Sections: 3-6-200—3-6-230); Ordinance No. 2005-012, 8/1/05 (Sections: 3-6-200—3-6-250))

 

ARTICLE 3. COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND GREEN WASTE
3-6-300 AWARD OF FRANCHISE OR CONTRACT.
    The City Council may, at its sole discretion and upon such terms as it may prescribe, award an exclusive franchise or contract to any qualified person to provide collection of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste for commercial and industrial establishments and residential properties in the City.

 

3-6-310 OBLIGATIONS OF FRANCHISEE OR CONTRACTOR.
    A person awarded an exclusive franchise or contract by the City for collection of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste shall provide, at a minimum, the following services to customers and the City.

    (a)   The person awarded an exclusive franchise or contract by the City shall provide all residential property in the City with regular collection of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste. The franchisee shall provide the owner, occupant, or manager of residential property with containers in which to discard such materials. If the owner or occupant of a single-family residence is physically unable to place discarded materials at the appropriate place for collection, the franchisee shall provide backyard service at no additional charge.

    (b)  The person awarded an exclusive franchise or contract by the City shall provide all commercial establishments in the City with regular collection of solid waste and recyclables. The containers that commercial establishments use for discarding such materials and the locations at which such establishments place the containers shall both be agreeable to the City’s franchisee or contractor.

    (c)   The person awarded an exclusive franchise or contract by the City shall provide collection services to debris boxes on an on-call basis. The franchisee or contractor shall respond to a call for debris box service by the end of the next business day.

    (d)  Upon request of a resident or business and for a special fee, the franchisee or contractor shall provide other services, including but not limited to, bulky waste collection, at times other than the regularly scheduled solid waste collection.

    (e)   Upon the request of City, the contractor or franchisee shall provide, at no cost, collection and disposal of solid waste and collection and recycling of recyclables at up to five (5) City-sponsored events each year. Such service shall include the provision and emptying of containers for and during the events in a manner that ensures the public will be able to use such containers. Such events may last more than one day.

    (f)   The franchisee may refuse to collect solid waste, recyclables, and green waste from and shall not be obligated to continue to provide service to any customer that, after a minimum of two (2) warnings, fails to set out the materials properly. The accumulation of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste on the property of such a customer may constitute an abatable nuisance under the San Leandro Community Preservation Ordinance.

 

3-6-320 NO UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person other than the City’s exclusive franchisee or contractor to collect solid waste, recyclables, or green waste, with the following exceptions:

    (1)  The owner, occupant, or manager of a residential property may collect and transport solid waste and green waste generated on the property to an authorized disposal facility. Owners, occupants, and managers of residential properties that self-haul such materials, as provided for in this section, may not contract with anyone other than the City’s franchisee for transport services.

    (2)  The owner, occupant, or manager of a residential property may sell or donate recyclable materials generated on the property to any party of the person’s choice, including collecting such materials and transporting them to a recycling center. For the purposes of this section, “donate” means to give without receiving any compensation or consideration of any nature, whether monetary or otherwise.

    (3)  A person holding a current and valid contractor’s license issued by the State of California may, as an incidental part of a construction project, remove construction and demolition debris from property upon which the person is performing work permitted under the provisions of Chapters 7-1 and 7-5 or upon which the person is performing work for the City or other public agency. For the purposes of this section, demolition and construction debris means waste generated by construction, remodeling, or demolition of structures; it does not include putrescible waste, garbage, or liquid waste.

    (4)  A landscaping or gardening contractor hired by the owner, occupant, or manager of a property may remove such materials from the property where that contractor is working, if the removal is an incidental part of the gardening, landscaping, tree trimming, cleaning, maintenance, construction, or other similar service such contractor is providing.

    (5)  A person may provide recyclables collection to commercial establishments, if the service is free and ninety percent (90%) of each load of recyclables is actually recycled.

    (6)  The owner or manager of a commercial or industrial establishment, or the employee of such a person, may collect and transport solid waste and green waste generated by the establishment to an authorized disposal facility. Owners and managers of commercial and industrial establishments that self-haul such materials, as provided for in this section, may not contract with anyone other than the City’s franchisee for transport services.

    (7)  The owner or manager of a commercial or industrial establishment, or the employee of such a person, may give recyclable materials generated by the establishment to a person described in subsection (a)(5) of this section and may collect such materials and transport them to a recycling center. Other than as provided for in this subsection, owners and managers of commercial and industrial establishments that self-haul such materials may not contract with anyone other than the City’s franchisee for transport services.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person not enumerated above to solicit or attempt to obtain from the owner, occupant, or manager of any property in the City permission to remove solid waste, recyclables, and green waste from such property.

 

3-6-330 PROHIBITION ON SCAVENGING.
    (a)   Upon placement of recyclable materials at a designated recycling collection location for collection by the City or its franchisee or contractor, recyclable materials shall become the property of the City’s franchisee or contractor.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized City employee or the City’s franchisee or contractor to take, remove, or otherwise appropriate recyclables that have been placed for recycling collection or the container in which such recyclables have been placed. Any and each such removal in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation enforceable as provided for in this Code.

    (c)   Nothing in this Article shall limit the right of an individual person, organization, or other entity to donate, sell, or otherwise discard recyclable materials, if the person or entity takes such action in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

    (d)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the City’s franchisee or contractor to bring a civil action against any person that violates this section. A conviction for a violation of this section shall be an infraction or misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1-12 of this Code.

 

3-6-340 NO UNAUTHORIZED CONTAINERS.
    (a)   Except as expressly authorized by this Chapter, no person other than the City or its franchisee or contractor may place a container within the City for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, or green waste, unless the person is the owner, operator, or manager of a residential property or commercial or industrial establishment and self-hauls such material, as provided for in Sections 3-6-320(a)(1) and (6).

    (b)  The City shall notify, in writing, any person that violates this section that the prompt and permanent removal of an unauthorized container from the place or premises is required. The City shall deliver such written notice by posting a copy of the notice prominently upon the container. If the container is identified with the name and telephone number of the enterprise servicing it, the City shall also endeavor to contact the enterprise by telephone. Failure to notify the owner telephonically shall not invalidate the notice. The City may impound or cause to be impounded any such container if the enterprise servicing it does not permanently remove it from the place or premises within the time set forth in the notice, which time shall be not less than twenty-four (24) hours after posting of the notice, nor less than six (6) business hours after telephonic notification, if any. For purposes of this section, “business hours” shall mean the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Any person that violates this section shall be liable to the City for all fines and charges levied in connection with the collection, transportation, storage, and handling of such container by the City. The bin, box, or container impounded by the City shall be retrieved by the owner or his or her representative immediately after all applicable fines and charges have been paid. The City Manager may delegate to the City’s franchisee or contractor the authority to serve notice of a violation of this section, to impound unauthorized containers, and to collect the fines and charges levied by the City.

    (c)   Upon posting of a written notice of violation upon an unauthorized container, the customer using the unauthorized container shall immediately cease placing solid waste and recyclable materials therein.

 

3-6-350 NO ENCROACHMENT PERMITS REQUIRED FOR CONTAINERS.
    Consistent with Section 5-1-105 of this Code, the City’s franchisee shall not be required to obtain an encroachment permit to place a container for solid waste, recyclables, or green waste in the public right-of-way. The City’s franchisee shall, nevertheless, be required to do all of the following:

    (a)   Remove any such container from the public right-of-way at no cost to the City when the City requires such removal;

    (b)  Comply with the City’s administrative guidelines regarding the placement and marking of all such containers; and

    (c)   Indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City from and against any and all damages to persons or property resulting from the placement of such containers in the public right-of-way.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-012, 8/1/05 (Sections 3-6-300—3-6-350))

CHAPTER 3-7 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS WASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-7-100 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
    This Chapter is adopted in order to supplement the provisions of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 which requires that each local jurisdiction in the state divert fifty percent (50%) of discarded materials from landfills by December 31, 2000, and aid in compliance with the Alameda County Waste Reduction and Recycling Act of 1990 (Measure D). Since construction and demolition debris has, in past years, constituted as much as sixteen percent (16%) of the materials deposited in Alameda County landfills, the City has identified such debris and waste as a significant target for reduction and recycling. The intent of this Chapter is to divert building materials from landfills in order to process and return them to the economic mainstream, thereby conserving natural resources and stimulating markets for recycled and salvaged materials. To that end, projects that are subject to the requirements of this Chapter must recycle one hundred percent (100%) of asphalt and concrete and recycle fifty percent (50%) of the remainder of the construction and demolition debris, as provided below.

 

3-7-110 DEFINITIONS.
    The following definitions shall govern the construction of this Chapter, unless context requires otherwise, or the term is more specifically defined within.

    (a)   ANNUAL DEBRIS RECYCLING CERTIFICATION APPLICATION. “Annual Debris Recycling Certification Application” means the completed Debris Recycling Certification Application Form approved by the City and submitted for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with the requirements of Section 3-7-230 of this Chapter.

    (b)  APPLICANT. “Applicant” shall mean any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, the State, and political subdivision and/or agency of the State, any community college district, industry, business, public or private corporation or any other entity that applies to the City for permits to undertake any construction, demolition, renovation or roofing project within the City that is subject to this Chapter.

    (c)   CERTIFIED APPLICANT. “Certified applicant” means an applicant who has demonstrated compliance with the requirements of Section 3-7-230 of this Chapter.

    (d)  CONSTRUCTION. “Construction” means the building of any structure or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, improvements to or remodeling or repair of an existing facility or structure.

    (e)   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS, C&D DEBRIS, CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. “Construction and Demolition debris,” “C&D debris” and “construction debris” mean used or discarded materials removed from the premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, improvement, or demolition operations on any pavement, street, driveway, house, building, or other structure or improvement regardless of the nature of such structure or improvement.

    (f)   CONVERSION RATE. “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized Conversion Rate Table approved by the City, pursuant to this Chapter, for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials in a Debris Recycling Statement.

    (g)  COVERED PROJECT. “Covered project” means a project that is subject to the requirements of this Chapter, pursuant to Section 3-7-200.

    (h)  DEBRIS RECYCLING STATEMENT. “Debris Recycling Statement” or “DRS” means the completed DRS form approved by the City and submitted by the applicant for the purpose of assessing compliance with this Chapter.

    (i)   DEBRIS RECYCLING STATEMENT COMPLIANCE OFFICER. “Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer” means the Manager of Environmental Services or his/her designee. The Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer shall be the individual responsible for implementing this Chapter.

    (j)   DEMOLITION. “Demolition” means the destroying, razing, tearing down or wrecking of any pavement, street, driveway, house, building, or other structure or improvement regardless of the nature of such structure or improvement whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

    (k)  DIVERT. “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or incineration facility. Methods of diverting materials from landfills shall include reuse, recycling, and salvage.

    (1)  DIVERSION ATTAINMENT. “Diversion attainment” means the diversion of one hundred percent (100%) of the asphalt, concrete and similar material, and at least fifty percent (50%) by weight, of the total of all other C&D debris generated by a covered project.

    (m) PROJECT. “Project” means any activity which requires an application for a building permit, demolition permit, encroachment permit or other similar permit from the City of San Leandro.

    (n)  RECYCLING. “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and/or reconstituting of materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

    (p)  RENOVATION. “Renovation” means any change, addition or modification in an existing structure or improvement.

    (q)  REUSE. “Reuse” means further or repeated use of Construction or Demolition debris in the same or different form.

    (r)   SALVAGE. “Salvage” means the controlled removal of C&D debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purposes of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

    (s)   SOURCE SEPARATED. “Source separated” means recyclables that have been segregated from solid waste, by or for the generator, on the premises where they were generated, in order to manage the recyclables separately from the solid waste.

    (t)   TARGETED MATERIALS. “Targeted materials” means the C&D debris listed pursuant to Section 3-7-440.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-035, 12/16/02 (Sections 3-7-100—3-7-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
3-7-200 THRESHOLDS FOR COVERED PROJECTS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all projects within the City involving construction, demolition or renovation that have a project valuation in excess of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00). For the purposes of this section, the value of projects shall be as determined by the City’s Building Official or designee in connection with permit issuance. The valuation threshold established by this section shall be adjusted every five (5) years, beginning in the year 2008, to reflect an increase or decrease in the cost of construction due to inflation or deflation, by comparing the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (twenty (20) city average) for the five (5) year anniversary month over the same Construction Cost Index for the same month of the fifth year prior to the anniversary month.

 

3-7-210 NON-COVERED PROJECTS.
    Applicants for projects that do not meet the valuation threshold requirement set forth in Section 3-7-200 shall be encouraged to meet the diversion attainment standards set forth in this Chapter.

 

3-7-220 COMPLIANCE AS A CONDITION OF APPROVAL.
    Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be included as a condition of approval on all building and/or demolition permits issued for covered projects.

 

3-7-230 CERTIFICATION PROCESS AND COMPLIANCE AUDITS.
    (a)   Applicants who have completed two (2) or more covered projects within the past twelve (12) months are eligible to apply to the City for certification under the terms of this section. Such application shall be on a form approved by the City, and may be supplemented by any other statements, documents, or other materials that will assist the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer in determining the applicant’s past compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

    (b)  Applicants certified under the terms of this section must comply with all the requirements of this Chapter; however, certified applicants are not required to complete a Debris Recycling Statement on a project-by-project basis. certified applicants are required to file an Annual Debris Recycling Certification Application at the time of certification, and annually thereafter at the time such certification is renewed.

    (c)   In connection with the application for certification, and as a condition to approval thereof, applicant shall execute a form of written consent acknowledging the City’s right and authorizing the City to conduct audits of applicant’s business records to determine continuing compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Such audits will consist of a review of business records and other matters to determine that diversion is occurring at a rate consistent with the intent of this Chapter. Such audits may be conducted in connection with determining eligibility for certification under this section, in connection with annual re-certification under this section, and at other times as may be required in the judgment of the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer to assure continuing compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. All audits will take place either on the premises where the applicant maintains business records or at City offices, during regular business hours, and upon reasonable notice to the applicant.

 

3-7-240 RESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE SUBDIVISIONS.
    Where a covered project involves construction of a new residential or mixed-use subdivision requiring the issuance of five (5) or more building permits, an applicant shall only be required to file a single Debris Recycling Statement with respect to such covered project.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-035, 12/16/02 (Sections 3-7-200—3-7-240))

 

ARTICLE 3. DEBRIS RECYCLING STATEMENTS
3-7-300 SUBMISSION OF DEBRIS RECYCLING STATEMENT.
    (a)   Applicants other than certified applicants for permits involving covered projects shall complete and submit a Debris Recycling Statement (DRS) on a form approved by the City. The City shall provide, as part of the permit application package, a DRS form to the applicant. The DRS form completed by an applicant shall include and indicate all of the following:

    (1)  The estimated volume or weight of the C&D debris, by type of material generated;

    (2)  The estimated volume or weight of materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling;

    (3)  The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to salvage, collect and/or receive diverted material;

    (4)  The estimated volume or weight of materials that will be deposited in a landfill.

    (5)  Any other information requested, and deemed necessary for determining compliance with this Chapter, by the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer.

    (b)  For the purposes of this section, the applicant shall use standardized conversion rates, approved by the City, to estimate the volume and weight of materials identified in the DRS.

 

3-7-310 REVIEW OF DEBRIS RECYCLING STATEMENT.
    (a)   Timeframe for Review: The Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer will review the DRS and advise the applicant within five (5) working days of receipt of the DRS of his/her decision regarding approval or non-approval.

    (b)  Approval of Debris Recycling Statement:

    (1)  Prior to issuance of a building permit for a covered project, an applicant other than a certified applicant shall submit a DRS for such project. A DRS shall only be approved if the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer determines that the following conditions have been met:

    (i)   The DRS provides all of the information required by this Chapter; and

    (ii)  The DRS indicates that the applicant will divert one hundred percent (100%) of the asphalt, concrete and other similar material, and at least fifty percent (50%) by weight, of all other C&D debris generated by the project; or

    (iii) The DRS indicates that the applicant will divert one hundred percent (100%) of the asphalt, concrete, and similar materials, and demonstrates good cause as to why at least fifty percent (50%) by weight of the remainder of the C&D debris generated by the project will not be so diverted; or

    (iv) The DRS indicates that the project will generate a negligible amount of C&D debris.

    (2)  If the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer determines that the DRS has met condition (i) and either condition (ii), (iii), or (iv) of the preceding subsection, the DRS shall be marked “Approved”. A copy of the approved DRS shall be returned to the applicant.

    (c)   Non-Approval of Debris Recycling Statement:

    (1)  If the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer determines that the applicant has failed to comply with subsection (b)(1)(i), or either of subsections (b)(l)(ii), (b)(1)(iii) or (b)(1)(iv), the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer shall either return the DRS to the applicant requesting complete documentation of the reasons that the requirements of this Chapter cannot be met, or shall return the DRS to the applicant marked “Denied.” If the DRS is returned marked “Denied,” it shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons for the denial.

    (2)  If the DRS is denied, the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer may enforce any violation of this Chapter as provided in Section 3-7-600.

    (d)  Emergency Demolition: No DRS is required where an authorized official of the City has made a determination that immediate demolition is required to protect the public health or safety from imminent peril.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-035, 12/16/02 (Sections 3-7-300—3-7-310))

 

ARTICLE 4. COMPLIANCE
3-7-400 WEIGHING OF C&D DEBRIS.
    Applicant shall make every reasonable effort to assure that all C&D debris diverted and/or deposited in a landfill are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent possible, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. A volumetric measurement shall be used for all C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations. Volumetric measurements shall be converted to weight by using the conversion rates.

 

3-7-410 DETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE.
    (a)   Certified Applicants: Certified applicants must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Chapter in connection with their initial application for certification, and thereafter in connection with their annual recertification. Compliance will be determined based on information contained in the Annual Debris Recycling Certification Application, through audits of weight tags and recycling and/or disposal facility receipts, and other business records as necessary. Certified applicants are required to keep such recycling and disposal records for a period of three (3) years. The Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer may conduct audits as needed, in addition to the annual audit in connection with recertification, to assure compliance with this Chapter.

    (b)  Non-certified Applicants: Upon completion of any covered project, an applicant other than a certified applicant shall submit weight tags generated by such covered project to the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer. The Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer shall review such weight tags to determine whether the applicant has achieved diversion attainment. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements of this Chapter and the following guidelines:

    (1)  The applicant shall be found to have achieved diversion attainment if (1) one hundred percent (100%) of the asphalt, concrete and similar material generated by the project has been diverted and appropriate documentation thereof as required by this Chapter has been provided to the City; and (2) at least fifty percent (50%), by weight, of the remainder of the C&D debris generated by the project has been diverted and appropriate documentation thereof as required by this Chapter has been provided to the City.

    (2)  When the applicant has not achieved diversion attainment for a covered project, the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer shall determine if such applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. In making this determination, consideration may be given to any relevant information provided by the applicant, including but not limited to information regarding the availability of markets for the C&D debris that was not diverted, the size and nature of the project, and the documented efforts of applicant to divert C&D debris. If the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the C&D diversion and documentation provisions herein above set forth, further compliance with this Chapter in respect to such project shall be excused.

    (3)  Applicant shall be in a “Non-attainment” status if it is determined that (1) one hundred percent (100%) of the asphalt, concrete, and similar material generated by the project was not diverted; (2) that fifty percent (50%) of the remainder of the C&D debris was not diverted; (3) the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by this Chapter; and (4) that a good faith effort was not made.

 

3-7-420 RIGHT TO MONITOR AND INSPECT.
    (a)   During regular business hours and upon reasonable notice of not less than twenty-four (24) hours, the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer may inspect any covered project to determine levels of actual diversion activities and to validate the information contained in the DRS or in other documents or representations provided by the applicant. If consent to such inspection is not granted by the applicant, or if the applicant or other person in control of the project site cannot be located after reasonable efforts are made, the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer shall have recourse through every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

    (b)  Notwithstanding the above, the Debris Recycling Statement Compliance Officer may inspect any covered project with less than twenty-four (24) hours notice with the consent of the applicant or the other person on the project site responsible for the project in the absence of the applicant.

    (c)   Upon request by the City, applicant shall provide as soon as practicable and no later than five (5) working days, documentation, papers, and records relating to the disposal of C&D debris for a covered project.

 

3-7-430 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION.
    Applicants shall retain receipts and weight tags for the quantities of materials reused, salvaged, recycled, and deposited in a landfill in connection with a covered project for a period of three (3) years following the final inspection and issuance of a temporary or final certificate of occupancy. Applicant shall make such records available to the City as soon as practicable upon request.

 

3-7-440 TARGETED MATERIALS.
    In furtherance of the goals established by this Chapter, the Manager of Environmental Services, or his/her designee, shall establish a list of materials that could potentially be reused, recycled or salvaged, and may, from time to time, amend the list based upon local markets and conditions, taking into consideration the economic feasibility of compliance, and the availability of local recycling facilities.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-035, 12/16/02 (Sections 3-7-400—3-7-440))

 

ARTICLE 5. APPEALS
3-7-500 APPEALS.
    Any applicant affected by any decision, action, or determination made by the Debris Recycling Statement Officer who is interpreting or implementing the provisions of this Chapter may file with the City Manager a written appeal within ten (10) days of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the applicants’ appeal. The City Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer who shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days from the date of the filing. The Hearing Officer shall make a ruling on appeal within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing. The Hearing Officer’s determination shall be final.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-035, 12/16/02 (Section 3-7-500))

 

ARTICLE 6. ENFORCEMENT
3-7-600 ENFORCEMENT.
    Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in the following manner: 1) Pursuant to Chapter 1-12 of this Code; 2) by a stop work order issued by the

Building Official where work on the project has already commenced; or 3) in any other manner provided by law or equity. Violations may also result in revocation of applicant’s business license pursuant to Section 2-2-440 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-035, 12/16/02 (Section 3-7-600))

CHAPTER 3-8 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE 1. PERMITS FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
3-8-100 PERMIT.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a “restaurant,” “itinerant restaurant,” “vehicle,” “retail food production and marketing establishment” or “bakery” (hereinafter collectively referred to as “food establishments”); as those terms are respectively defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 28552, 28523, 28524, 28802 and 28190 in the City of San Leandro unless he or she has a permit issued by the Alameda County Health Officer. A permit shall be issued if the applicant complies with the applicable provisions of State law and local ordinances.

 

3-8-105 POSTING.
    The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the food establishment.

 

3-8-110 GOOD CAUSE.
    Any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may be suspended or revoked for good cause by the County Health Officer. “Good Cause” means a violation of any of the applicable provisions of State law or local ordinances.

 

3-8-115 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
    When the County Health Officer suspects a violation of the applicable provisions of State law or local ordinance has occurred he or she shall issue and serve upon the permittee a notice setting forth in clear and concise language the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged and informing the permittee of his or her right to a hearing.

 

3-8-120 HEARING.
    At any time within the fifteen (15) day period after service of such notice, the permittee may request a hearing before the County Health Officer to show cause why his or her permit should not be suspended or revoked. A failure to request a hearing within such fifteen (15) day period shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. The decision of the County Health Officer shall be final.

 

3-8-125 IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD.
    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Article, whenever the County Health Officer finds insanitary or other conditions in a food establishment which, in his or her judgment, constitute an imminent and substantial hazard to the public health, he or she may, without prior notice, issue a written notification to the permittee citing such insanitary or other conditions and specifying the corrective action to be taken, and order all food service operations to be immediately discontinued. Any permittee to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the County Health Officer, shall be afforded a hearing before the County Health Officer within five (5) days.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. BAN ON POLYSTYRENE FOAM FOOD SERVICE WARE

 

3-8-200 TITLE.
    This Article shall be known as the “City of San Leandro Ban on Polystyrene Foam Food Service Ware” and may be so cited.

 

3-8-205 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to protect the City’s natural environment, its economy, and the health of its residents and visitors by substituting polystyrene foam food service ware with compostable or recyclable food service ware at all food vendors, City departments, and City facilities served by contractors, and at City-sponsored events.

 

3-8-210 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Article the following definitions shall govern unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

    (a)   “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  “City department” means any governmental subdivision of the City.

    (c)   “City facility” means any premises or lands owned or operated by the City.

    (d)  “City-sponsored event” means any activity that is organized by the City and any private activity whose organizers voluntarily request any endorsement or recognition from the City that is unrelated to any requirements for such an event under applicable law.

    (e)   “Compostable” means all materials in the product or package will break down into, or otherwise become a part of, usable compost (e.g., soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a safe and timely manner consistent with the composting facility used by the City’s franchisee or by the Oro Loma Sanitary District’s franchisee for integrated waste management.

    (f)   “Contractor” means any individual, group, or organization that has a contract with the City for work or improvement to be performed, for a franchisee, concession, for grant monies, goods and services, or supplies to be donated or to be purchased at City expense.

    (g)  “Food Vendor” means any establishment located within the City of San Leandro, or any establishment which provides prepared food or beverages within the City for public consumption on or off its premises and includes, but is not limited to, any store, shop, sales outlet, restaurant, bar, pub, coffee shop, cafeteria, caterer, convenience store, liquor store, grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, mobile food preparation truck or vehicle, roadside stand, or any other person who provides prepared food; and any individual, group, or organization which regularly provides food as part of its services.

    (h)  “Food service ware” means single-use disposable products used in the restaurant and food service industry for serving or transporting prepared food and includes, but is not limited to, plates, cups, bowls, trays, and hinged or lidded containers. This definition does not include single-use straws, drink lids or utensils.

    (i)   “In association with” means any combination of food service ware with any form of prepared food for the purposes of containment, consumption, or display to promote consumption.

    (j)   “Prepared food” means any food or beverage prepared for consumption on or off a premises or lands using any cooking or food preparation technique, or any raw foods provided for consumption without requiring further food preparation. Prepared food does not include uncooked meat, fish, poultry, or eggs unless provided for consumption without further food preparation.

    (k)  “Person” means an individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, non-profit, governmental entity, partnership, or association.

    (l) “Polystyrene foam” means the thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing the styrene monomer, which may be marked with resin symbol #6, processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). Polystyrene foam is generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays and egg cartons.

    (m) “Recyclable” means any material that is accepted by the City recycling program, including, but not limited to, paper, glass, metal, cardboard, and plastic that can be recycled, salvaged, processed, or marketed by any means other than landfilling or burning whether as fuel or otherwise, so that they are returned to use by society. For the purposes of this article, recyclable plastic does not include polystyrene foam labeled with resin symbol #6.

 

3-8-215 POLYSTYRENE FOAM FOOD SERVICE WARE PROHIBITED.
    (a)   The following are prohibited from using polystyrene foam food service ware in association with prepared food:

    (1)  Food vendors;

    (2)  City departments; and

    (3)  Contractors that serve any City facility.

    (b)  Food vendors, City departments, and contractors that serve any City facility are prohibited from using polystyrene foam food service ware in association with prepared food at any City-sponsored event.

 

3-8-220 REQUIRED USE OF COMPOSTABLE OR RECYCLABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE.
    (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-8-225, the following are required to use compostable or recyclable food service ware in association with prepared food:

    (1)  Food vendors;

    (2)  City departments; and

    (3)  Contractors that serve any City facility.

    (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3-8-225, food vendors, City departments, and contractors that serve any City facility are required to use compostable or recyclable food service ware in association with prepared food at any City-sponsored events.

 

3-8-225 EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   Food vendors that are currently existing or are established in the City by the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article will be exempted from the provisions of this Article prohibiting the use of polystyrene foam food service ware for a period of time to be determined by the City Manager on a case-by-case basis for undue hardship. Undue hardship includes, but is not limited to, situations unique to the food vendor not generally applicable to other persons in similar circumstances.

    (b)  Prepared foods prepared and packaged outside of the City of San Leandro and prepared foods prepared and packaged in the City of San Leandro for use outside of the City of San Leandro are excluded from the provisions of this Article. Purveyors of food prepared and packaged outside the City of San Leandro are encouraged to follow these provisions in accordance with the City’s stated policy goal to eliminate the use of polystyrene foam food service ware in all possible applications.

    (c)   Retailers, wholesalers and suppliers of polystyrene foam food service ware within the City of San Leandro are excluded from the provisions of this Article, but are encouraged to promote the sale, purchase, and use of compostable and recyclable food service ware options in San Leandro in accordance with the City’s stated policy goal to eliminate the use of polystyrene foam food service ware in all possible applications.

    (d)  Emergency supplies or services procurement: Food vendors, City departments, City facilities, and contractors shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article, in a situation deemed by the City Manager to be an emergency for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety.

 

3-8-230 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
    (a)   The Public Works Services Director, or the Director’s designee, shall have the primary responsibility for enforcement of this Article. If the Director or designee determines that a violation of this Article has occurred, he or she shall issue a written warning notice to the food vendor that a violation has occurred. Subsequent violations of the Article by a food vendor shall be subject to the enforcement and penalties set forth below.

    (b)  Any violation of this Article that occurs after the issuance of a written warning to a food vendor is subject to an administrative citation pursuant to Article 1-12-400 et seq., of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    (c)   The San Leandro City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this Article.

 

3-8-240 EFFECTIVE DATE.
    This Article shall take effect on November 1, 2012.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2011-011, 9/19/11 (Sections 3-8-200—3-8-240))

CHAPTER 3-9 AIRCRAFT
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-9-100 TAKE OFF/LANDING PROHIBITIONS.
    No person shall take off or land any aircraft, including helicopters and lighter-than-air craft within the corporate limits of the City of San Leandro at any site other than an established airport, aircraft landing field, heliport, or helistop designated as such by the City Council of the City of San Leandro, except as hereinafter provided. The words “take off and land” shall include hovering and attachment of lifting devices for purpose of aerial movement of any materials, structures or objects. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to emergency landings necessary for the protection of human life.

 

3-9-105 INFREQUENT HELICOPTER LANDINGS.
    Helicopters may land and take off in any district provided that a permit therefor has first been obtained from the City Manager and when such landings or take-offs are consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. The City Manager may grant such a permit provided that:

    (a)   The applicant provides evidence that the proposed activity complies with all applicable Federal and State regulations;

    (b)  The proposed activity is in compliance with all local building, fire and health codes;

    (c)   Fire protection facilities are provided satisfactory to the San Leandro Fire Department;

    (d)  Public access to the area is restricted to prohibit the entrance of unauthorized persons;

    (e)   Operation of the facilities will not be detrimental to or interfere with the enjoyment of surrounding properties

    The provisions of this section should not be construed as permitting the establishment of an airport, aircraft landing field, heliport or helistop within the meaning of Section 3-9-100.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 71-46, 12/13/71; Ordinance No. 82-029, 5/3/82)

CHAPTER 3-10 TRAILER PARKS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-10-100 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purposes of this Chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be construed, as herein set out, unless it shall be apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended.

    (a)   APPROVED. “Approved” when used in connection with any material, appliance, or construction, means meeting the requirements and approval of the building, sanitary, electric, and zoning laws of the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  BUILDING. “Building” includes public toilets, public baths, and laundry rooms or other structures and a compartment containing a toilet or bath, or both, constructed for the exclusive use of an occupant of a camp site.

    (c)   CAMP SITE. “Camp site” means any portion of a trailer park designed for the use or occupancy of one trailer coach.

    (d)  NUISANCE. In a trailer park, “nuisance” includes any of the following:

    (1)  Any public nuisance so defined by law.

    (2)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health.

    (3)  The overcrowding of any trailer with occupants.

    (4)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination of any room.

    (5)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.

    (6)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome, or detrimental to the health of human beings.

    (7)  Inadequate garbage and refuse disposal.

    (e)   TRAILER COACH. “Trailer coach” means any camp car, trailer, or other vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares and designed or used for human habitation.

    (f)   TRAILER PARK. “Trailer park” means any area or tract of land where space is rented or held out for rent to the owners or users of one or more trailer coaches or to tent campers furnishing their own camping equipment or where tree camping is permitted owners or users of trailer coaches or tent camping equipment for the purpose of securing their trade, or where space is used for the sleeping of human beings either with or without compensation outside of structure permanently affixed to the land (except such use when incidental to the occupancy of a single or multiple family residence).

 

3-10-105 CITY MANAGER.
    The City Manager or agents of his or her office may:

    (a)   Enter public or private property to determine whether there exists a trailer park to which this Chapter applies.

    (b)  Enter and inspect all trailer parks wherever situated in the City of San Leandro and inspect all accommodations, equipment, or paraphernalia used in connection therewith, including the right to examine any registers of occupants maintained therein in order to secure the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.

 

3-10-110 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
    Any trailer park within the City of San Leandro maintained in violation of the Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12. Any nuisance as defined by this Chapter, or any violations of this Code or any other applicable local, State, or Federal law or regulation found to exist in any such trailer park, may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12.

 

3-10-115 PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
    In addition to the penalties provided for in Section 3-10-110 any permit for the operation of a trailer park issued pursuant to Section 3-10-215 may be suspended and revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter. Notice of hearing or suspension or revocation of permit shall be served by posting at least one copy in a conspicuous place on the premises and by sending another copy by mail, postage prepaid to the person to whom the permit was issued or the manager of the trailer park.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 3-10-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMITS AND FEES
3-10-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following unless he or she first makes application in writing to the City of San Leandro and obtains a permit therefor:

    (a)   Construct a trailer park.

    (b)  Construct additional buildings or reconstruct or move existing buildings in an existing trailer park.

    (c)   Operate, or rent, lease, sublease, let, or hire out for occupancy any space in a trailer park that has been constructed, reconstructed, or altered, or moved without having obtained a permit as required herein.

    (d)  Occupy for purposes of sleeping or habitation a trailer park or any portion thereof unless such trailer park is operating under a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter.

 

3-10-205 FORM OF APPLICATION—NEW TRAILER PARK.
    In the case of a new trailer park the application shall be accompanied by:

    (a)   A description of the grounds upon which the trailer park is to be constructed.

    (b)  Five (5) sets of plans, drawn to scale, of the proposed development showing the location of all buildings, electrical facilities, driveways, toilet facilities, showers, laundry facilities, slop sinks, hydrants, and other improvements including the location of water and sewer lines.

    (c)   A description of the water supply, ground drainage, and method of sewage disposal.

 

3-10-210 FORM OF APPLICATION—EXISTING TRAILER PARK.
    existing trailer park the application shall be accompanied by:

    (a)   A description of the grounds upon which buildings are to be moved, or which is to be used for camping purposes.

    (b)  Five (5) sets of plans and specifications of the proposed addition, reconstruction, or movement.

    (c)   A description of the water supply, ground drainage, and method of sewage disposal.

 

3-10-215 INSPECTION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
    Within ten (10) days after the application, description, plans, and specifications, and required fee, if any, are filed and paid, an inspector of the City of San Leandro shall inspect the grounds upon which the applicant proposes to do the work for which he or she seeks a permit. The City shall issue a written permit to the applicant if, in its opinion:

    (a)   The grounds are satisfactory for the work proposed.

    (b)  The descriptions and plans and specifications filed indicate that the work proposed will meet the requirements of this Chapter.

 

3-10-220 NOTICE OF CHANGE IN NAME.
    The City shall be notified by the owner or operator of any trailer park of any change in the name of or the ownership or possession thereof. Said notice shall be in written form and shall be furnished within thirty (30) days after any change in the name or transfer of ownership.

 

3-10-225 POSTING OF PERMITS.
    Permits for construction and operation shall be posted in a conspicuous place.

 

3-10-230 EXPIRATION OF PERMITS/EXTENSIONS.
    All permits as required in this Chapter for construction or reconstruction of a trailer park shall automatically expire within six (6) months from the date of the issuance thereof in those cases where the construction or reconstruction has not been completed within said period; provided, however, that the City of San Leandro may extend the expiration date of said permit for a reasonable time.

 

3-10-235 PERMIT FEE.
    A permit fee of $1.00 per camp site shall be charged before any such permit shall be issued, and a renewal fee shall be paid each year during the existence of such permit and in the said amount of $1.00 per camp site maintained within the trailer park.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. WATER CLOSET, BATHING AND PLUMBING FACILITIES
3-10-300 FACILITIES.
    There shall be not less than one water closet in a separate compartment for each sex for the first five (5) camp sites or fractional part thereof, not provided with a private water closet. There shall be one additional water closet for each sex in a separate compartment for every five (5) additional camp sites or fractional part thereof.

    (a)   All toilet facilities shall be not farther than two hundred (200) feet from each camp site it is designed to serve. Each toilet shall be for the exclusive use of occupants of the camp sites in the trailer park.

    (b)  The public toilets shall be maintained readily accessible to all the tenants at all times.

    (c)   In every trailer park water closets for men shall be distinctly marked: “For Men”; and water closets for women shall be distinctly marked: “For Women”. In addition, the location of water closets shall be plainly indicated by signs.

    (d)  The floor of every water closet compartment shall be constructed and shall be maintained in a waterproof condition by the use of cement, concrete, or other approved waterproof material. The waterproof material shall be applied upward on the interior walls of the water closet compartments to a height of not less than twelve (12) inches above the floor with cove base.

    (e)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or permit the use of any toilet in any trailer coach located or camped within a trailer park, unless such toilet meets the requirements of the Health Officer as set forth in rules and regulations of the said Department for such use.

 

3-10-305 BATHING FACILITIES.
    In every trailer park, showers, baths or other bathing facilities with hot and cold running water shall be installed in separate compartments for each sex for every five (5) or fractional part of five (5), camp sites. Every compartment shall be provided with a self-closing door or otherwise equipped with a waterproofed draw curtain. All showers, baths or other bathing facilities provided herein shall be not farther than one hundred (100) feet from each camp site it is designed to serve.

 

3-10-310 PROVISIONS—WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT.
    Every water closet compartment or compartments containing bathing facilities shall be:

    (a)   Kept clean.

    (b)  Kept free from obnoxious odors, flies, mosquitoes, or other insects.

    (c)   Provided with one or more windows having an aggregate area of not less than six (6) square feet. However, if the room contains more than one water closet, bath, or urinal, the total window area shall be equivalent to three (3) square feet for each water closet, bath or urinal, but need not exceed one-fourth (1/4) of the superficial floor area of the room.

    (d)  All openings to the outside, doors, and windows, shall be screened with sixteen (16) mesh screening. Screen doors shall be self-closing and outward swinging.

    (e)   The floor of every shower bath compartment shall be constructed and shall be maintained in a waterproof condition by the use of cement, concrete, or other approved waterproof material with cove base. The waterproof material shall be applied upward on the interior walls of the compartment to a height of not less than six (6) feet above the floor.

 

3-10-315 LAUNDRY.
    There shall be constructed in every trailer park a laundry compartment with not less than two (2) laundry trays, within one hundred (100) feet of any trailer space the occupants of which use such compartments.

    (a)   The floors of laundry compartments and at least twelve (12) inches on the walls from the ground shall be constructed of approved waterproof masonry composition with cove base.

    (b)  Each laundry compartment shall have window area’ equal to at least one-eight (1/8) of the floor area, and in no case shall it be less than nine (9) square feet.

    (c)   In every trailer park there shall be set aside a space convenient to the laundry facilities for the occupants or the camp sites to dry clothes.

 

3-10-320 SLOP SINK.
    There shall be installed in every trailer park one or more slop sinks, which shall be located at or in the service buildings.

 

3-10-325 LAVATORIES.
    Lavatories shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one lavatory for every two (2) toilets for each sex.

 

3-10-330 PURE WATER.
    There shall be in every trailer park an adequate supply of pure water for all the requirements of the park. The water shall be obtainable from faucets installed within one hundred (100) feet of each part of the park.

 

3-10-335 DIPPING VESSELS.
    No dipping vessels or cups for common use are permissible in any trailer park.

 

3-10-340 DRINKING FOUNTAINS.
    Drinking fountains shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be of a type approved by the Health Department.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. LIQUID PETROLEUM GASES
3-10-400 LIQUID PETROLEUM GASES.
    All appliances, containers, shut-off valves, pipe and fittings, and the location of all containers for liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the Industrial Accident Commission of the State of California.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 5. CAMP SITES
3-10-500 CAMP SITES.
    Each camp site in a trailer park shall be not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in area. The corners of said area shall be clearly and distinctly marked.

 

3-10-505 TEMPORARY OR OVER-NIGHT CAMP SITES.
    So-called “temporary” or “over-night” camp site shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter; such camp sites shall be included into the total number of camp sites for which the trailer park is licensed.

 

3-10-510 TRAILERS.
    (a)   No trailer shall be parked and occupied in a trailer park except in a properly designated camp site, and no camp site shall be used for sleeping except in a trailer or other similar enclosure.

    (b)  No trailer coach shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from any building or another trailer coach; provided, however, that this does not apply to a compartment containing solely a private toilet or bath, or both, constructed for the exclusive use of an occupant of a camp site, designed for the occupancy of one trailer coach, nor to buildings or trailer coaches which are not located within the same trailer park.

    (c)   Each trailer coach and each building shall be located not closer than five (5) feet from a lot line nor within fifteen (15) feet of a public street.

 

3-10-515 DRIVEWAYS.
    Each camp site shall front upon a driveway of not less than twenty (20) feet in width. All driveways shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public thoroughfare.

 

3-10-520 FENCES.
    All trailer parks shall be bordered by an ornamental fence or closely grown hedge as follows:

    (a)   On all front yard lines, as a front yard is defined in the Chapter hereof on Zoning.

    (b)  Such a fence six (6) feet high on all other boundary lines.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 6. REFUSE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
3-10-600 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH CONTAINERS.
    Garbage and rubbish containers, so marked, constructed of water-tight cleanable and washable material with tight-fitting lids, and of thirty (30) gallon capacity shall be provided in the ratio of one garbage container and one rubbish container for every five (5) camp sites.

 

3-10-605 REFUSE ACCUMULATED.
    All refuse accumulated in a trailer park shall be removed from the premises as often as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions. All refuse so removed shall be disposed of by the collector at an approved disposal site.

 

3-10-610 DISPOSAL.
    No refuse of any type shall be incinerated or otherwise disposed of on the premises of a trailer park.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 7. MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION
3-10-700 MAINTENANCE.
    The area or tract of land upon which an auto and trailer camp is maintained shall be:

    (a)   Well drained and graded.

    (b)  Kept free from dust.

    (c)   Kept clean and free from the accumulation of refuse, garbage, rubbish, or debris.

    (d)  The space directly beneath each trailer coach shall be kept clean and free from refuse, rubbish, or other impediments.

 

3-10-705 WASTE WATER.
    It shall be unlawful to permit any waste water or material from sinks or other plumbing fixtures in a trailer coach to be deposited upon the surface of the ground, and all such fixtures, when in use must be connected to a sewer system.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 8. SAFETY PROVISIONS
3-10-800 ELECTRICAL OUTLETS.
    Electrical outlets shall be provided for each trailer site and the installation shall be in accordance with all State and local ordinances. No electrical extension cord shall lie on the ground or be suspended less than seven (7) feet above open areas. Extension cords shall be heavy-duty types, rubber-covered cable.

 

3-10-805 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
    Fire extinguishers approved and checked every six (6) months by the Fire Chief shall be provided within one hundred (100) feet of each trailer site. In lieu of fire extinguishers, two hundred (200) feet of one and one-half (1-1/2) inch hose stored in a cabinet close to a fire hydrant on the premises may be accepted if approved by the Fire Chief.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
3-10-900 OPERATION OF A TRAILER PARK.
    Every person who owns or operates a trailer park shall keep a register in which shall be entered:

    (a)   The name and address of each guest who is the owner or operator of an automobile, and the name and address of each member of his or her party, for which accommodations are afforded or for which space is rented in a trailer park;

    (b)  The make, type, and license number of the automobile, and trailer, if any, and the state in which such vehicle or vehicles is or are registered and the year of registration.

 

3-10-905 ARTIFICIAL LIGHT.
    In every trailer park there shall be installed and kept burning from sunset to sunrise sufficient artificial light to adequately illuminate every building containing public toilets and public showers, and the area or tract of land in the trailer park.

 

3-10-910 ANIMALS.
    No animals of any kind shall be permitted to run or roam at large in any trailer park.

 

3-10-915 CARETAKER.
    It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain, or cause or permit to be operated or maintained, any trailer park, unless there is a caretaker on the premises at all times. The caretaker shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter governing the operation and maintenance of trailer parks.

 

3-10-920 OCCUPANCY RESTRICTIONS.
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a trailer park to use or cause, or permit to be used for occupancy:

    (a)   Any trailer coach from which any tire or wheel has been removed therefrom except for the purpose of making temporary repairs.

    (b)  Any trailer coach to which are attached any rigid water, gas, or sewer pipes; provided, however, that metal tubing not to exceed one-half (1/2) inch inside diameter may be used for water and gas.

    (c)   Any trailer coach which is permanently attached with under pinning or foundation to the ground.

    (d)  Any trailer coach which does not conform to the requirements of the California State Vehicle Code governing the use of trailers on public highways.

    (e)   Any trailer coach which does not carry a current yearly license issued by any state or foreign state motor vehicle department.

    (f)   Any trailer coach in an unsanitary condition.

    (g)  Any trailer coach which is structurally unsound and does not protect its habitants against the elements.

    (h)  Any trailer coach to which there is attached or to which there is established less than six (6) feet adjacent thereto any room or rooms or lean-tos; provided, however, that an approved awning entirely open on two sides may be allowed.

    (i)   Any trailer coach which has less than five hundred (500) cubic feet of air space for each person that the trailer is designed, built, or intended to or does accommodate.

 

3-10-925 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or hold out for rent any trailer coach in a trailer park which is owned by or in the possession or control of the owner or operator of the trailer park or his or her agent.

    (b)  It is unlawful for any person to use, occupy, or maintain any trailer coach upon any area or tract of land without the permission of the owner or person legally in charge of the land,

    (c)   It is unlawful to camp overnight or to park a trailer coach overnight upon any public street or other public place. This provision shall not apply where a trailer coach is temporarily parked for the purpose of making emergency repairs.

 

3-10-930 CODE COMPLIANCE.
    Except as herein otherwise provided, all structures erected or maintained in a trailer park shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the building, electrical, and plumbing codes and any other laws, ordinances, or regulations of the City of San Leandro.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 10. TRAILER COACH RESTRICTED TO TRAILER PARK
3-10-1000 TRAILER COACH RESTRICTIONS.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful to locate or use as living or sleeping quarters any trailer coach on any premises other than those contained within a trailer park duly permitted and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, or to permit the same to be done on any premises.

    (b)  The owner of a trailer may park the same in his or her garage or in the rear yard of his or her home provided the trailer is not used for living or sleeping quarters.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 906 N.S.; Ordinance No. 82-029, 5/3/82; Ordinance No. 84- (Repeal Section 3-10-1005))

 

ARTICLE 11. STATE PREEMPTION
3-10-1100 STATE PREEMPTION.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable except to the extent preempted by the Mobilehome Parks Act, Section 18200 et seq., of the California Health and Safety Code, and the regulations adopted pursuant to the Mobilehome Parks Act (Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code).

 

(Legislative History: )

CHAPTER 3-11 FIREWORKS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Former Chapter 3-12, Fireworks, was renumbered to be Chapter 3-11 by Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01.

 

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-11-100 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the words and phrases “fireworks,” “safe and sane fireworks” and “safe and sane and/or regulated fireworks” shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Sections 12500 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

 

3-11-105 PROHIBITIONS.
    (a)   The manufacture of fireworks or safe and sane fireworks or safe and sane and/or regulated fireworks is prohibited within the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, solicit the sale of, possess, purchase, use, ignite, discharge, explode, or allow the use on their property or property under their control any fireworks or safe and sane and/or regulated fireworks within the City of San Leandro except as provided in this Chapter.

 

3-11-110 EXCEPTIONS.
    (a)   Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes of illumination; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic, or sports events or military ceremonials or demonstrations; or the sale, discharge or display of fireworks by permittees having a permit as hereinafter provided; or the use and display of fireworks of whatever nature by any person engaged in the production of motion pictures, theatricals, or operas when such use and display is a necessary part of such production; or the transportation of fireworks through the City in regular course, and in original packages or containers from any point outside of the City to any other point outside of the City.

    (b)  Public displays of fireworks may be conducted by permit granted pursuant to Article 2, of this Chapter III.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-015, 9/21/87; Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-11-100—3-11-110); Ordinance No. 2007-016, 6/4/07 (Section 3-11-105))

 

ARTICLE 2. PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS
3-11-200 PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS—PERMIT REQUIRED.
    Any person desiring to hold a public display of fireworks within the City shall submit an application for permit to the City Manager at least ten (10) days in advance of the display. After such privilege shall be granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.

    The City Manager shall have the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement park or other organization for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Every such use or display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the City Manager and shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the City Manager, shall not be hazardous to persons or property.

    The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the City Manager for the payment of all damages which may be caused to a person or persons or to property by means of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors.

    All fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in an approved manner for the particular type of fireworks remaining.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-015, 9/21/87; Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Section 3-11-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
3-11-300 PROVISIONS TO SUPPLEMENT STATE FIREWORKS LAW.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall supplement and be construed in harmony with the “State Fireworks Law” (Part 2, Division 11 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California) and other applicable provisions of the laws of the State of California.

 

3-11-305 ENFORCEMENT.
    Any violation of this Chapter may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12. Additionally, the City Manager or designee, or any Enforcement Officer as defined in Section 1-12-110, shall have the authority to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this Chapter. The City may recover, administratively or through appropriate civil action, any costs involved in such seizure, take, or removal, including attorney’s fees.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 80-1, 2/4/80; Ordinance No. 80-11, 4/14/80; Ordinance No. 87-015, 9/21/87; Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-11-300, 3-11-305); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 3-11-305))

CHAPTER 3-12 FEED LOTS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Former Chapter 3-13, Feed Lots, was renumbered to be Chapter 3-12 by Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01.

 

ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
3-12-100 FEED LOT.
    “Feed Lot,” as used in this Chapter, shall mean property, other than a holding pen or grazing land, where more than ten (10) cattle, sheep or swine are kept for any reason.

 

3-12-105 HOLDING PEN.
    “Holding pen,” as used in this Chapter, shall mean property conforming to the rules and regulations of the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States where cattle, sheep or swine are held prior to slaughter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-12-100, 3-12-105))

 

ARTICLE 2. REQUIREMENTS
3-12-200 CLEANING.
    Feed lots shall be cleaned of all animal odors and other putrescible material whenever necessary to comply with the provisions of Section 3-12-300 and 3-12-305, but no less than once per week.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Section 3-12-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. PROHIBITIONS
3-12-300 INSECTS.
    No person shall create or maintain a condition on or in connection with the operation of, a feed lot, which causes the breeding of flies or other insects.

 

3-12-305 ODORS.
    No person shall create or maintain a condition on, or in connection with the operation of, a feed lot, which causes the emanation or dissemination beyond the boundaries of the feed lot of odors objectionable to a person of reasonable sensibilities.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-12-300, 3-12-305))

 

ARTICLE 4. VIOLATIONS
3-12-400 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    Any feed lot used or maintained in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may be abated as such.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 73-18, 2/13/73; Ordinance No. 78-54, 11/6/78; Ordinance No. 82-029, 5/3/82; Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Section 3-12-400))

CHAPTER 3-13 WELLS
Note
*        Editor’s Note: Former Chapter 3-14, Wells, was renumbered to be Chapter 3-13 by Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01.

 

ARTICLE 1. ADOPTION
3-13-100 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
    Article 14 of Chapter 6 of Title 3 of the Alameda County Ordinance Code, codified by Alameda County Ordinance No. 73-68, entitled “An Ordinance to Regulate the Construction, Repair, Reconstruction, Destruction or Abandonment of Wells Within the Boundaries of the County of Alameda,” is hereby adopted as the Wells Ordinance of the City of San Leandro to regulate the construction, repair, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of wells within the City of San Leandro. Three (3) copies of said Alameda County Ordinance No. 73-68 and three (3) copies each of the standards thereby adopted by reference with specified modifications, namely Chapter II of Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, “Water Well Standards: State of California,” including Appendices E, F and G thereof, Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-2, “Water Well Standards: Alameda County” and Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1, “Cathodic Protection Well Standards: State of California,” are available for public use and examination at the office of the City Clerk of this City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Section 3-13-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. ENFORCEMENT
3-13-200 COUNTY ADMINISTRATION.
    The Alameda County Public Works Department, through the Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, is hereby designated the administering agency of this Chapter within the City of San Leandro, and is hereby authorized to exercise all the power and duties and to perform all the functions of the City of San Leandro under this Chapter within the City of San Leandro.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 73-68, 10/15/73; Ordinance No. 82-029, 5/3/82; Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Section 3-13-200))

CHAPTER 3-14 UNIFORM WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REGULATIONS
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Former Chapter 3-11, Uniform Wastewater and Discharge Regulations, was renumbered to be Chapter 3-14 by Ordinance No. 2001-005, 3/19/01. Chapter 3-14 as derived from Ordinance No. 95-015, 9/5/95, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2001-05, 3/19/01, and further repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14. Previous Chapter 3-11, as derived from Ordinance Nos. 09-06, 91-016 and 92-035 was amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 95-015, 9/5/95.

 

ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE
3-14-100 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to:

    (a)   Provide for and regulate the disposal of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the City sanitary sewer system in such manner and to such extent as is reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of such system to handle and dispose of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes;

    (b)  Improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim treated effluent and wastewater sludge;

    (c)   Protect the physical structures of the sewer system and the efficient functioning of its component parts;

    (d)  Protect the City and its personnel, and preserve and protect the health, safety and comfort of the public;

    (e)   Comply with all applicable and compatible laws, rules, regulations and orders of the State of California and the United States.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14)

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
3-14-200 DEFINITIONS.
    Words, phrases or terms not specifically defined herein, and having a technical or specialized meaning shall be defined as set forth in 40 CFR Parts 136, 401, and 403.

    In addition, terms defined herein shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined by the Porter Cologne Water Quality Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended in 1972.

    Unless the context indicates otherwise, the following words and terms all have the meaning defined herein.

    Accessory Dwelling Unit. An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a secondary dwelling unit built on a parcel with an existing single-family dwelling with complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. An ADU can take three (3) forms: detached structure, attached structure, repurposed existing space. For the purposes of this Code, there can be only one ADU per parcel, and the existence of an ADU does not change the status of the single-family dwelling. If more than one ADU is created on the lot, all ADUs convert to single-family dwellings.

    Act or The Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. See Federal Act.

    Approval Authority. Approval Authority shall mean United States Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized designee. See EPA.

    Authorized Representative of Industrial User. Authorized Representative of Industrial User shall mean the following:

    (1)  A responsible corporate officer as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(I)(1);

    (2)  A general partner or proprietor of a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively, as provided in 40 CFR 403.12(I)(2);

    (3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1) or (2), subject to the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(I)(3) and (4).

    Beneficial Uses. Beneficial Uses shall mean uses of the Waters of the State including, but not limited to, domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or intangible as specified in Federal or State law.

    Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

    Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen demanded in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade.

    Building Sewer. Building Sewer shall mean the piping conveying wastewater from the premises of a User to the City sanitary sewer system. See Sewer Lateral, Private Sewer Lateral.

    Categorical Pretreatment Standard. Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471.

    City. City shall mean the City of San Leandro.

    City Manager. City Manager shall mean the individual appointed by the City governing body (City Council) with responsibility and authority for all functions of local government. See Manager.

    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

    Commercial User. Commercial User shall mean any nonresidential user that the City determines will introduce primarily domestic sewage to the sewerage system.

 

    Composite Sample. Composite Sample shall mean a sample that is collected manually or automatically, discretely or continuously, based on time or flow intervals.

    Conservative Pollutant. Conservative Pollutant shall mean a pollutant that is not metabolized by treatment processes in a conventional wastewater treatment plant. A conservative pollutant may be removed by the treatment processes and retained in the biosolids, may be volatilized and lost in fugitive air emissions, or may be discharged in the plant’s effluent. Although the pollutant may be chemically changed in a treatment process, it can still be detected and may still be detrimental to the environment.

    Contamination. Contamination shall mean an impairment of the quality of Waters of the State by waste to a degree that creates a hazard to public health through poisoning or spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not Waters of the State are affected.

    Control Authority. The City’s approved POTW pretreatment program.

    Conventional Pollutant. Conventional Pollutant shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, organic carbon, suspended solids, ammonia, nitrogen, pH, and total coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the POTW’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit if the POTW was designed to treat such pollutant, and if such pollutants do not interfere with the operations of the POTW or adversely impact sludge use and disposal and, in fact, the POTW does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree.

    Cooling Water. Cooling Water shall mean water used for cooling, such as air conditioning, heat removal from industrial equipment, or refrigeration.

    Direct Discharge. Direct Discharge shall mean the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the Waters of the State.

    Domestic Sewage. Domestic Sewage shall mean liquid and waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, to the City sanitary sewer system.

    East Bay Dischargers Authority. East Bay Dischargers Authority shall mean the joint powers of authority comprised of the City of Hayward, the City of San Leandro, the Oro Loma Sanitary District, the Castro Valley Sanitary District, and the Union Sanitary District.

    EPA. EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency. See Approval Authority.

    Fats, Oil and Grease (FOG). Organic compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. Fats, oil and grease are generated from food production, preparation and service, and kitchen cleanup. Throughout this Chapter, references to oils and grease include mineral/petroleum based oils and grease.

    Federal Act. Federal Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by the EPA pursuant to the Act. See Act.

    Food Service Establishment. Any establishment that prepares and/or serves food for use or sale including, but not limited to, restaurants, cafés, cafeterias, commercial kitchens, catering kitchens, bakeries, hotels, schools, hospitals, correctional facilities, care institutions, grocery stores with food preparation, meat cutting and preparation, meat packing and any other food handling facilities where FOG may be introduced into the municipal sewer.

    Garbage. Garbage shall mean putrescible solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

    Grab Sample. Grab Sample shall mean a discrete sample collected from a waste stream over a period of time not more than fifteen (15) minutes.

    Holding Tank Waste. Holding Tank Waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. Sometimes referred to as septic waste or septage.

    Indirect Discharge. Indirect Discharge shall mean the discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act into the City sanitary sewer system.

    Industrial User. Industrial User shall mean an entity that generates and/or discharges into the City sanitary sewer system industrial waste.

    Industrial Waste. Industrial Waste shall mean the waste and wastewater resulting from activities such as production, testing, remediation, manufacturing or processing operations and may include institutional and commercial entities. The term shall include the definition of process waste found at 40 CFR 401.11(q). See Wastewater.

    Interceptor. A device, unit or installation constructed and operated for the purpose of removing and retaining dangerous, harmful, or prohibited constituents from wastewater before discharge to the City sanitary sewer system.

    Interference. Interference shall mean the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations that contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City’s NPDES permit or affects sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW under 40 CFR Parts 405 and 503 of the Act, or conformance to any criteria, guideline, or regulation developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent State criteria (including those contained in any State Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the City.

    Major Contributing Industry. Major Contributing Industry shall mean an Industrial User that meets one or more of the following criteria:

    (1)  Class A - Industrial Users regulated by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

    (2)  Class B - Users not covered by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, but have the potential to discharge regulated pollutants and must meet the pollutant limitations established in this Chapter and in individual permits issued by the Control Authority.

    (3)  Class C - Users that discharge conventional pollutants but could by themselves or combined with flow from another user overload the City sanitary sewer system, causing the City to violate NPDES permit limits.

    (4)  Class D - Users that discharge wastewater from sources not associated with usual industrial processes. Sources may include, but are not limited to, remediation, excavation, and leachate extraction.

    Manager. Manager shall mean the City Manager or designee. See City Manager.

    Mass Emission Rate. Mass Emission Rate shall mean the mass of material discharged to the City sanitary sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents.

    National Pretreatment Standard. National Pretreatment Standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to Industrial Users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established in 40 CFR Part 403.5.

    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.

    National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard. National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard shall mean any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.

    Natural Outlet. Natural Outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, bay, ocean, or other body of surface water, or outlet into the ground water.

    New Source. New Source shall mean an entity as defined at 40 CFR Part 403.3(m).

    Nuisance. Nuisance shall mean any condition injurious to health or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property or affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.

    Pass Through. Pass Through shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) as defined at 40 CFR 403.3(p).

    Person. Person shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

    pH. pH shall mean the measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a liquid on a scale of 0 to 14, 0 being extremely acidic, 7 neutral, and 14 extremely alkaline. The pH corresponds to the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in gram-ions per liter of solution.

    Pollutant. Pollutant shall have the meaning as defined at 40 CFR 401.11(f).

    Pollution. Pollution shall mean an alteration of the quality of the Waters of the State by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination. Pollution is further defined at 40 CFR 401.11(g).

    POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works. POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works shall mean a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is owned by the City and includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or liquid industrial waste. It also includes sewers, pipes, and lift stations that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. POTW also means the City, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from the treatment works. POTW is further defined at 40 CFR 403.3(q) and (r). “The City sanitary sewer system” is used throughout this Chapter to refer to the POTW. See Sewerage System, City.

    Premises. Premises shall mean a parcel of real estate including any improvements thereon determined by the City to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for service.

    Pretreatment or Treatment. Pretreatment or Treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the City sanitary sewer system. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means except dilution. Pretreatment is further defined at 40 CFR 403.3(s).

    Pretreatment Facility. Pretreatment Facility shall mean any facility or device for treatment, control or flow limitations of sewage or industrial waste, prior to discharge into the City sanitary sewer system.

    Pretreatment Requirements. Pretreatment Requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an Industrial User other than National Pretreatment Standards. The term is defined at 40 CFR 403.3(t).

    Private Sewer Lateral. Private Sewer Lateral shall mean a sewer lateral not maintained as part of the City sanitary sewer system. See Building Sewer, Sewer Lateral.

    Process Wastewater. Process Wastewater shall mean any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product. The term is defined at 40 CFR 401.11(g).

    Reclaimed Water. Reclaimed Water shall mean wastewater that, as a result of treatment, is suitable for a beneficial use that would not otherwise occur.

    Regional Water Quality Control Board. Regional Water Quality Control Board shall mean the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region.

    Sanitary Sewer. Sanitary Sewer shall mean a pipe that carries domestic sewage and/or industrial wastes and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. A City sewer or public sewer is any sewer located within an easement or public right-of-way that is maintained by the City.

    Sewerage System. See POTW.

    Sewer Lateral. Sewer Lateral shall mean the piping used to convey wastewater from within a building or structure to a public or private sewerage collection system. See Building Sewer, Private Sewer Lateral.

    Significant Industrial User. Significant Industrial User shall mean:

    (1)  Industrial users subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards;

    (2)  Any other industrial user that:

    (i)   Discharges to the POTW an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more of process wastewater per day;

    (ii)  Contributes process wastewater that makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or

    (iii) Is designated as such by the Control Authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW’s operation or to violate a pretreatment standard or requirement.

    The term is further defined at 40 CFR 403.3(v).

    Significant Noncompliance. Significant Noncompliance shall mean a significant industrial user’s violation of pretreatment standards meeting any of the following criteria or an industrial user’s violation of pretreatment standards meeting criteria (3), (4), or (8):

    (1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement for the same pollutant parameter, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I);

    (2)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I), multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

    (3)  Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the City determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering human health, property or the environment);

    (4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the exercise of the City’s emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B), to halt or prevent such a discharge;

    (5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a control mechanism or enforcement order;

    (6)  Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, required reports such as permit applications, baseline monitoring reports, periodic compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

    (7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and

    (8)  Any other violation or group of violations which may include BMPs, that the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program.

    Significant Noncompliance and its application are defined at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii).

    Shall. “Shall” is mandatory.

    Slug Discharge. Slug Discharge shall mean a discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge that has potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the City’s regulations, local limits, or permit conditions. Slug discharge is further defined at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi).

    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

    Storm Sewer. Storm Sewer shall mean infrastructure that carries storm and surface waters and drainage, and excludes sewage and industrial waste.

    Storm Water. Storm Water shall mean flow resulting from natural precipitation.

    Total Suspended Solids. Total Suspended Solids shall mean the total mass or concentration of particles suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids that will not pass through a filter (in the application of EPA Method 160.2).

    Total Toxic Organics (TTO). For users subject to Federal Categorical Standards with defined TTO parameters, TTO shall be defined and applied per the applicable categorical standard to determine compliance with the Federal Standard. TTO standards for local limits compliance shall be the sum of those parameters in the list of toxic pollutants found at 40 CFR 401.15 that are detected at or above the Method Detection Limit at a value greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter by EPA Methods 624 and 625. For users that may have potential to discharge additional toxic pollutants not specified herein, those additional parameters may be included as provisions in individual permits.

    User. User shall mean any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the City sanitary sewer system.

    Waste. Waste shall mean domestic sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive associated with human habitation, or human or animal origin, or from or related to any production, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers prior to, and for the purpose of, disposal.

    Wastewater. Wastewater shall mean waste and water, whether treated or untreated. See Industrial Waste.

    Wastewater Constituents and Characteristics. Wastewater Constituents and Characteristics shall mean the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.

    Water Quality Requirements. Water Quality Requirements shall mean requirements for the City’s treatment plant effluent established by the NPDES permit, or by State or Federal regulatory agencies. Water quality requirements include effluent limitations and waste discharge standards, limitations, or prohibitions that may be established or adopted by State or Federal laws or regulatory agencies.

    Waters of the City. Waters of the City shall mean any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of the City.

    Waters of the State. Waters of the State shall mean all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof.

    Water Pollution Control Plant. Water Pollution Control Plant shall mean the City of San Leandro POTW treatment plant.

    Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meaning:

 

BOD

Biochemical Oxygen Demand

CFR

Code of Federal Regulations

COD

Chemical Oxygen Demand

L

Liter

mg

Milligrams

mg/L

Milligrams per Liter

NPDES

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

SIC

Standard Industrial Classification

TSS

Total Suspended Solids

IU

Industrial User

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14; Ordinance No. 2017-005, 3/20/17; Ordinance No. 2018-006, 3/19/18 (Section 3-14-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. SEWER USE REGULATIONS
3-14-300 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
    A user may not introduce into the POTW any pollutant which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in Sections 3-14-305 and 3-14-310 of this Chapter apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other National Pretreatment Standards or any other National, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

 

3-14-305 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
    (a)   No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:

 

Toxicant

Maximum Total Concentration Allowable (Milligrams Per Liter)

Arsenic

0.1 mg/L

Cadmium

0.5 mg/L

Copper

2.0 mg/L

Cyanide

0.5 mg/L

Lead

0.8 mg/L

Mercury

0.01 mg/L

Nickel

0.5 mg/L

Silver

0.6 mg/L

Total Chromium

1.0 mg/L

Zinc

3.0 mg/L

Phenolic Compounds

1.0 mg/L

Total Toxic Organics

2.13 mg/L

Selenium

1.0 mg/L

Barium

100.0 mg/L

Beryllium

0.75 mg/L

 

    (b)  No person shall discharge any wastewater:

    (1)  Having a temperature higher than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) at the point of discharge or raise the POTW influent temperature above one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) or that inhibits biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference.

    (2)  Any water or waste which contains more than one hundred (100) parts per million (100 ppm), by weight, of oil or grease of petroleum origin; which contains more than 100 ppm, by weight, of fat, oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin; or which contains grease or oil or other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees (32°) to one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F).

    (3)  Containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will, either singularly or in conjunction with other discharges, cause interference or pass through.

    (4)  Having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 12.4, or having a pH which will cause damage to the collection system or interfere with the POTW treatment processes.

 

3-14-310 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS ON DISCHARGES.
    A user may not discharge the following substances to the sanitary sewer system:

    (a)   Fire or Explosion. Any pollutant with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C). Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause a fire or explosion or to be injurious in any other way to the POTW. At no time, shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sanitary sewer (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.

    (b)  Obstruction of Flow. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, wax, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residuals from refining, or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.

    (c)   Toxic Pollutants. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard.

    (d)  Noxious or Malodorous Substances. Any harmful or offensive gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to violate air quality standards at the POTW, create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.

    (e)   Disposal/Reclamation. Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludge, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause a violation of the criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, or the Toxic Substances Control Act; or State or local criteria applicable to the sludge disposal site and the sludge management method being used.

    (f)   Permit Violation. Any substances which will interfere with the wastewater treatment process or cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards.

    (g)  Detrimental Environmental Impact. Any substance which may have a harmful environmental impact or create a nuisance in the waters of the State or a condition which violates the rules and regulations of any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the City, including, but not limited to, any statute or any rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or State or Federal regulatory body.

    (h)  Discoloration. Any wastewater creating discoloration or any other condition in the quality of the POTW effluent such that receiving water quality requirements established by law cannot be met.

    (i)   Loadings. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that will cause interference to the POTW.

    (j)   Hazard or Public Nuisance. Any waste, which in the opinion of the City may have an adverse or harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private property or may otherwise endanger the public, the local environment or create a public nuisance. The City shall, in determining the acceptability of specific wastes, consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy of the collection, treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste.

    (k)  Excessive Flow. Total quantities of flow or instantaneous peaks which, due to volume or manner of delivery, require a disproportionate share of the City’s treatment plant capacity. This also includes flows which, alone or in combination with others, cause excessive treatment costs and/or treatment plant process upsets.

    (l)   Trucked or Hauled Wastes. No trucked or hauled pollutants shall be discharged into the City sanitary sewer system except at discharge points designated by the POTW.

 

3-14-315 DISCHARGE INTO STORM DRAIN PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful to discharge any waste or wastewater into any storm drain or natural outlet unless the user has obtained an NPDES permit and the user is in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of all other agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge.

 

3-14-320 PROHIBITION ON STORM DRAINAGE AND GROUND WATER.
    Storm water, ground water, street drainage, subsurface drainage or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to the sanitary sewer. The City may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into the sanitary sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the City.

 

3-14-325 PROHIBITION ON DILUTION AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR TREATMENT.
    No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards (see Section 3-14-365 of this Chapter), or any other limitation developed by the City, State, or USEPA.

 

3-14-330 PROHIBITIONS ON RADIOACTIVE WASTES.
    No user shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged, any radioactive waste into the sanitary sewer; provided, however, that:

    (a)   Users authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials may discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged such wastes, provided that such wastes are discharged in strict conformance with the then current State of California Code of Regulations, Title 17, any Federal laws and regulations pertaining to radioactive materials, and any recommendations for safe disposal of such wastes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended; and

    (b)  The user so acting does so in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of all other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such discharges.

 

3-14-335 LIMITATIONS ON POINT OF DISCHARGE.
    No user shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in the City sanitary sewer system other than through an approved building sewer, unless approved by the Control Authority.

 

3-14-340 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF GARBAGE GRINDERS.
    Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer except where wastes are generated in preparation of food consumed in a residence for household use.

 

3-14-345 PROHIBITIONS ON HOSPITAL WASTES.
    Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, and convalescent homes shall not discharge to the sanitary sewer:

    (a)   Equipment, instruments, utensils, hypodermic needles, syringes and associated articles.

    (b)  Any article that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated.

    (c)   Recognizable portions of the human anatomy.

    (d)  Wastes excluded by other provisions of these regulations. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of appropriate health agencies to define wastes as being infectious and to prohibit discharge to the sanitary sewer.

 

3-14-350 INTERCEPTOR REQUIRED.
    (a)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed by the user when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, flammable waste, sand or other harmful materials, except that such interceptors shall not be required for dwelling units. Toilets, urinals, wash basins, showers and other fixtures containing fecal matter shall not flow through the interceptor.

    (b)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Manager. The interceptor shall be installed in conformity with approved plans and in accordance with all City Codes and regulations.

    (c)   The interceptor shall be installed and connected so as to be readily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of grease.

    (d)  The interceptor shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of accumulated grease and solids. Unless otherwise approved by the Manager, grease interceptors must be pumped in full when the total accumulation of surface grease and settled solids reaches twenty-five percent (25%) of the grease interceptor’s overall liquid depth. All accumulated grease and solid materials shall be removed by a certified waste hauler licensed by the State of California. No accumulated FOG shall be introduced into any drainage piping or public or private sewer. The introduction of emulsifying agents such as chemicals, solvents or enzymes which will cause pass through of grease is strictly prohibited. Bacterial agents used to reduce FOG may be used in addition to regular maintenance, but shall not be a consideration in determining grease interceptor sizing or maintenance frequency. Wastewater in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) shall not be discharged to the grease interceptor for any duration. Failure to clean or maintain the interceptor shall be a violation and subject to enforcement action.

    (e)   The user shall develop and maintain a record of periodic maintenance and cleaning/pumping of the interceptor. Records shall be retained for a period of not less than three (3) years.

    (f)   All fixtures, equipment and drain lines located in a food service establishment which may contain fats, oil and grease (FOG) or other objectionable materials shall be connected to an appropriately sized grease interceptor. The following types of equipment or fixtures identified as a potential source of FOG include, but are not limited to: pre-rinse and/or pre-wash sinks or sinks in dishwashing areas; two or three compartment sinks; wok stoves; soup kettles; self-cleaning stove ventilation/exhaust hood; kitchen floor drains; kitchen floor trench; kitchen floor sinks; mop sinks; and food prep sinks. No sanitizing dishwashers are to be connected to drainage pipes conveying wastewater to a grease interceptor unless such connections are approved by the Manager.

    (g)  Abandoned interceptors shall be emptied, disconnected and filled as required for abandoned septic tanks (Section 722.0 of the California Plumbing Code).

 

3-14-355 APPLICATION OF LIMITATIONS.
    All limitations, State, Federal, and local shall apply.

 

3-14-360 SUPPLEMENTAL LIMITATIONS.
    The limitations on wastewater strength and prohibitions in these regulations may be supplemented if:

    (a)   The City determines that existing limitations may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the POTW; or

    (b)  The City determines that existing limitations may not be sufficient to enable the POTW to comply with water quality standards, or effluent limitations specified in the POTW’s NPDES permit; or

    (c)   The discharge is of such a nature that it reduces or impairs the POTW’s recycle, reclamation or disposal options; or

    (d)  In the Manager’s evaluation, the discharge, alone or in combination with any other discharge, poses a threat or unreasonable risk to the POTW or personnel.

 

3-14-365 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
    The Categorical Pretreatment Standards found in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471 are hereby incorporated into this Chapter by reference. The provision of this Chapter shall conform to these incorporated provisions as they may be amended, unless explicitly modified within this Chapter. Upon promulgation of a new or amended Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the new Federal Standard shall immediately apply to all affected users. The City will notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. Regardless of notification, industrial users are required to comply with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.

3-14-370 PROPER DISPOSAL OF SLUDGE AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
    Users shall not discharge to the sewer system any substance that could affect the POTW’s effluent and cause violation of its NPDES permit requirements or cause it to be in non-compliance with sludge use, recycle, or disposal criteria pursuant to regulations developed under Sections 204(b) and 405 of the Clean Water Act and Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. A record of disposal shall be maintained onsite and available for review by the City.

 

3-14-375 AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE PRETREATMENT OR CORRECTIVE MEASURES AND AUTHORITY TO DENY OR CONDITION NEW, INCREASED OR CHANGED DISCHARGES.
    Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established in these regulations before discharging to the sanitary sewer. Any pretreatment facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. In the event pretreatment or special facilities are required to make the industrial wastes acceptable, the user shall be required to furnish a compliance schedule and plans, approved prior to construction, showing the schedule of activities, time frame and method of pretreatment proposed. The pretreatment facility or measures shall be installed in conformity with the approved plans and other City Codes or regulations. The approval of the pretreatment method will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of these regulations. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City. The effectiveness of the pretreatment unit discharging to the sanitary sewer will be monitored by the City at the discharger’s expense.

    Permitted users shall notify the City prior to the introduction of new wastewater or pollutants or any substantial change in the volume or characteristics of the wastewater being introduced into the POTW from user’s industrial activities. The City may deny or condition any proposed discharge if the discharge may have potential to violate applicable pretreatment standards or cause the City to violate its NPDES permit. Proposed discharge shall not commence without prior City approval. A written request must be submitted not less than sixty (60) days prior to commencement of any proposed discharge.

 

3-14-380 NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES—DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
    In order that employees of users be informed of City requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of these regulations together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the City from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14; Ordinance No. 2018-006, 3/19/18 (Sections 3-14-300, 3-14-340, 3-14-370))

 

ARTICLE 4. WASTEWATER VOLUME DETERMINATION
3-14-400 METERED WATER SUPPLY.
    User charges and fees shall be based on the total amount of water used from all sources unless, in the opinion of the City, significant portions of water received are not discharged to the sanitary sewer. The total amount of water used from public and private sources will be determined by means of public meters or private meters, installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the City.

 

3-14-405 METERED WASTEWATER VOLUME AND METERED DIVERSIONS.
    Where, in the opinion of the City, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the sanitary sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other means, the user charges and fees will be applied against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the sanitary sewer. Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user if the user is to avoid the application of the user charges and fees against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user must install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the City and at the user’s expense. Such meters may measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be tested for accuracy every two (2) years at the expense of the user.

    Where, in the opinion of the City, it is unnecessary or impractical for the user to install a meter, a conservative estimate of the quantity of wastewater may be used, provided it can be reasonably substantiated by the user. It is the user’s responsibility to provide the City with justification for the desired adjustment. The request for an adjustment shall be based upon a rational determination of the wastewater diversion and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, production of goods and services or such other determinants of water used in process and not discharged to the sanitary sewer. The user must submit a description of the justification and methodology for estimating the unmetered volume, in writing, to the City for approval.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14)

 

ARTICLE 5. REPORTS AND PERMITS
3-14-500 PERIODIC REPORTS AND BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
    (a)   The City may require any user to file a periodic report. The report may include, but need not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, or other information which relates to the generation of waste including wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge or alternate means of disposal. Such report may also include the chemical constituents of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to reports, the City may require information in the form of permit applications, self-monitoring reports, status reports, technical reports, hazardous waste disposal records, operation and maintenance records, compliance reports and compliance schedule progress reports.

    (b)  All users shall promptly notify the Manager by any standard means of communication in advance of any change in volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under local, Federal or State notification requirements.

    (c)   All users shall notify the Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the applicable waste code and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the discharge exceeds one hundred (100) kilograms of hazardous waste or any amount of acute hazardous waste in any calendar month, the notification shall also contain the following information: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month and the mass of the constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. In the case of any notification made under this subsection, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated.

    (d)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing users subject to such Categorical Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW are required to submit to the Manager a Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR). At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard are required to submit to the Manager a Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR). The BMR shall contain the information as required in 40 CFR Part 403.12(b). Part 403.12(b) of 40 CFR and any amendments thereto are incorporated by reference into this Chapter.

    (e)   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of discharge for the regulated process, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Manager a report documenting compliance with the Categorical Standard deadline. The report shall contain at a minimum the information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4) to (7). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall also contain the long term production rate. For all other users subject to a production based categorical standard the report shall include the actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified pursuant to Section 3-14-555 of this Chapter.

 

3-14-505 PERMIT APPLICATION.
    All major contributing industries and industries using/discharging EPA priority pollutants shall complete and file with the Manager, a permit application accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information, including, but not limited to:

    (a)   Name, address and classification code (SIC) of applicant;

    (b)  Volume of wastewater to be discharged;

    (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics;

    (d)  Time and duration of discharge;

    (e)   Average and maximum wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;

    (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;

    (g)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials that will or could be discharged;

    (h)  Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production;

    (i)   Number and type of employees, and hours of work;

    (j)   Spill prevention plans;

    (k)  Solvent management plans;

    (l)   Pollution prevention plan;

    (m) Storm water pollution prevention plan and monitoring plan;

    (n)  Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

    The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and approval of all the data required, the City may issue a permit, subject to specific terms or conditions provided therein. The holder of all permits issued hereunder shall be subject at all times to all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.

 

3-14-510 MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRIES.
    All major contributing industries proposing to discharge into the City sanitary sewer must obtain a permit within sixty (60) days of the commencement of operation.

 

3-14-515 INDUSTRIAL USERS.
    Industrial users may be required to obtain a permit if their discharge is regulated by any provisions of these regulations, State or Federal regulations, or at the discretion of the Manager. Under the following circumstances, a new or amended permit application must be filed with the City:

    (a)   Upon change of ownership of the property; or

    (b)  Upon change of occupancy; or

    (c)   Upon change of any activity that results in a change in the type of industrial/hazardous wastewater generated.

    Holders of permits issued shall be subject at all times to all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations. At no time and in no way, does the holder of any permit acquire, or be regarded as having acquired, a vested or continuing right to maintain, or to have continued, connection to the City sanitary sewer.

 

3-14-520 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
    Permits shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. The conditions of permits shall be uniformly enforced by the City in accordance with these regulations, and applicable State and Federal regulations. Permits may contain restrictions and requirements including, but not limited to, the following:

    (a)   Separation of industrial wastewater from domestic sewage prior to discharge to the City sanitary sewer;

    (b)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;

    (c)   Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities;

    (d)  Pretreatment requirements;

    (e)   Compliance schedules;

    (f)   Specifications for self-monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency, and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedules;

    (g)  Requirements for submission of technical reports, progress reports or discharge reports;

    (h)  Requirements to pay applicable user charges or fees within thirty (30) days of invoice;

    (i)   Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City and allowing access to those records;

    (j)   Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when conservative or toxic pollutants are proposed or present in the user’s wastewater discharge;

    (k)  Other conditions or requirements as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with these regulations.

 

3-14-525 DURATION OF PERMITS.
    Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. If the user is not notified by the City thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the City during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in these regulations or applicable State or Federal regulations are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed pertinent changes at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change.

 

3-14-530 TRANSFER OF A PERMIT.
    Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.

 

3-14-535 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
    Any user who violates the following conditions of the permit or any conditions of these regulations, or applicable State and Federal regulations, is subject to having its permit revoked:

    (a)   Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

    (b)  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

    (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;

    (d)  Violation of conditions of pretreatment standards or regulations or of permit conditions; or

    (e)   Failure to pay applicable fees and charges within sixty (60) days of invoicing.

 

3-14-540 REFUSAL TO ISSUE A PERMIT.
    The Manager may refuse to issue a permit if any one or more of the following conditions exist:

    (a)   The application for a permit contains false or misleading information.

    (b)  Issuance of the permit would result in the discharge of industrial wastes of such quantity or strength that the public health or safety, or public or private property is endangered.

    (c)   Issuance of the permit would cause the POTW to violate any permit conditions, laws, or regulations of the State and/or Federal government.

    (d)  The applicant has not provided plans for sufficient protection from accidental discharges to the sanitary sewer system or the environment.

 

3-14-545 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
    All user information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring, and inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the information is confidential business information within the meaning established at 40 CFR 2.201. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.14(b), effluent information and data is not subject to confidentiality.

    Information deemed confidential shall not be made available to the public but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies and for use by the State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

    As outlined in Section 308(b), (c), and (d) of the Act, all information contained in an industrial user’s file and/or submitted by an industrial user will be available to the Environmental Protection Agency, State agencies concerned with carrying out the Act, and other entities as specified within the section.

    The City shall not be liable in damages to any permit applicant or user for any negligent disclosure of any confidential business information furnished to the City.

 

3-14-550 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
    Special agreements and arrangements between the City and any persons or agencies may be established when, in the opinion of the City, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. At no time shall special agreements be established when said agreement violates any local limits, specific numerical prohibitions and/or Federal Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.

 

3-14-555 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
    All reports, permit applications or agreements shall be signed as follows: By a responsible corporate officer, if the user is a corporation; by a general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; by a duly authorized representative of the designated individual above provided the authorization is submitted in writing to the City.

    If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the signatory requirements above shall be submitted prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.

    Any person signing reports, permit applications or agreements shall make the following certification:

 

“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14)

 

ARTICLE 6. ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE
3-14-600 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
    Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials regulated by Pretreatment Standards or Requirements or other wastes determined to be harmful or hazardous by State or Federal regulations into the City’s sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the protective facilities. It is the user’s responsibility to submit plans which are in compliance with Federal, State and local regulations.

    The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to protect the sanitary or storm sewer system. The review and approval of such plans will in no way relieve the user of any responsibility or liabilities in the event of a spill or accidental discharge.

 

3-14-605 NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL OR SLUG DISCHARGE.
    Users shall immediately notify the POTW upon any changes at their facilities affecting the potential for a slug discharge or accidentally discharging wastes in violation of these regulations and/or discharging a slug load to enable counter measures to be taken by the City to minimize damage to the sewerage system and the receiving waters. This notification does not relieve the user of the responsibility of notifying all other required agencies as outlined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 19, and other applicable regulations.

    The initial notification shall be followed, within five (5) days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement to the Manager describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage, or for any fines imposed by the City, or for other violations of Federal, State, or local laws where applicable.

 

3-14-610 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE—RECORD KEEPING.
    Any person responsible for any unauthorized discharge shall keep accurate records of the events of the discharge at the time of the discharge. The record shall include all pertinent information related to the unauthorized discharge, including, but not limited to, dates, times, names of parties involved, volume of discharge, substance discharged, agencies notified and corrective action taken. Discharger shall keep all records related to the unauthorized discharge for at least five (5) years. Records shall be available for review by the City upon request.

 

3-14-615 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE—LIABILITIES.
    Any person responsible for any unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, with the cost borne by the discharger. When deemed necessary by the Manager, identification and clean-up of the discharge may be initiated by the City or by an authorized individual or firm. All costs associated with such clean-up shall be borne by the owner, user or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge.

    In the event that the clean-up costs are less than the cost of legal disposal, a fine may be levied. The fine may be the difference between the cost of legal disposal and the actual cleanup cost, plus twenty-five percent (25%) of the total amount.

 

3-14-620 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES—NOTICES TO EMPLOYEES.
    A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of each commercial or industrial user advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of these regulations.

 

3-14-625 EMPLOYEES—DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
    In order that employees of users be informed of City requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of these regulations together with other environmental information and notices which may be furnished by the City.

 

3-14-630 PREVENTIVE—ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
    The user shall provide adequate containment of materials that are prohibited from discharge or could have a deleterious effect in the event of an accidental discharge. The user shall be responsible for protecting the City sewer inlets from intentional or unintentional discharges of such materials. All points of entry to the sanitary sewer are subject to review and approval by the City. Potential points of entry for accidental discharge must be clearly labeled to provide warning. The user shall be responsible for immediately reporting any accidental discharge to the sanitary sewer.

 

3-14-635 DEVELOPMENT OF A SLUG/SPILL CONTROL PLAN.
    All users are required, when requested by the City, to develop and implement a Slug/Spill Prevention Plan. Each plan shall include at a minimum; discharge practices (including non-routine batch discharges), guidelines for storage of chemicals, location of chemical storage, procedures to notify the POTW immediately of slug discharges and spills, operation and maintenance procedures, general housekeeping practices, training programs, and other information as required. Slug control plan elements are specified at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi).

 

3-14-640 PRIVATE SEWER LATERALS AND SEWER OVERFLOWS.
    The operation, maintenance, and repair of private sewer laterals are the responsibility of the property owner or user. The reconnection of a property owner’s or user’s private sewer lateral to a relocated City sanitary sewer main upon a determination by the City Engineer that conditions related to particular sections of sanitary sewer or the sewerage system require the necessary and appropriate reconnection shall be the responsibility of the City. In such instances, the City’s responsibility shall be limited to reimbursing a property owner’s or user’s costs to reconnect from the premises to the POTW. Any person responsible for a sewer overflow shall take immediate action to contain, control, and cease the unauthorized discharge and institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, with the cost borne by the discharger. When deemed necessary by the Manager, clean-up of the discharge may be initiated.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14; Ordinance No. 2018-006, 3/19/18 (Sections 3-14-605, 3-14-640))

 

ARTICLE 7. MONITORING AND INSPECTION
3-14-700 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
    The collection of samples of wastewater for the measurement of constituents controlled by Sections 3-14-300 through 3-14-310 of this Chapter shall be at the combined facility discharge. Monitoring locations for the collection of samples of wastewater for the measurement of constituents controlled by National Pretreatment Standards are specified in the applicable Federal point source category Part in 40 CFR and may be at the discharge of the regulated process, or after pretreatment of Federally regulated process flows.

 

3-14-705 SELF-MONITORING.
    Where self-monitoring is required, such monitoring shall be provided by the user at the user’s expense, and analyzed using approved methods in a laboratory certified by the State to perform such analyses. Significant industrial users that are required to submit periodic self-monitoring reports shall report the results of all monitoring of regulated pollutants at the designated sampling point.

    If self-monitoring performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Manager within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the City monitors at the user’s facility at least once per month provided the monitoring includes the pollutant in violation, or if the City performs a compliance monitoring sampling event between the time of the user’s initial sampling and when the results of this sampling were received, or if the user requests that the City perform a violation follow-up sample event and analysis to determine current compliance status. Monitoring shall comply with the requirements in 40 CFR 403.

 

3-14-710 MONITORING FACILITIES.
    The Manager may require the user to construct, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the user’s expense. The monitoring facility should be situated on the user’s premises, but the City may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

    In the event that a monitoring facility is allowed to be constructed in the public right-of-way, the user shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City against any claim, cause of action, disability, loss, liability, damage, cost or expense, which in any way arises out of the monitoring facility, or its use.

    If the monitoring facility is inside the user’s secured premises, there shall be accommodations to allow access for City personnel, such as a gate secured with a City lock. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow accurate sampling. The monitoring facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.

    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City’s requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the City that such monitoring facilities are required, unless a time extension is granted by the City.

    In the event that the installation of a monitoring facility is not practical, the Manager may approve an alternative point for sampling, monitoring or inspection.

    The Manager may require the user to upgrade or modify an existing monitoring facility.

 

3-14-715 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
    The City may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether these regulations are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the City or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection or sampling in the performance of any of their duties. The City shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force that would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel. Upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

 

3-14-720 MAINTENANCE OF MONITORING RECORDS.
    The user shall retain all records for three (3) years resulting from all sampling or monitoring performed for analyses of regulated contaminants. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user or the centralized waste treatment facility, or when requested by the POTW, the Manager or the Regional Administrator. Records shall be available for inspection and copying.

 

3-14-725 USER PRETREATMENT.
    Whenever deemed necessary by the Manager, the owner of any private premises shall, at his or her own expense, provide treatment or take such other measures, as shall be required in order to reduce objectionable characteristics, content, or rate of discharge of waters or wastes being deposited in the sanitary sewer system so that the same may be received therein without any damage to the sewer system or any undue interference with its operation.

 

3-14-730 TEST PROCEDURES.
    All sampling and analysis required under this Chapter or the Act or in conjunction with a pretreatment permit shall be conducted using appropriate methods and procedures as outlined in 40 CFR Part 136 entitled, “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants.” Alternate test procedures may be approved for limited use pursuant to 40 CFR 136.5, and other test procedures may be specified as described at 40 CFR 401.13.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14)

 

ARTICLE 8. ADMINISTRATION
3-14-800 WASTEWATER CHARGES AND FEES.
    (a)   Determination of User Charges and Fees. When user classification charges are established, they shall be based upon a minimum basic charge for each premises, computed on the basis of wastewater from a basic domestic premises with the following characteristics:

 

Characteristic

Milligrams Per Liter

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)

300 mg/l

Total suspended solids (TSS)

320 mg/l

Volume

145 gal. per day per single-family dwelling unit.

Volume

121 gal. per day per multiple-family dwelling unit.

 

The charges for all characteristics of users other than the basic domestic premises shall be based upon the relative difference between the average wastewater constituents and characteristics of that classification as related to those of a domestic premises. The charges and fees established for industrial users shall be based upon the measured or estimated constituents and characteristics of that user which may include, but are not limited to, BOD, TSS, and volume.

 

3-14-805 SEVERABILITY.
    If any provision of these regulations or the application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the regulations or the application of such provisions to other persons or other circumstances shall not be affected.

 

3-14-810 REQUIREMENT OF PAYMENT OF USER CHARGES AND FEES.
    Every user shall pay to the City all charges and fees levied upon their connection to and use of the sanitary sewer in accordance with the City’s schedule of charges and fees.

 

3-14-815 COLLECTION OF FEES AND CHARGES.
    Fees and charges for residential dwelling units (houses, apartments, condominiums and the like) for the period of July 1 to and including June 30 of each fiscal year shall be filed with the County Auditor of the County of Alameda prior to August 10, who shall enter such fees and charges as an assessment of the tax roll and against the respective premises. Said assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ad valorem taxes and other charges as are otherwise collectible by the County and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in the case of delinquencies as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levying, collection and enforcement of ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to such assessments as provided herein. All other fees and charges not assigned for collection to the County Auditor shall be billed and collected by the Finance Department of the City of San Leandro. All charges and fees are due and payable on receipt of a bill therefor. Such charges and fees shall be paid to the City as directed upon the bill. Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after billing the charges and fees shall become delinquent if the bill, or that portion thereof which is not in bona fide dispute, remains unpaid. If the assessment delinquency extends beyond a thirty (30) day period the City may assess a delinquency of the unpaid balance.

 

3-14-820 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES AND FEES.
    During July of each year, the Manager shall submit to the City’s governing body a report of delinquent charges and fees. A time, date and place for hearing the report and any objection or protests thereto shall be fixed by the City Clerk. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the Manager shall mail written notice thereof to the owner of each of the premises affected thereby, using for this purpose the names and addresses which appear on the last equalized tax assessment roll.

    At said hearing the government body shall hear any objections or protests of owners of premises liable to be assessed for delinquent charges or fees. The governing body may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which the report shall be confirmed by resolution. The delinquent charges and fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective premises and are a lien on the premises for the amounts of such delinquent charges and fees. Prior to August 10, a certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the County Auditor, who shall enter each assessment on the tax roll against the respective premises. Said assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessments. The lien created attaches upon recordation of a certified copy of the confirmed report in the office of the County Recorder and shall continue until the charges and fees are fully paid.

 

3-14-825 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
    The City will annually provide public notice, in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of the POTW, of industrial users that, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements per the provisions of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii).

 

3-14-830 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
    After providing adequate notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard, the City may revoke any permit, and/or halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The City also maintains the authority to halt or prevent any discharge to the sanitary sewer system which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW.

    If service is terminated it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any material to the City sanitary sewer. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules, or regulations, authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-020, 11/17/14; Ordinance No. 2019-013, 9/3/19)

CHAPTER 3-15 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Note
*Editor’s Note: Chapter 3-15, consisting of Sections 3-15-100 through 3-15-530, as derived from Ordinance No. 92-011, 7/6/92 and Ordinance No. 93-04, 3/15/93, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2001-06, 3/19/01.

 

ARTICLE 1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-15-100 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance” and may be so cited.

 

3-15-105 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of City of San Leandro citizens by:

 

    (a)   Eliminating non-storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer;

    (b)  Controlling the discharge to municipal separate storm sewers from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than storm water; and

    (c)   Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable.

    The intention of this Chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act.

 

3-15-110 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   Any terms defined in the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1990 (as may from time to time be amended) as used in this Chapter shall have the same meaning as in that statute or regulations. Specifically, the definitions of the following terms included in that statute or regulations are hereby incorporated by reference, as now applicable or as may hereafter be amended:

    (1)  DISCHARGE means (a) any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point source, or (b) any addition of any pollutant to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft.

    (2)  ILLICIT DISCHARGE means any discharge to the City storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water, except discharges pursuant to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.

    (3)  POLLUTANT means dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharge into water.

    (4)  STORM WATER means storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.

    (b)  When used in this Chapter, the following words will have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

    (1)  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to “waters of the United States”. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

    (2)  CITY means the City of San Leandro.

    (3)  CITY MANAGER means the individual appointed by the City of San Leandro governing body (City Council) with responsibility and authority for all functions of local government and is the authorized enforcement official.

    (4)  CITY STORM WATER SYSTEM includes but is not limited to those facilities within the City by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains, which is not part of a Publicly-Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.

    (5)  NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE means any discharge that is not entirely composed of storm water.

    (6)  PREMISES means any building, lot parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

 

3-15-115 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
    This Chapter shall be administered for the City by the City Manager, or designee. Where storm drain facilities and/or watercourses have been accepted for maintenance by the Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District (ACFCWCD) or other public agency legally responsible for certain watercourses, then the responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this Chapter may be assigned to such agency (through contract or agreement executed by the City and such agency) with respect to those watercourses for which they have accepted maintenance.

 

3-15-120 CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICATION.
    This Chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and NPDES Permit No. CA0029831 and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof.

 

3-15-125 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY.
    If any portion of this Chapter is declared invalid, the remaining portions of this Chapter are to be considered valid.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-06, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-15-100—3-15-125))

 

ARTICLE 2. DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
3-15-200 DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS.
    The discharge of non-storm water discharges to the City storm sewer system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than storm water must be in compliance with a NPDES permit issued for the discharge (other than NPDES Permit No. CA0029831)

    (a)   Exceptions to Discharge Prohibition: The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 3-15-200 above:

    (1)  Any discharge regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations.

    (2)  Discharges from the Following Activities When Properly Managed: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, or flows from fire fighting.

 

3-15-205 DISCHARGE IN VIOLATION OF PERMIT.
    Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of NPDES Permit No. CA0029831, and, of any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge.

 

3-15-210 ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
    It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, or continue illicit drainage connections to the City storm sewer system and to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the City storm sewer system. This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

 

3-15-215 REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN STORM WATER.
    Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the City storm sewer system shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants. The following minimal requirements shall apply.

    (a)   Littering: Except when deposited into containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds, no person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit, or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the City, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor, of any real property in the City of San Leandro in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property as required for the disposal of garbage.

    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water within the City.

    (b)  Standard for Parking Lots and Similar Structures: Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station pavement, or similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the City storm sewer system.

    (c)   Best Management Practices for New Developments and Redevelopments: Any construction contractor performing work in the City shall endeavor, whenever possible, to provide filter materials at the catch basin to retain any debris and dirt flowing into the City’s storm sewer system. The City Engineer may establish controls on the volume and rate of storm water runoff from new developments and redevelopments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants.

    (d)  Compliance with Best Management Practices: Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any Federal, State of California, regional, and/or City agency, for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall comply with such guidelines or requirements.

 

3-15-220 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
    (a)   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee or tenant, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse; shall maintain existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse; and shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.

    No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless a written authorization has first been obtained from the City Manager or designee:

    (1)  Discharge into or connect any pipe or channel to a watercourse;

    (2)  Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse;

    (3)  Carry out development within thirty feet (30′) of the center line of any creek or twenty feet (20′) of the top of a bank;

    (4)  Deposit in, plant in, or remove any material from a watercourse including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance;

    (5)  Construct, alert, enlarge, connect to, change, or remove any structure in a watercourse; or

    (6)  Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within a watercourse, or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material being carried away by storm waters passing through such watercourse.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-06, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-15-200—3-15-220))

 

ARTICLE 3. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-06, 3/19/01)

 

ARTICLE 4. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PROGRAMS
3-15-400 COORDINATION WITH HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INVENTORY AND RESPONSE PROGRAM.
    The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the City’s hazardous materials inventory and response program shall include a program for compliance with this Chapter, including the prohibitions on non-storm water discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce storm water pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-06, 3/19/01 (Section 3-15-400))

 

ARTICLE 5. FUNDING PROVISIONS
3-15-500 CITY OF SAN LEANDRO STORM WATER SYSTEM UTILITY ENTERPRISE FUND.
    The City of San Leandro Storm Water System Utility Enterprise Fund (hereinafter “Fund”) is hereby established to provide funding for the Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Program. The Fund may be expended for the following:

    (a)   All activities and resultant expenses required under the Alameda Countywide Clean Water Program;

    (b)  All activities and resultant expenses required by the NPDES permit which authorizes and regulates discharge from the City of San Leandro storm water collection and conveyance system;

    (c)   All activities and resultant expenses associated with the maintenance and operation of the storm water collection and conveyance system;

    (d)  Capital expenses associated with the repair, replacement, and capital improvement of the storm water collection and conveyance system;

    (e)   All expenses associated with the maintenance, operation, and capital requirements of any storm water treatment system which may be prospectively required by State or Federal law;

    (f)   All expenses for any activities directly related to any of the foregoing.

 

3-15-505 FUNDING PROVISION—DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   LAND USE CATEGORY means that category of land use assigned to a parcel of real property as shown on the most current official assessment roll of the Alameda County Assessor.

    (b)  PARCEL means a unit of real property in one ownership as shown on the most current official assessment roll of the Alameda County Assessor; “parcel size” means the area of such a unit, measured in acres, as determined from records maintained by Alameda County or the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   RUNOFF FACTOR means the indicator of storm water generation of a parcel and is based on the average ratio of impervious area to total parcel area for a category of land use.

 

3-15-510 REVENUE SOURCE.
    The City of San Leandro Storm Water System Utility Enterprise Fund shall derive revenue from the following sources:

    (a)   Reimbursements and subventions made available through the Alameda Countywide Clean Water Program;

    (b)  Reimbursements and subventions made available by any other governmental entity for the purpose of supporting any of the activities of the City of San Leandro Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Program;

    (c)   Any other funds the City Council directs to be allocated to the Storm Water System Utility Enterprise Fund for money available to it, including but not limited to, money in its General Fund; and

    (d)  Service charges assessed by the City of San Leandro in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

 

3-15-515 ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
    Every person or entity owning real property within the City of San Leandro, or owning property not within the incorporated City limits but discharging storm water to a collection and conveyance system owned and operated by the City of San Leandro, shall pay a service charge calculated in accordance with the provisions of this article as set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

 

3-15-520 CALCULATION OF SERVICE CHARGES.
    Service charges shall be calculated in a manner which distributes, as equitably as possible, storm water system costs to users of the system proportionate to the benefit received. In consideration of the fact that storm water runoff and consequent storm water system loading is directly related to the physical size and impervious surface area of any parcel of land, those factors shall be utilized in the calculation of service charges. For the purpose of this section, impervious surface area shall be represented by the runoff factor established for parcels on the basis of use and as otherwise determined by the Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District. In addition, other factors which disproportionately affect storm water system costs and which are attributable to any user or class of users may be utilized in the setting of rates for that user or class of users.

 

3-15-525 COLLECTION, INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
    The City Manager is authorized to have the charges imposed by this Article collected by the County of Alameda in conjunction with the County’s collection of property tax revenues for the City of San Leandro. In the event that the County of Alameda collects the charges imposed by this Article, the imposition of penalties, additional fees, and interest upon owners who fail to remit any delinquent remittance under this Article shall be subject to and governed by the rules, regulations, and procedures utilized by the County of Alameda in its collection of property taxes and charges for the City of San Leandro, and in its collection of this additional charge for the City of San Leandro.

    Every penalty imposed and all interest accrued under the provisions of this Article shall become a part of the charges herein required to be paid.

 

3-15-530 DELINQUENT CHARGES REMEDIES.
    (a)   Delinquent charges are hereby made a lien upon the real property served by the storm water system;

    (b)  The amount of any charge, penalty, and interest imposed under the provisions of this Article shall be deemed a debt to the city.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-06, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-15-500—3-15-530))

CHAPTER 3-16 GRAFFITI
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-16-100 GRAFFITI—DEFINITION.
    The term “graffiti” shall mean the writing, defacing, marring, inscribing, scratching, painting or affixing of markings on buildings or structures, including, but nor limited to, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, walkways, sidewalks and curbs.

 

3-16-105 UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE.
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the City to maintain or allow to be maintained graffiti on such property for an unreasonable period and to the extent such graffiti is visible from a public street or from other properties, public or private.

 

3-16-110 ENFORCEMENT.
    Any violation of this Chapter may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12. Recovery of the costs of any enforcement action may be had according to the provisions of said Chapter 1-12, in addition to any recovery provided by Article 2 of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-024, 12/20/93 (Sections 3-16-100—3-16-110); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 3-16-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. COST RECOVERY FOR GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
3-16-200 AUTHORIZATION FOR RECOUPMENT.
    The City Council of the City of San Leandro hereby authorizes the Probation Officer for the County of Alameda, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 742.14(a), to recoup the City’s costs associated with identifying and apprehending minors who have defaced property and, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 742.14(d), to recoup the City’s costs associated with the cleanup or replacement of the City’s property due to defacement by minors.

 

3-16-210 REVIEW OF FINDINGS.
    The City Council shall review the findings in Section 2 of this Ordinance every three (3) years and shall by resolution adopt updated cost findings if necessary.

 

3-16-220 TRANSMITTAL OF DATA TO COUNTY PROBATION OFFICER.
    The City shall transmit to the County Probation Officer sufficient data to enable the Probation Officer and the Juvenile Court to calculate the costs associated with identifying and apprehending the minor and the costs associated with cleaning, repairing, or replacing the property defaced by the minor.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 97-018, 6/30/97 (Sections 3-16-200—3-16-220))

CHAPTER 3-17 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-17-100 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “City of San Leandro Hazardous Materials Ordinance” and may be so cited.

 

3-17-105 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
    The City Council (Council) finds and declares:

    (a)   Hazardous materials and hazardous wastes present in the community may pose acute and chronic health hazards to individuals who live, visit and work in the City of San Leandro (City) and who are exposed to such substances as a result of fire, spills, industrial accidents, or other releases or emissions.

    (b)  It is the intent of the Council to recognize the community’s right and need for basic information on the use, handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials and wastes in San Leandro and to establish an orderly system for the provision of such information.

    (c)   It is further the intent of the Council that the system of disclosure set forth herein shall provide the information essential to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials, workers and their representatives, and residents in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a way that the statutory privilege of trade secrecy is not abridged.

    (d)  Businesses that safely handle hazardous materials and wastes are beneficial to the economic life of the City and community. It is the intent of the Council to provide program provisions that facilitate the continued and growing presence of safe businesses.

    (e)   It is further the intent of the Council to conform the provisions of this chapter to California laws regulating the storage and handling of hazardous materials and wastes, including: Chapter 6.5 (hazardous waste); Chapters 6.7 and 6.75 (underground storage tanks); Chapter 6.95, Article 1 (hazardous materials); Chapter 6.95, Article 2 (Accidental Release Prevention Program) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code; and Division 7, Chapter 10, Article 4 of the California Water Code (water monitoring wells). The City hereby assumes responsibility and exclusive jurisdiction of these laws, to the extent authorized by law. These State provisions are incorporated into this chapter by reference, as are the State regulations adopted in furtherance of these statutory provisions, except as modified within this chapter. This chapter is also intended to be used in conjunction with the most recent version of the Uniform Fire and Building Code adopted by the City which pertains to hazardous materials management.

 

3-17-110 ASSUMPTION OF CUPA AUTHORITY.
    (a)   The City hereby assumes the authority and responsibility for the implementation of CUPA programs (Chapter 6.11) of the California Health and Safety Code (Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et seq.), as to the handling of hazardous waste/materials in the City. Pursuant to Section 25404 of Chapter 6.11, the City shall have exclusive jurisdiction within its boundaries for the purposes of implementing CUPA programs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the Alameda County District Attorney shall continue to be responsible for any civil and criminal prosecution of CUPA violations, unless otherwise agreed to by the City and the County of Alameda in writing.

    (b)  In accordance with Section 25404.2 of Chapter 6.11, the City of San Leandro Environmental Services Division hereby is designated as the administering agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 6.11 and this Article. The City Manager hereby delegates to the City of San Leandro Environmental Services Division Manager (“Administrator”) authority to take any and all actions that may be necessary for the City of San Leandro Environmental Services Division to administer and enforce Chapter 6.11 and this Article. All City employees designated by the Administrator are authorized to make such inspections and take any actions on behalf of the Administrator as may be required to administer and enforce.

 

3-17-115 LAWS AND REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
    The following chapters of the California Health and Safety Code, with their implementing regulations and agency resolutions, are hereby incorporated into this Chapter by reference: Chapter 6.5 (hazardous waste); Chapters 6.7 and 6.75 (underground storage tanks); Chapter 6.95 Article 1 (hazardous materials); Chapter 6.95 (Hazardous Materials Release Plans and Inventory), Article 2 (Accidental Release Prevention Program); Chapter 6.5 (Hazardous Waste Control) Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory Program of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code; and Division 7, Chapter 10, Article 4 of the California Water Code. This Chapter contains additional stricter local requirements in accordance with Sections 25299.2 and 25500 of the California Health and Safety Code. This Chapter also incorporates by reference the Uniform Fire and Building Codes that pertain to hazardous materials management as they may be adopted from time to time by the City of San Leandro. The provision of this chapter shall conform to these incorporated provisions as they may be amended, unless explicitly modified within this Chapter.

 

3-17-120 DEFINITIONS.
    In addition to the definitions incorporated by reference from the laws and regulations referenced in Section 3-17-115, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

    (a)   ADMINISTRATOR means the hazardous materials program Administrator, who shall be the Manager of the City of San Leandro Environmental Services Division.

    (b)  CLOSURE of a storage unit or facility permitted under this chapter to handle hazardous materials or wastes means the termination of handling those hazardous materials or wastes, and includes preparation and implementation of a closure plan designed to meet the following objectives:

    (1)  Eliminate the need for further maintenance or monitoring of the closed unit or facility;

    (2)  Ensure that there is no residual threat to public health or safety or the environment from possible releases of hazardous materials or wastes from the unit or facility; and

    (3)  Ensure that the removal, disposal, neutralization or reuse of the hazardous materials or wastes that were handled in or released from the unit or facility is accomplished in an appropriate manner.

    (c)   HANDLER means a business that handles hazardous materials and/or generates wastes, and is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

    (d)  HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE means any of the following:

    (1)  Any material classified as a hazardous material or hazardous substance by any of the laws or regulations incorporated by reference into this Chapter by Section 3-17-115;

    (2)  Any waste classified as a hazardous waste by any of the laws or regulations incorporated by reference into this Chapter by Section 3-17-115; or

 

 

    (3)  Any other material or waste designated as hazardous for purposes of this Chapter by the Administrator, upon a finding by the Administrator that the material or waste, because of its quantity, concentration, physical, or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the community.

 

3-17-125 COMMUNITY RIGHT TO KNOW—TRADE SECRETS.
    (a)   Subject to the subsections of this section relating to trade secrets, all disclosure forms and permits are public records and will be publicly available during normal business hours in the offices of the Administrator in accordance with the following procedures:

    (1)  Written application for the information shall be submitted to the Administrator, on a form provided by the City which shall include name, address, telephone number, and verification of the applicant’s identity. The written application shall also identify the specific file(s) requested for disclosure;

    (2)  The information shall be provided within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application, with the exception, that requests for information that has been designated as a trade secret by the handler shall be subject to the subsections of this section regarding trade secrets.

    (b)  If a handler believes that information required to be disclosed on the disclosure form, a permit application, or under the terms of Section 3-17-135 involves the trade secret, the handler shall notify the Administrator in writing of the information the handler believes involves the release of a trade secret. As used in this Chapter, “trade secret” shall have the meaning given by Section 25290 (for underground storage tank systems) and 25511 of the Health and Safety Code, Section 6254.7 of the Government Code and Section 1060 of the Evidence Code.

    (c)   Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information identified by the handler to the Administrator as a trade secret under subsection (b) of this section, the Administrator shall notify the handler in writing of the request by certified mail, return receipt requested. The Administrator shall release the information to the public, but not earlier than thirty (30) days after the mailing of such notice, unless prior to the expiration of said thirty (30) days, the handler institutes an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that such information is subject to protection under subsection (b) of this section and/or obtains an injunction prohibiting disclosure. The handler and the member(s) of the public requesting disclosure shall be considered the real parties in interest in any such action, and the City of San Leandro, if named, will be a disinterested party.

    (d)  Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the Administrator, or representative or employee, which is exempt from disclosure following subsection (c) of this section, shall not be disclosed to anyone except:

    (1)  Any officer or employee of the City, County of Alameda, State of California, or United States of America, in connection with official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health. For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the City, and any contractor who is furnished information that is protected from disclosure by this section, shall be considered employees of the City;

    (2)  Any physician or registered nurse who has determined that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of a patient.

    Any person who received information protected from disclosure by this section because they qualify under subdivisions (1) or (2) of this subsection, and who, knowing that disclosure of this information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

    (e)   Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States Government as necessarily kept secret for national security purposes shall be accorded the full protection against disclosure as specified by such officials in accordance with the laws of the United States.

    (f)   The provisions of this section shall not permit a handler of hazardous materials to refuse to disclose to the Administrator information required by this Chapter.

 

3-17-130 FEES AND PENALTIES.
    The City Council shall establish by resolution, from time to time, a schedule of fees for each class of permits issued under this Chapter, for additional late fees, and for additional services provided by the City to administer and enforce this Chapter including but not limited to annual registration fees pursuant to Health & Safety Code Section 25404. These fees shall be sufficient to allow the City to recover its costs of administering this Chapter. The fees will take effect upon adoption by the City Council.

 

3-17-135 INSPECTIONS.
    (a)   In order to carry out the purposes of this Chapter, the Administrator or designee has the authority to inspect any place where hazardous materials or wastes are handled, or any place where the Administrator has reason to believe that an unauthorized release of a hazardous material has occurred, is occurring, or may occur. This authority extends to any property within two thousand (2,000) feet of property on which hazardous materials or wastes are handled. The authority conferred by this section includes the authority to conduct any monitoring or testing of any above-ground or underground storage tank system. This right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours unless otherwise required by an emergency, and entry shall be made to any establishment or property only with consent of the owner or tenant thereof, or with proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry.

    (b)  All inspections under this Chapter shall be at the discretion of the City of San Leandro Environmental Services Division (CSL/ESD) and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring the CSL/ESD to conduct any such inspection nor shall any actual inspection made imply a duty to conduct any other inspection. Furthermore, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to hold the CSL/ESD or any officer, employee or representative of the CSL/ESD responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of making an inadequate or negligent inspection, or by reason of any failure to make an inspection or reinspection.

 

3-17-140 ENFORCEMENT.
    This Chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3-18 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

3-17-145 RELATION TO EXISTING LAW—EFFECTIVE DATES.
    (a)   The requirements set forth in this amended Chapter are declarative of existing law and the responsibilities of handlers of hazardous materials and waste within the City as of the effective date of this amended Chapter. Handlers filing disclosure forms or permit applications under this Chapter shall use revised forms at the time of their first update of the relevant document(s) after the effective date of this revised Chapter.

    (b)  The City, under the terms of Health and Safety Code Section 25502, hereby assumes responsibility and exclusive jurisdiction within the City for implementation of Health and Safety Code Section 25502 et seq., regulating the inventory and preparation of response plans for hazardous materials by business, and regulating the Accidental Release Program.

    (c)   The city, under the terms of Health and Safety Code Section 25583, hereby assumes responsibility and exclusive jurisdiction within the City for implementation of Health and Safety Code Sections 25280 et seq., regulating the underground storage of hazardous substances.

 

3-17-150 RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
    (a)   If any provision of this Chapter or any application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.

 

 

    (b)  When conflicts arise between the contents of this Chapter and any other provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code, the more stringent provisions shall prevail, provided said more stringent provisions are not in conflict with the laws set forth in Section 3-17-115.

    (c)   The disclosure of hazardous materials information following the provisions of this chapter shall not in any way affect any other liability or responsibility of a handler with regard to safeguarding the health and safety of any employee, or any other person or the environment.

    (d)  The degree of protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. The standards set forth herein are minimal standards and this Chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no improper release of hazardous materials or wastes. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All persons handling hazardous materials or wastes within the City are advised to determine, to their own satisfaction, the level of additional protection necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no improper release of hazardous materials or wastes.

    (e)   Subject to the limitations of due process, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code whenever the word “shall” is used in establishing a responsibility or duty of the City, its elected or appointed officer, employees, or agents, it is the intent of the City that such word established a discretionary responsibility or duty requiring the exercise of judgments and discretion.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01 (Sections 3-17-100—3-17-150); Ordinance No. 2011-005, 4/4/11 (Section 3-17-125))

CHAPTER 3-18 ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-18-100 ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “City of San Leandro Environmental Enforcement Ordinance” and may be so cited.

 

3-18-105 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of the City of San Leandro and its residents by:

    (a)   Providing for uniform and effective enforcement of the City of San Leandro Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance in Chapter 3-15 and the Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations in Chapter 3-14; and

    (b)  Providing for procedures by which the City of San Leandro will implement the enforcement of environmental laws pursuant to its role as a Certified Unified Program Agency.

 

3-18-110 SCOPE.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the City of San Leandro Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance in Chapter 3-15, and; the Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations in Chapter 3-14; the Certified Uniform Program Agency Ordinance at Chapter 3-17; and hazardous materials provisions in the Fire Code.

 

3-18-115 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the City, or who knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under these regulations, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) or by imprisonment in a County Jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both. The City Attorney, upon order of the City Council, shall petition the court of appropriate jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums.

 

3-18-120 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
    Primary responsibility for enforcement of these regulations shall be vested in the City Manager or agents of the City as he or she shall designate. Field inspectors or other employees of the City are hereby authorized to act as agents of the City for and on behalf of the City Manager with the power to inspect and issue notices and/or citations for violations of these regulations.

 

3-18-125 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this Title 3 or whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this Title, the City Manager may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the City Manager by this Title; provided that: (1) if such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and (2) if such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.

    Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of an inspection or search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, or in the event that the owner or person in charge of the building or premises cannot be located, an inspection/
abatement or search warrant authorizing entry shall be obtained prior to City’s entry onto the building or premises. The City Manager is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such warrant authorizing entry.

    Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this Title 3.

    (a)   Authority to Sample and Establish Sampling Devices. The City shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or monitoring operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the City Manager may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on-site.

    (b)  Notification of Spills. As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants or waste, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and clean-up of such release and shall notify the City of the occurrence by telephoning the City Manager and confirming the notification by correspondence to the same.

    (c)   Requirement to Test or Monitor. The City Manager may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, and/or release, discharge or deposit of hazardous materials shall undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the City Manager may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses, and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses, and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and/or reports requested.

 

3-18-130 SUBMISSION OF TIME SCHEDULES.
    (a)   When the City finds that a discharge of wastewater is taking place, has been taking place or threatens to take place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this Title 3, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions of a permit, the City may, at its discretion, require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as the City Manager deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of these regulations or of any permit issued pursuant to these regulations, and to take such action in accordance with such schedule.

    (b)  Nothing provided in this section shall limit or prohibit the City from pursuing any other remedy, legal or equitable, otherwise available to City, or from seeking sanctions in any criminal or civil action related to the violation set forth in subsection (a) of this section.

 

3-18-135 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    In addition to the penalties provided in this Chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this Title 3 is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance. Such violation may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12. Any violation of a discharge standard and/or requirement of these regulations, applicable State or Federal regulations or any order issued by the City as authorized by these regulations, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of this Code or other laws or ordinances governing such nuisance. Such nuisance may be abated, removed or enjoined and damages assessed therefor, in any manner provided by law or this Code.

    The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property, and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property. The lien procedures in Chapter 1-12 of this Code shall be followed for any such lien.

    If violation of this Chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the City shall so declare. Thereafter, such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing.

 

3-18-140 EMERGENCY CORRECTION.
    In the event clean-up, repairs, construction, or other public work is performed on any premises pursuant to any provision of law relating to the emergency performance of public work and the expenditure of public funds therefor, or pursuant to any other provision of law authorizing public work on private property in order to correct, eliminate or abate a condition upon such premises which threatens to cause, causes, or has caused a violation of any provisions of these regulations, or of any permit issued pursuant to these regulations, or of any other requirement of law, the owner, occupant and/or responsible party is responsible for the occurrence or condition giving rise to such work, the occupant, the owner of the premises and responsible party shall be liable jointly and severally to the City for such public expenditures including overhead costs.

 

3-18-145 CALIFORNIA CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE SECTION 1094.6.
    The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure are applicable to judicial review of City decisions pursuant to this Title 3.

 

3-18-150 ISSUANCE OF CEASE AND DESIST ORDER.
    When the City Manager finds that a violation of this Title 3 or the provisions of a permit has taken place or is likely to take place, the City may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such violation and direct those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions to:

    (a)   Comply forthwith;

    (b)  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the City; or

    (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action.

 

3-18-155 NOTICE TO CLEAN.
    Whenever the City Manager finds any oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste, or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds which may result in: (1) a release; or (2) pollutants entering the City storm sewer systems or a non-storm discharge to the City storm sewer system, said official may give notice to the property owner and/or to the tenant, if any, to remove such oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice.

 

3-18-160 DAMAGE TO FACILITIES—ADDITIONAL REMEDY.
    When a discharge causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to City facilities including, but not limited to, the City sewerage system, the City may assess a charge against the owner, occupant or responsible party for the work required to clean, repair and/or replace the facility and add such charge to the facilities’ charges and fees, including overhead costs.

 

3-18-165 APPEALS.
    Any user, permit applicant, permit holder, property owner, occupant, or responsible party affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the City, interpreting or implementing the provisions of Title 3 or in any permit issued herein, may file with the City Manager a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the appellant’s request for reconsideration. The City Manager shall appoint a hearing officer who shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days from the date of filing. The hearing officer shall make a ruling on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing. If the ruling made by the hearing officer is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he or she may within ten (10) days after notification of the City’s action, file a written appeal to the City Council. The written appeal shall be heard by the body within sixty (60) days from the date of filing. The City Council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing. The City Manager’s decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. The City Council’s determination on the appeal shall be final.

 

3-18-170 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
    Any person, without regard to intent or negligence, who violates any provision of Chapter 3-14 of this Code, or of any provisions of any permit issued pursuant to these regulations, or who discharges any material which causes contamination, nuisance, pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, termination of service, prohibition, effluent limitation, national standard of performance or national pretreatment or toxicity standard or requirement, shall be civilly and/or criminally liable to the City in a sum not to exceed Six Thousand Dollars ($6,000.00) per day per violation and in a sum not to be less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. The City may petition the Superior Court to impose, assess and collect such sums pursuant to this Chapter and Section 54740 of the California Government Code.

 

3-18-175 ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN VIOLATION OF FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT AND/OR PORTER-COLOGNE ACT.
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those Acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this Article shall also include notice to the violator of such potential liability.

 

3-18-180 CIVIL ACTIONS.
    In addition to any other remedies provided for in this Chapter, any violation of this Title may be enforced by civil action brought by the City. In any such action, the City may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

    (a)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;

    (b)  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection;

    (c)   Compensatory damages for loss and destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subdivision shall be paid to the City to be used exclusively for programs of the Environmental Services Section.

 

3-18-185 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS OF ARREST.
    The City Manager may issue a citation for an infraction and notice to appear in the manner prescribed by Chapter 5c of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code (or as the same may hereafter be amended). It is the intent of the City Council that the immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code be applicable to public officers or employees acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to Title 3 of the Penal Code.

    Police officers, but not the City Manager, shall have and are hereby vested with the authority to arrest or cite any person who violates any section of Title 3 in the manner provided by the California Penal Code for the arrest or release on citation of misdemeanor infractions as prescribed by Chapters 5, 5c, and 5d of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code (or as the same may be hereinafter amended).

 

3-18-190 CONTINUING VIOLATION.
    Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation, or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion for which a violation of this Title 3 is committed, continued, or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly as herein provided.

 

3-18-195 CONCEALMENT.
    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Title 3 shall constitute a violation of such provision.

 

3-18-200 MISDEMEANOR.
    Any person violating any provision of these regulations, or of any permit issued pursuant to said regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not to exceed one year, or by a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by both such imprisonment and fine. Every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The City Attorney, upon order of the City Manager, shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess, and recover such sums as may be applicable. Any such violation constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the City, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

    Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36900. After a third infraction conviction for a violation of the same provision within a twelve (12) month period, or subsequent violations of that same provision within a twelve (12) month period may be charged as misdemeanors.

 

3-18-205 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER PROCESS.
    Any City enforcement officer may issue a complaint to any person on whom civil liability may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 3-17 of this Title. The complaint shall allege the acts or failures to act that constitute a basis for liability and the amount of the proposed civil liability. The complaint shall be served by personal service or certified mail and shall inform the party so served that a hearing shall be held at a specific time and place within sixty (60) days after the party has been served. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings hereunder.

 

3-18-210 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER HEARING PROCESS.
    The administrative order hearing shall be held before the City Manager or his/her designee. All hearings shall be recorded. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules of evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. At the time stated in the complaint, the City Manager shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony under oath relative to the acts or failures to act that constitute a basis for liability. If the City Manager finds that there is sufficient cause to find liability, the City Manager shall prepare findings and an order, which shall specify the nature of the violation and the amount of the proposed civil liability.

 

3-18-215 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER APPEAL PROCESS.
    The owner, occupant or responsible party (Respondent) subject to an Administrative Order proceeding may appeal the City Manager’s findings and order to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the City Manager’s decision. The appeal shall contain:

    (a)   A specific identification of the alleged basis for liability;

    (b)  The names and addresses of all appellants;

    (c)   A statement of appellant’s legal interest in the proceedings;

    (d)  A statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested and the grounds for appeal, together with all material facts in support thereof;

    (e)   The date and signatures of all appellants;

    (f)   The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

    As soon as practicable after receiving the appeal, the City Clerk shall set a date for the City Council to hear the appeal which date shall not be less than ten (10) calendar days nor more than sixty (60) calendar days from the date the appeal was filed. The City Clerk shall give each appellant written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. Continuances of the hearing may be granted by the City Council on request of the Respondent for good cause shown, or on the City Council’s own motion.

    Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall determine whether any civil liability exists and the amount of the liability. If the City Council so finds, the City Council shall adopt a resolution setting forth its findings and ordering the payment of the civil penalty. The decision and order of the City Council shall be final.

 

3-18-220 WAIVER OF HEARING ON ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
    The responding party in an administrative order proceeding may waive the right to a hearing. If the party waives the right to a hearing, the City shall issue an order setting liability in the amount proposed in the complaint unless the City and the party have entered into a settlement agreement, in which case the City shall issue an order setting liability in the amount specified in the settlement agreement. Where the party has waived the right to a hearing or where the City and the party have entered into a settlement agreement, the order shall not be subject to review by any court or agency.

 

3-18-225 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
    The remedies provided for in this Chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any and all other remedies available to the City. The violations and penalties as set forth in Chapters 6.7 and 6.95, Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, are hereby specifically adopted and shall be cumulative to the remedies set forth herein.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-07, 3/19/01; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 3-18-135); Ordinance No. 2014-021, 11/3/14)

CHAPTER 3-19 GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY BUILDING PROJECTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-19-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    To promote economic and environmental health in the City, it is essential that the City itself, through the design, construction, operation and deconstruction of its own facilities and facilities it funds, provide leadership to both the private and public sectors by incorporating green building practices. The most immediate and meaningful way to do this is to require the integration of green building strategies in City buildings.

 

3-19-105 FINDINGS.
    (a)   The City finds that the design, construction, and maintenance of buildings within the City can have a significant impact on the City’s environmental sustainability, resource usage and efficiency, waste management, and the health and productivity of residents, workers, and visitors to the City.

    (b)  The City finds, based on studies by Alameda County Waste Management Authority (StopWaste.Org), that construction and demolition debris comprise a substantial portion of materials disposed in Alameda County landfills.

    (c)   The City finds that green building, construction, operation and maintenance can have a significant positive effect on energy, water and resource efficiency, waste and pollution generation, and the health and productivity of a property’s occupants over the life of the building.

    (d)  The City finds that green building design contributes to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, improves air quality and enhances urban sustainability.

    (e)   The City finds that green building benefits are spread throughout the systems and features of the building, the larger San Francisco Bay Area ecosystem and the community. Green buildings use recycled-content materials, consume less energy and water, have better indoor air quality, and use fewer natural resources than conventional buildings. Construction waste is often recycled and remanufactured into other building products.

    (f)   The City finds that green building design and construction decisions made by the City in the construction and remodeling of City buildings can result in significant cost savings to the City over the life of the projects.

    (g)  The City finds that it is critical to both the economic and environmental health of the City that the City provides leadership to both the private and public sectors in the area of green building.

    (h)  The most immediate and meaningful way to do so is to include green building elements in City projects, and to encourage private projects to include green building elements.

    (i)   Green building design, construction, operations and maintenance techniques have been increasingly adopted in residential and commercial building construction.

    (j)   At the national level, the U.S. Green Building Council has taken the lead in promoting and defining commercial green building by developing the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)™ Rating System.

    (k)  Requiring City Projects to incorporate LEED™ is necessary and appropriate to achieving the benefits of green building in the City.

 

3-19-110 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Building” means any structure used for support or shelter of any use or occupancy. “Building” includes structures of occupied space, as defined by the California Building Code.

    (b)  “City project” means any new construction or renovation of a building owned or occupied by a City department or agency.

    (c)   “Covered project” means all new building or renovation projects that equal or exceed Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) in construction costs, adjusted annually to the Building Cost Index published in the Engineering News-Record Magazine, and are owned or occupied by a City department or agency.

    (d)  “Green Building Compliance Official” means the designated staff person(s) with the requisite green building training and accreditations that are authorized and responsible for implementing this Chapter.

    (e)   “Initiated” means officially identified and substantially funded to offset the costs associated with the project.

    (f)   “LEED™ Rating System” means the most recent version of the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED™) Green Building Rating System approved by the United States Green Building Council. City staff shall maintain the most recent version of the LEED™ Rating System at all times.

    (g)  “LEED™ Accredited Professional” means an individual who has passed the LEED™ accreditation exam administered by the United States Green Building Council.

    (h)  “Renovation” means any addition or modification to an existing building or structure.

    (i)   “Structure” means a building and excludes traditional public works projects.

    (j)   “Traditional public works project” means heavy construction projects such as pump stations, sewer-related facilities, flood control improvements, roads, and bridges, as well as traffic lights, sidewalks, bike paths, bus stops, and associated infrastructure on City owned and maintained property.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-007, 5/19/08 (Sections 3-19-100—3-19-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. STANDARD FOR COMPLIANCE
3-19-200 LEED™ RATING FOR COVERED PROJECTS.
    All covered projects initiated on or after the effective date of this ordinance, shall meet a LEED™ Silver Rating and be so certified by the United States Green Building Council. Prior to the design process, the City Manager may designate a covered project as needing to meet a higher LEED™ rating. All covered projects shall also have a LEED™ Accredited Professional as a principal member of the design team from the beginning of the project.

 

3-19-205 NON-COVERED PROJECTS.
    For the purposes of reducing operating and maintenance costs in all City facilities, projects that do not meet the threshold that triggers compliance with the requirements of this Chapter should meet as many LEED™ credits as practicable. Public Works and Engineering and Transportation Departments should regularly review the project specifications used in bidding traditional public works projects to include the best green building/environmental practices possible.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-007, 5/19/08 (Sections 3-19-200, 3-19-205))

 

ARTICLE 3. PROMULGATION OF IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS
3-19-300 TIMELINE.
    The City Manager shall, within six (6) months of ordinance adoption, promulgate any rules and regulations necessary or appropriate to achieve compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. The initial rules and regulations shall be promulgated after securing and reviewing comments from affected City agencies and departments.

 

3-19-305 GENERAL GUIDELINES.
    The rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager’s office under this Chapter shall provide for at least the following:

    (a)   The incorporation of the green building requirements of this Chapter into the appropriate design, construction, maintenance and development agreement documents prepared for the applicable covered projects.

    (b)  The designation of an appropriate Green Building Compliance Official(s) who shall have the responsibility to administer and monitor compliance with the green building requirements set forth in this Chapter and with any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, and to grant waivers or exemptions from the requirements of this Chapter, and to report to the City Manager regarding green building compliance on all covered projects.

    (c)   For Cities with an adopted Environmental Purchasing Policy (EPP), the Green Building Compliance Official(s) will coordinate activities with the person(s) responsible for implementation of the EPP.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-007, 5/19/08 (Sections 3-19-300, 3-19-305))

 

ARTICLE 4. UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
3-19-400 WAIVERS.
    Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may be waived in unusual circumstances where the City Council has, by resolution, found and determined that the public interest would not be served by complying with such provisions.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-007, 5/19/08 (Section 3-19-400))

CHAPTER 3-20 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-20-100 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Basic life support ambulance service” or “BLS” means the service performed in response to a non-emergency call. Specifically, first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) procedures that, at a minimum, include recognizing respiratory and cardiac arrest and starting the proper application of an automatic external defibrillator (AED) and CPR to maintain life without invasive techniques until the victim may be transported or until advanced life support is available.

    (b)  “Critical care transport” or “CCT” means any emergency or non-emergency transport of a patient where the skill level required in the care of that patient during transport requires, or may require, care within the CCT-Paramedic or CCT-RN scope of practice.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-008, 7/21/08 (Section 3-20-100))

 

 

ARTICLE 2. COMPLIANCE BY SERVICE PROVIDERS
3-20-200 COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY ORDINANCE CODE REQUIRED.
    Every company based in the City of San Leandro which provides Basic Life Support Ambulance Service or Critical Care Transport, and every company which provides Basic Life Support Ambulance Service or Critical Care Transport within the City of San Leandro shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 6.114 of Title 6 of the Ordinance Code of the County of Alameda, as it is now and as it may be amended in the future.

 

3-20-205 CITY LIABILITY.
    Unless expressly agreed in writing, the City of San Leandro and its officers and employees shall not be liable for any costs or charges associated with compliance with this Chapter or the rules or regulations promulgated hereunder.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2008-008, 7/21/08 (Sections 3-20-200, 3-20-205))

CHAPTER 3-21 VERY HIGH FIRE SEVERITY ZONES
3-21-100 TITLE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the Fire Severity Map Ordinance.

 

3-21-110 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to designate those areas within the San Leandro City limits that the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection has determined, under California Government Code Section 51179, are very high fire hazard severity zones (VHFHS Zones).

 

3-21-120 EFFECT.
    Basic authorities and responsibilities for designated very high fire hazard severity zones (VHFHS Zones) are set forth in Government Code Section 51175 et seq.

 

3-21-130 MAP.
    The map, prepared by the Fire Resource Assessment Program, California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection labeled Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones in the Local Response Area (LRA) as prepared by CAL FIRE dated September 3, 2008, is on file at the Alameda County Fire Department Prevention Office, the Office of the City Clerk, and at the Permit Center, all located at 835 E. 14th Street, in San Leandro. Such map may from time to time be amended by resolution of the City Council.

 

 

3-21-140 DESIGNATION.
    The areas recommended as VHFHS Zones as set forth on the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Map are designated as VHFHS Zones.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2009-001, 3/16/09)

CHAPTER 3-22 BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY PROJECTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
3-22-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The City Council declares the purpose and intent of this Chapter as follows:

    To promote economic and environmental health in the City, it is essential that the City itself, through the design, construction, and maintenance of its own landscapes and landscapes it funds, provide leadership to both the private and public sectors by incorporating Bay-friendly landscaping practices. The most immediate and meaningful way to do this is to require the integration of Bay-friendly landscaping strategies in City landscapes and landscapes that are part of public-private partnership projects.

 

3-22-105 FINDINGS.
    The City makes the following findings:

    (a)   The City finds that the design, construction, and maintenance of landscapes within the City can have a significant impact on the City’s environmental sustainability, resource usage and efficiency, waste management, and the health of the watershed and as well as the health of residents, workers, and visitors to the City.

    (b)  The City finds, based on studies by StopWaste.Org, that plant debris from landscape construction, renovation and maintenance comprises seven percent (7%) of the materials disposed in Alameda County landfills.

    (c)   The City finds that Bay-friendly landscape design, construction, operation and maintenance can have a significant positive effect on energy, water and resource efficiency, waste and pollution generation, wildlife habitat, and health of workers and users of the landscape.

    (d)  The City finds that Bay-friendly landscape design, construction, operation and maintenance contributes to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, improves air quality and enhances urban sustainability.

    (e)   The City finds that Bay-friendly landscaping benefits are spread throughout the systems and features of the landscape, the larger San Francisco Bay Area ecosystem and the community. Bay-friendly landscaping is a whole systems approach to the design, construction and maintenance of the landscape in order to support the integrity of the San Francisco Bay watershed. Key components of Bay-friendly landscaping include reducing waste and using recycled content materials; nurturing healthy soils while reducing fertilizer use; conserving water, energy and topsoil; using Integrated Pest Management (IPM) to minimize chemical use; reducing stormwater runoff; and creating wildlife habitat.

    (f)   The City finds that Bay-friendly landscape design and construction decisions made by the City in the construction and maintenance of landscapes can result in significant cost savings to the City over the life of the projects.

    (g)  The City finds that it is critical to both the economic and environmental health of the City that the City provides leadership to both the private and public sectors in the area of Bay-friendly landscaping.

    (h)  The most immediate and meaningful way to do so is to include Bay-friendly landscaping elements in City landscape projects and in landscape projects built as public-private partnerships, and to encourage private landscape projects to include Bay-friendly landscaping elements.

    (i)   Bay-friendly landscaping design, construction, operations and maintenance techniques have been increasingly utilized in residential and commercial landscape construction.

    (j)   In Alameda County, StopWaste.Org has taken the lead in defining and promoting environmentally friendly landscaping for the commercial, institutional and residential sectors by developing the Bay-friendly Landscape Guidelines for professional landscapers and the Bay-friendly Gardening Guide for residents.

    (k)  Requiring City projects and public-private partnership projects to incorporate Bay-friendly Landscape Guidelines is necessary and appropriate to achieving the benefits of sustainable landscaping in the City.

 

3-22-110 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

    (a)   BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPE GUIDELINES means the most recent version of guidelines developed by StopWaste.Org for use in the professional design, construction and maintenance of Landscapes. City staff shall maintain the most recent version of the Bay-friendly Guidelines at all times.

    (b)  BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING SCORECARD means the most recent version of the Bay-friendly landscaping points system developed by StopWaste.Org. City staff shall maintain the most recent version of the Bay-friendly landscaping scorecard at all times. The applicable version of the Bay Friendly Guidelines scorecard will be that in effect at the time of design documentation for any covered project.

    (c)   CITY LANDSCAPE PROJECT means any new construction or renovation of a landscape owned or maintained by a City Department or Agency and excludes traditional public works projects.

    (d)  COVERED PROJECT means all new landscaping projects or renovations of landscapes, including landscaped street medians and planting strips, that equal or exceed One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) in construction costs of the landscaped area and constitute a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of softscape and are either owned or maintained by a City Department or Agency or developed as a public-private partnership.

    (e)   BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL means the designated staff person(s) authorized and responsible for implementing this Chapter.

    (f)   INITIATED means officially identified and substantially funded to offset the costs associated with the project.

    (g)  LANDSCAPE means the parcel area less the building pad and includes all planted areas and hardscapes (i.e., driveway, parking, paths and other paved areas).

    (h)  PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP means any project built on City-owned land, or primarily funded by the City, built as a project of the Redevelopment Agency, or built under a Disposition and Development Agreement with the City.

    (i)   RENOVATION means any change, addition, or modification to an existing landscape.

    (j)   SOFTSCAPE refers to the parts of the landscape that are comprised of live horticultural elements. Softscape means all of the planting and turf areas. The following is not included in the softscape area: footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes and other nonirrigated areas designated for non-development (i.e., open spaces).

    (k)  TRADITIONAL PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT means heavy construction projects such as pump stations, sewer-related facilities, flood control improvements, roads, and bridges, as well as traffic lights, sidewalks, bike paths, bus stops, and associated infrastructure on City owned and maintained property.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2009-007, 5/18/09)

 

ARTICLE 2. STANDARD FOR COMPLIANCE
3-22-200 COVERED PROJECTS.
    All covered projects with landscapes initiated on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall meet the most recent minimum Bay-friendly landscape scorecard points as recommended by StopWaste.Org or its designee.

 

3-22-205 NONCOVERED PROJECTS.
    For the purposes of reducing operating and maintenance costs in all City facilities and public-private partnership facilities, projects that do not meet the threshold that triggers compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and constitutes an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater of softscape are encouraged to meet as many Bay-friendly landscaping scorecard points as practicable and to complete and submit the Bay-friendly landscaping scorecard to StopWaste.Org as a way of documenting the green building practices that have been incorporated into the project.

 

3-22.210 REVIEW.
    The City shall regularly review the project specifications used in bidding traditional public works projects to include the best environmental practices and Bay-friendly landscape practices applicable.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2009-007, 5/18/09)

 

ARTICLE 3. PROMULGATION OF IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS
3-22-300 TIMELINE.
    The City Manager shall, within six (6) months of ordinance adoption, promulgate any rules and regulations necessary or appropriate to achieve compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. The initial rules and regulations shall be promulgated after securing and reviewing comments from affected City agencies and departments.

 

3-22-305 GENERAL GUIDELINES.
    The rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager’s Office under this section shall provide for at least the following:

    (a)   The incorporation of the Bay-friendly landscaping requirements of this Chapter into the appropriate design, construction, maintenance and development agreement documents prepared for the applicable covered projects.

    (b)  The designation of an appropriate Bay-friendly Landscaping Compliance Official(s) who shall have the responsibility to administer and monitor compliance with the Bay-friendly landscaping requirements set forth in this Chapter and with any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, and to grant waivers or exemptions from the requirements of this Chapter, and to report to the City Council regarding Bay-friendly landscaping compliance on all covered projects.

    (c)   For cities with an adopted Environmental Purchasing Policy (EPP), the Green Building and Bay-friendly Landscaping Compliance Official(s) will coordinate activities with the person(s) responsible for implementation of the EPP.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2009-007, 5/18/09)

 

ARTICLE 4. UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
3-22-400 WAIVERS.
    Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may be waived in unusual circumstances where the City Council has, by resolution, found and determined that the public interest would not be served by complying with such provisions.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2009-007, 5/18/09)

CHAPTER 3-23 MANAGEMENT OF PCBS DURING BUILDING DEMOLITION PROJECTS
3-23-100 PURPOSE.
    (a)   The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to accomplish the following purposes:

    (1)  Require building demolition permit applicants (Applicants) to conduct a PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment and submit information documenting the results of the screening. Such documentation to include: (i) the results of a determination whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction; and (ii) the concentration of PCBs in each Priority Building Material present and; (iii) for each Priority Building Material present with a PCBs concentration equal to or greater than fifty (50) ppm, the approximate amount (linear feet or square feet) of that material in the building.

    (2)  Inform Applicants with PCBs present in one or more of the Priority Building Materials (based on the above screening assessment) that they must comply with all related applicable Federal and State laws. This may include reporting to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board (Regional Water Board), and/or the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). Additional sampling for and abatement of PCBs may be required.

    (3)  Meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and the Municipal Regional Stormwater Permit Order No. R2-2015-0049.

    (b)  The requirements of this Chapter do not replace or supplant the requirements of California or Federal law, including, but not limited to, the Toxic Substances Control Act, 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 761, and California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 22.

 

3-23-200 DEFINITIONS.
    In addition to the general definitions applicable to this Code, whenever used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

    (a)   “Applicable Structure” means buildings constructed or remodeled from January 1, 1950 to December 31, 1980. Remodeling, partial building, wood framed structure, and single-family residence demolition projects are exempt.

    (b)  “Applicant” means a person applying for a building demolition permit as required by Chapter 7-5, Article 1, Section 105.1 et seq.

    (c)   “Appropriate Authority” means the Building Division of the Community Development Department of the City of San Leandro.

    (d)  “Building” means a structure with a roof and walls standing more or less permanently in one place. Buildings are intended for human habitation or occupancy.

    (e)   “Demolition” means the wrecking, razing, or tearing down of any structure. This definition is intended to be consistent with the demolition activities undertaken by contractors with a C-21 Building Moving/Demolition Contractor’s License.

    (f)   “DTSC” means the State of California Department of Toxic Substances Control.

    (g)  “EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

    (h)  “PCBs” means polychlorinated biphenyls.

    (i)   “PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment” means the two-step process used to: (1) determine whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-Containing Building Materials based on the structure age, use, and construction; and if so (2) determine the concentrations (if any) of PCBs in Priority Building Materials revealed through existing information or representative sampling and chemical analysis of the Priority Building Materials in the building. Directions for this process are provided in the PCBs in the Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment Applicant Package.

    (j)   “Priority Building Materials” means the following:

    (1)  Caulking: e.g., around windows and doors, at structure walkway interfaces, and in expansion joints;

    (2)  Thermal/Fiberglass Insulation: e.g., around HVAC systems, around heaters, around boilers, around heated transfer piping, and inside walls or crawl spaces;

    (3)  Adhesive/Mastic: e.g., below carpet and floor tiles, under roofing materials, and under flashing; and

    (4)  Rubber Window Gaskets: e.g., used in lieu of caulking to seal around windows in steel-framed buildings.

    (k)  “Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment Applicant Package” (Applicant Package) means a document package that includes an overview of the screening process, Applicant instructions, a process flow chart, a screening assessment form, and the Protocol for Evaluating Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition (BASMAA 2018, prepared for the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association, August 2018).

    (l)   “Regional Water Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region.

    (m) “Remodel” means to make significant finish and/or structural changes that increase utility and appeal through complete replacement and/or expansion. A removed area reflects fundamental changes that include multiple alterations. These alterations may include some or all of the following: replacement of a major component (cabinet(s), bathtub, or bathroom tile), relocation of plumbing/gas fixtures/appliances, significant structural alterations (relocating walls, and/or the addition of square footage).

 

3-23-300 APPLICABILITY.
    This Chapter applies to Applicants for buildings constructed or remodeled from January 1, 1950 to December 31, 1980.

 

3-23-400 EXEMPTIONS.
    Applications for remodeling, partial building, wood framed structure, and single-family residence demolition projects are exempt.

 

3-23-500 PCBS IN PRIORITY BUILDING MATERIALS SCREENING ASSESSMENT.
    Every Applicant for a building demolition permit shall conduct a PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment, a two-step process used to:

    (a)   Determine whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction (i.e., whether the building is an Applicable Structure); and if so

    (b)  Demonstrate the presence or absence and concentration of PCBs in Priority Building Materials through existing information or representative sampling and chemical analysis of the Priority Building Materials in the building. Applicants shall follow the directions provided in the PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment Applicant Package (Applicant Package), which includes an overview of the process, Applicant instructions, a process flow chart, a screening assessment form, and the Protocol for Assessing Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition. Per the Applicant Package, for certain types of buildings built within a specified date range, the Applicant must conduct further assessment to determine whether or not PCBs are present at concentrations greater than fifty (50) ppm. This determination shall be made via existing data on specific product formulations (if available), or via conducting representative sampling of the priority building materials and analyzing the samples for PCBs at a certified analytical laboratory. Any representative sampling and analysis must be conducted in accordance with the Protocol for Assessing Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition. The Applicant Package shall provide all details.

 

3-23-600 AGENCY NOTIFICATION, ABATEMENT, AND DISPOSAL FOR IDENTIFIED PCBS.
    When the PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment identifies one or more Priority Building Materials with PCBs, the Applicant must comply with all related applicable Federal And State laws, including potential notification of the appropriate regulatory agencies, including EPA, the Regional Water Board, and/or the DTSC. Agency contacts are provided in the Applicant Package. Additional sampling for and abatement of PCBs may be required. Depending on the approach for sampling and removing building materials containing PCBs, the Applicant shall notify or seek advance approval from USEPA before building demolition. Even in circumstances where advance notification to or approval from USEPA is not required before the demolition activity, the disposal of PCBs waste shall be regulated under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Additionally, the disposal of PCBs waste shall be subject to California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 22 Section 66262. Additional information shall be in the Applicant Package.

3-23-700 COMPLIANCE WITH CALIFORNIA AND FEDERAL PCBS LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
    Applicants must comply with all Federal and California laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, health, safety, and environmental laws and regulations, that relate to management and cleanup of any and all PCBs, including, but not limited to, PCBs in Priority Building Materials, other PCBs-contaminated materials, PCBs-contaminated liquids, and PCBs waste.

 

3-23-800 INFORMATION SUBMISSION AND APPLICANT CERTIFICATION.
    (a)   The Applicant shall conduct a PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment and submit the associated information and results as part of the building demolition permit application, including the following (see Applicant Package for more details):

    (1)  Owner and project information, including location, year building was built, description of building construction type, and anticipated demolition date.

    (2)  Determination of whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction.

    (3)  If high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction, the concentration of PCBs in each Priority Building Materials present. If PCBs concentrations are determined via representative sampling and analysis, include a contractor’s report documenting the assessment, which includes the completed QA/QC checklist from the Protocol for Assessing Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition and the analytical laboratory results.

    (4)  For each Priority Building Material present with a PCBs concentration equal to or greater than fifty (50) ppm, the approximate amount (linear feet or square feet) of that material in the building (see Applicant Package for more details).

    (5)  Applicant’s certification of the accuracy of the information submitted.

    (b)  The Building Division of the Community Development Department shall specify a format or guidance for the submission of the information.

 

3-23-900 RECORDKEEPING.
    Applicants conducting a building demolition project must maintain documentation of the results of the PCBs in Priority Building Materials Screening Assessment for a minimum of five years after submittal.

 

3-23-1000 OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY THE CITY OF SAN LEANDRO OF CHANGES.
    The Applicant shall submit written notifications documenting any changes in the information submitted in compliance with this Chapter.

    The Applicant shall submit the revised information to the Building Division of the Community Development Department when changes in project conditions affect the information submitted with the permit application.

 

3-23-1100 LIABILITY.
    The Applicant is responsible for safely and legally complying with the requirements of this Chapter. Neither the issuance of a permit under the requirements of Chapter 7-5, Article 1, Section 105.1 et seq., nor the compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or with any condition imposed by the issuing authority, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the City of San Leandro for damages to persons or property.

 

3-23-1200 ENFORCEMENT.
    Failure to submit the information required in this Chapter or submittal of false information will result in enforcement under Chapter 7-5, Article 1, Section 104.1 et seq.

 

3-23-1300 FEES.
    In addition to the fees required under Chapter 7-5, Article 1, Section 109.1 et seq., all Applicants subject to this Chapter shall deposit funds with the City of San Leandro and pay a fee sufficient to reimburse the City of San Leandro’s costs for staff time required to implement this Chapter (i.e., to compensate specifically for municipal staff time related to implementing a new program to manage PCBs-containing building materials during demolition in compliance with MRP Provision C.12.f., and not for any other purpose).

 

3-23-1400 CITY OF SAN LEANDRO PROJECTS.
    City of San Leandro departments shall comply with all the requirements of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-012, 7/1/19 (Sections 3-23-100—3-23-1400))

TITLE 4 PUBLIC WELFARE
CHAPTER 4-1 PROHIBITIONS
CHAPTER 4-2 SALE AND DISPLAY OF NARCOTIC AND OTHER PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 4-3 MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
CHAPTER 4-4 DANCE HALLS
CHAPTER 4-5 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
CHAPTER 4-6 ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 4-7 USED VEHICLE DEALERS
CHAPTER 4-8 FIRE AND CLOSING-OUT SALES
CHAPTER 4-9 SECONDHAND DEALERS—JUNK DEALERS—PAWNBROKERS
CHAPTER 4-10 ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION AND ANTI-LITTER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4-11 ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER 4-12 SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL ,
CHAPTER 4-13 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
CHAPTER 4-14 FIREARMS
CHAPTER 4-15 FORTUNETELLING
CHAPTER 4-16 OBNOXIOUS CONDUCT
CHAPTER 4-17 DUST CONTROL—NUISANCE
CHAPTER 4-18 LOUD AND UNRULY GATHERINGS
CHAPTER 4-19 SAN LEANDRO MARINA
CHAPTER 4-20 PUBLIC MEETINGS, ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES
CHAPTER 4-21 FAMILY BILLIARD PARLORS
CHAPTER 4-22 SOLICITATIONS
CHAPTER 4-23 REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
CHAPTER 4-24 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 4-25 BINGO GAMES
CHAPTER 4-26 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
CHAPTER 4-27 PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 4-28 LODGING REGISTRATION
CHAPTER 4-29 REGULATION OF DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT READING MATERIAL
CHAPTER 4-30 SHOPPING CART IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 4-31 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS AT SKATEBOARD AREA OF THRASHER PARK
CHAPTER 4-32 RENT REVIEW
CHAPTER 4-33 CANNABIS DISPENSARY PERMITS
CHAPTER 4-34 MOBILE FOOD VENDING
CHAPTER 4-35 MINIMUM WAGE
CHAPTER 4-36 TOBACCO RETAILERS
CHAPTER 4-37 TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE
CHAPTER 4-38 PERMITTED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY
CHAPTER 4-39 MOBILEHOME SPACE RENT STABILIZATION
CHAPTER 4-40 SHORT-TERM RENTALS
CHAPTER 4-41 NON-HOSTED SHORT-TERM RENTALS PROHIBITED

CHAPTER 4-1 PROHIBITIONS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Prior Ordinance codified herein includes portions of Ordinance No. 93-021.

 

ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-1-100 VIOLATION AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    Any violations of the provisions of this Chapter are expressly deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-1-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. GAMBLING—CARDS
4-1-200 GAMBLING.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, within the incorporated area of the City, to deal, play, carry on, open, cause to be opened, or conduct, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game played with cards, dice or any device, for money, checks, credit or representative of value as the result of any such game.

 

4-1-205 CARDS.
    No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter or be in any place open to the general public where cards are played. Every person owning or operating within this City any place open to the general public where cards are played shall refuse to permit minors to remain and shall maintain on the outside of all entrances to such place a conspicuous sign in letters at least one and one half (1 1/2) inches high: “Persons under 21 years not permitted.”

 

4-1-210 INTENT.
    It is the intent of the City Council of the City of San Leandro that the provisions of this Article supplement, but not supercede or conflict with the provisions of Chapter 10, Title 9, Part 1 of the Penal Code of the State of California.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 65-80, 10/18/65; Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82)

 

ARTICLE 3. YOUTH CURFEWS
4-1-300 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall mean:

    (a)   “Emergency” shall mean any unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state thereof that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, explosion, or any situation that requires immediate action to prevent loss of life or serious bodily injury, including, but not limited to, any bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.

    (b)  “Establishment” shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

    (c)   “Guardian” shall mean: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

    (d)  “Loiter” shall mean to delay an activity, errand or journey with aimless idle stops and purposeless distractions, to remain in place in an idle manner, or to hang around aimlessly or without real necessity.

    (e)   “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

    (f)   “Parent” shall mean a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor.

 

    (g)  “Public place” shall mean any place or ground to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

    (h)  “Responsible adult” shall mean a person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

 

4-1-305 DAYTIME CURFEW.
    (a)   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuation education to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other public place, public building, place of amusement, eating establishment or vacant lot during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. of that same day, on days when the minor’s school is in session.

    (b)  There is a rebuttable presumption that the minor’s school is in session on days when school facilities within the City of San Leandro are held open for the compulsory education or compulsory continuation education of all minors.

    (c)   It is a defense to subsection (a) of this section that the minor was:

    (1)  Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other responsible adult having care or custody of the minor; or

    (2)  On an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other responsible adult having care or custody of the minor; or

    (3)  Going or coming directly to or from his or her place of gainful employment or to or from a health care appointment; or

    (4)  Permitted to leave the school for lunch or a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; or

    (5)  Going or coming directly to or from a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession, occupation or program in which he or she is lawfully engaged, such as a work study or work experience program, subject to verification by a proper school authority; or

    (6)  Exempt by Federal or State law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education; or

    (7)  Authorized to be absent from his or her school under the provisions of Section 48205 of the California Education Code, applicable Federal or State law or a school absence policy permitted under the foregoing laws; or

    (8)  Going directly to or from an event or activity that is directly related to any medical condition of a parent or other responsible adult having the care or custody of the minor; or

    (9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, or going to or returning home therefrom, without any detour or stop; or

    (10) Traveling from an activity listed in this section to another activity listed in this section, without any detour or stop.

 

4-1-310 NIGHTTIME CURFEW.
    (a)   It is unlawful for any unemancipated minor to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other public place, public building, place of amusement, eating establishment or vacant lot during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day.

    (b)  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of an unemancipated minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the minor to loiter in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other public place, public building, place of amusement, eating establishment or vacant lot during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day.

    (c)   It is a defense to subsections (a) and (b) that the minor was:

    (1)  Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other responsible adult having care or custody of the minor; or

    (2)  On an errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian or other responsible adult having care or custody of the minor, without detour or delay; or

    (3)  In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel, and such driving does not constitute loitering or wandering; or

    (4)  Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from employment, without detour or delay; or

    (5)  Involved in an emergency; or

    (6)  On the sidewalk adjacent to his or her residence, provided that the minor is not otherwise violating the law; or

    (7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by a responsible adult and sponsored by the City of San Leandro, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor; or going to or returning home from an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by a responsible adult and sponsored by the City of San Leandro, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor, without detour or delay; or

    (8)  Emancipated pursuant to law; or

    (9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, or going to or returning home therefrom, without any detour or stop; or

    (10) Traveling from an activity listed in this section to another activity listed in this section, without any detour or stop.

 

4-1-315 ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.
    (a)   Prior to any enforcement action under this Article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender to provide:

    (1)  A form of government-issued or school-issued identification belonging to him or her, or a statement of his or her age; and

    (2)  A reason for him or her to be in or upon the public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other public place, public building, place of amusement, eating establishment or vacant lot during the curfew hours established under this Article.

    (b)  The police officer shall not detain, arrest or issue a citation to the apparent offender unless the police officer reasonably believes:

    (1)  That the apparent offender has violated the provisions of this Article; and

    (2)  That, based on the apparent offender’s responses or other circumstances, no rebuttable presumptions or defenses under the provisions of this Article appear to be present or applicable.

 

4-1-320 VIOLATIONS.
    (a)   Each and every violation of this Article shall constitute a separate offense in accordance with Section 1-12-140.

    (b)  Minors who are found to have violated the provisions of this Article shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure.

    (c)   Any person found to have violated the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction.

    (1)  The fine for this violation shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the second offense within twelve (12) or fewer consecutive months of the first offense, and Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the third and additional offenses within twelve (12) or fewer consecutive months from the second offense.

    (2)  In lieu of paying the Fifty Dollar ($50.00) fine, first-time offenders may be assigned to a diversion program which may include five (5) hours of community service with a civic organization located within the City of San Leandro. Upon completion of community service, the minor shall obtain written proof of completion from the civic organization, which shall be subject to verification by the Chief of Police or designee. To meet the requirements of the diversion program, the minor’s background shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police to determine eligibility. All second, third, and additional offenders within twelve (12) or fewer consecutive months from the first offense shall be assigned to the diversion program described herein without exception.

    (3)  In the discretion of the Chief of Police, parents of minors who are guilty of a third or additional offenses under subsection (c)(2) above may be required to attend a parenting class, approved and/or provided by the Chief of Police, before any fines or offenses are dismissed in the Chief’s discretion.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2012-012, 9/4/12 (Sections 4-1-300—4-1-320))

 

ARTICLE 4. CASTOR BEANS
4-1-400 KEEPING OF CASTOR BEAN PLANT PROHIBITED.
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person having possession of or responsible for the management or upkeep of any lot, parcel or portion of real property within the City of San Leandro to: (a) wilfully and knowingly plant, grow, nurture, keep, or harbor any castor bean plant (Ricinus Communis) or the seeds or beans thereof upon said real property; or (b) refuse, fail, or neglect for a period of forty-eight (48) hours after receiving notice as hereinafter provided, to destroy any such plant and all parts and seeds or beans thereof.

 

4-1-405 KEEPING OF CASTOR BEAN PLANT—EXCEPTIONS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any of the following circumstances:

    (a)   The keeping of castor bean plants or the seeds or beans thereof by any person engaged in educational, scientific, or research activity, or having a botanical collection or display for such purposes, provided a permit therefor is first obtained from the City Manager or designated representative.

    (b)  The commercial cultivation or cropping of castor bean plants or the seeds or beans thereof, provided that the premises or portion thereof where same is carried on shall be completely enclosed or shall be inaccessible so as to effectively prevent children from entry upon such premises or portions thereof.

    (c)   The possession of castor bean plants or the seeds or beans thereof for sale at retail or wholesale, provided that any such plants or seeds or beans where displayed or exposed to members of the general public or sold to anyone shall be in packages or containers, which in the case of such seeds or beans shall be securely sealed or closed, and such packages or containers shall have written thereon or upon a label securely fastened thereto the information that such plants or seeds or beans are poisonous to persons or animals if chewed, eaten, or swallowed.

 

4-1-410 ENFORCEMENT.
    Any violation of the provisions of this Article may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12. In addition, enforcement may be had by issuing the notice provided in Section 4-1-400. Such notice shall be in writing and may be given by personal service on the violator, or by registered or certified mail addressed to the violator, or by posting such notice in a conspicuous place or places on the premises where the violation has occurred.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 1243 N.S., 1/11/60; Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-1-410))

 

ARTICLE 5. SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT AND NOISE
4-1-500 REGISTRATION.
    No persons shall use, or cause to be used, a vehicle in connection with his or her business with sound amplifying equipment in operation in the City of San Leandro before filing a registration statement with the City Clerk in writing. This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following:

    (a)   Name and home address of the applicant.

    (b)  Address and place of business of applicant.

    (c)   License number and motor number of vehicle used by applicant.

    (d)  Name and address of registered owner of vehicle.

    (e)   Name and address of person having direct charge of vehicle.

    (f)   Name and address of all persons who will use or operate vehicle.

    (g) The purpose for which vehicle will be used.

    (h)  A general statement as to the section or sections of the City in which the vehicle will be used.

    (i)   The proposed hours of operation of the vehicle.

    (j)   The number of days of proposed operation of the vehicle each week.

    (k)  A general description, including wattage, of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used.

 

4-1-505 REGULATIONS FOR USE.
    Vehicles with sound amplifying equipment used to advertise goods, wares, or merchandise sold, delivered, or distributed from such vehicles in the City of San Leandro shall be subject to the following regulations:

    (a)   The only sounds permitted are music.

    (b)  Operations are permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

    (c)   Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the vehicle upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10) miles per hour.

    (d)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of two hundred (200) feet from the vehicle and so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.

 

4-1-510 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2003-005, 3/17/03)
 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 1146 N.S. 7/21/58; Ordinance No. 74-61, 10/14/74; Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 2003-005, 3/17/03 (Section 4-1-510))

 

ARTICLE 6. SOCIAL GATHERINGS—ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES—UNLAWFUL
Note
*Editor’s Note: Article 6, previously contained herein, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 84-02. Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 69-22, 73-61, 82-021.

 

4-1-600 SOCIAL GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS POSSESS OR CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; UNLAWFUL.
    No person shall allow, permit, or host a social gathering at his or her residence, hotel or motel room, or other residential facility under his or her custody or control, where two (2) or more persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are present and alcoholic beverages are being consumed by or are in the possession of, any person under the age of twenty-one (21).

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 90-07, 4/2/90)

 

ARTICLE 7. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-1-700 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall mean:

    (a)   “Alcoholic beverage” shall mean and include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer that contains one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

    (b)  “Open container” shall include, but is not limited to, any bottle, can thermal jar or jug, vessel, or other receptacle which is open, has been opened, or which has a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.

 

4-1-705 DRINKING IN CITY PARKS AND OPEN SPACE AREAS.
    No person shall consume or be in possession of any open container of any alcoholic beverage in any City park or open space area, except for City sponsored events with prior approval from the City Council.

 

4-1-710 DRINKING ON STREETS.
    No person shall consume, drink, exhibit or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage on any street, sidewalk, alley, or highway. This section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the State of California.

 

4-1-715 DRINKING IN PARKING LOTS.
    No person shall consume, drink, exhibit or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage upon that portion of public or private property open to the public and within five hundred (500) feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley or highway and used or intended to be used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles by customers or employees of any commercial or industrial use, or public use, without the express permission of the owner, agent, or person in lawful possession thereof. This section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the State of California.

 

4-1-720 VIOLATIONS AS INFRACTIONS.
    Violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute an infraction.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 78-63, 12/11/78 (Section 4-1-705); Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82 (Section 4-1-705); Ordinance No. 83-029, 10/17/83 (Section 4-1-705); Ordinance No. 88-012, 7/5/88; Ordinance No. 2008-016, 12/1/08)

 

ARTICLE 8. MISCELLANEOUS
4-1-800 VIOLATION OF CORPUS SECURITY.
    (a)   No person shall wilfully and maliciously provide or have provided personal data from the Criminal Oriented Records Production Unified System (CORPUS) to any unauthorized person.

    (b)  No authorized person shall wilfully and maliciously obtain personal data from the Criminal Records Production Unified System (CORPUS).

 

4-1-805 ODORS.
    It shall be unlawful, and a nuisance, for any person, firm or corporation, in any place in this City, to dispose of any offensive or obnoxious substance, or substances, or cause or create or permit to be caused or created any offensive or objectionable odors that may be prejudicial to health or offensive to the sensibilities of any residents or other persons.

 

4-1-810 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2012-012, 9/4/12)
 

4-1-815 RESERVED. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2012-012, 9/4/12)
 

4-1-820 CONTRACEPTIVES—SALE OF.
    No person other than a duly licensed physician, surgeon, or pharmacist shall within this City sell, distribute or give away any article, drug or preparation, intended for use as or which may be used as a contraceptive, condom, or sex inciting device. No person shall within this City sell distribute or give away such article by means of machines, or by peddling, canvassing, or soliciting.

 

4-1-825 FALSE REPORTS.
    No person shall within this City wilfully make any false report to the police or fire department.

 

4-1-830 IDENTIFICATION.
    Any person who furnishes a fictitious name or address or knowingly furnishes an incorrect birth date to a junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

4-1-835 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER.
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than one who by law is given the authority of a peace officer or one who is a firefighter to wilfully wear, exhibit or use any uniform resembling either in color or design any officially approved uniform of the San Leandro Police Department or San Leandro Fire Department with the intent of fraudulently impersonating a peace officer or firefighter or of fraudulently inducing the belief that he or she is a peace officer or firefighter. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to be inconsistent with Sections 146, 146a, 538d or 538e of the California Penal Code or any other provisions of the laws of the State of California. To the extent that the provisions of this section are inconsistent, such laws of the State of California shall prevail.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 80-39, 8/18/80; Ordinance No. 80-60, 12/15/80; Ordinance No. 81-024, 3/6/81; Ordinance No. 81-055, 8/10/81; Ordinance No. 81-074, 10/19/81; Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 86-02, 1/20/86; Ordinance No. 2007-017, 7/16/07 (Section 4-1-810); Ordinance No. 2012-012, 9/4/12 (Sections 4-1-810, 4-1-815))

 

ARTICLE 9. RESERVED
ARTICLE 10. BUTTERFLIES
4-1-1000 INTERFERENCE WITH MONARCH BUTTERFLIES PROHIBITED.
    It is declared to be unlawful for any persons to molest or interfere with, in any way, the peaceful occupancy of the Monarch Butterflies during the entire time they remain within the San Leandro Marina, Tony Lema Golf Course and Marina Golf Course of the City of San Leandro, in whatever spot therein they may choose to stop, provided, however, that if said butterflies should at any time swarm in, upon, or near the private dwelling house or other buildings of a citizen of the City of San Leandro in such a way as to interfere with the occupancy and use of said dwelling or other buildings, that said butterflies may be removed, if possible, to another location upon the application of said citizen to the City Manager.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 97-031, 11/17/97 (Section 4-1-1000))

 

 

ARTICLE 11. NOISE
4-1-1100 SHORT TITLE.
    This Article shall be known and may be cited as the “Noise Ordinance.”

 

4-1-1105 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of San Leandro, in the exercise of its police power, to protect the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of San Leandro from excessive, unnecessary and unreasonable noises from any and all sources in the community. It is the intention of the City Council to control the adverse effect of such noise sources on the citizens by prescribing standards prohibiting detrimental levels of noise and by providing a remedy for violations. The provisions of this Article and the remedies contained in this Code shall be cumulative and are not intended to replace any otherwise available remedies for public or private nuisances, nor any other civil or criminal remedies otherwise available. In addition, the regulations contained herein are not intended to substitute for any noise analysis conducted as a part of the City’s environmental review process for discretionary permit approvals, nor is it intended to limit more strict noise control requirements for discretionary permit approvals should more strict measures be found to be necessary in order to maintain noise levels that are not detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the City.

    Among the unacceptable noise sources identified in the City’s General Plan are mobile sources such as airplanes, commuter and freight railroads, and highway traffic and other sources which are regulated exclusively by the Federal or the State Government. While in most instances the City may not intervene to address these problems directly, it is the strong policy of the city to work with responsible government agencies and elected officials to reduce the real and damaging effects of these noise-producing activities on the quality of life of the City’s residents.

 

 

4-1-1110 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
    It is unlawful for any person, as defined in Section 1-14-100(h) of this Code, to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity. The factors which should be considered in determining whether a violation of this section exists include the following:

    1.    The sound level of the objectionable noise.

    2.    The sound level of the ambient noise.

    3.    The proximity of the noise to residential property.

    4.    The zoning of the area.

    5.    The population density of the area.

    6.    The time of day or night.

    7.    The duration of the noise.

    8.    Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

    9.    Whether the noise is produced by an industrial, commercial, or noncommercial activity.

    10.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.

 

 

4-1-1115 PROHIBITED ACTS.
    It is the intent of this Article to prohibit all disturbing, excessive and offensive noises except those specifically exempted by Section 4-1-1120 and those permitted under an exception permit issued pursuant to Section 4-1-1125. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, the following acts, which are not in any way exclusive, are declared to be disturbing, excessive and offensive noises in violation of Section 4-1-1110:

    (a)   Noises by Animals. The permitting, by any person having charge, care, custody, or control of any animal, of such animal to emit any noise which is disturbing, excessive or offensive. For the purposes of this subsection, the animal noise shall not be deemed a disturbance if a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal is situated or if the noise is for any other legitimate cause, such as someone teasing or provoking the animal. The scope of this subsection is intended to be and shall be interpreted to be broader than any similar prohibition set forth in Section 4-11-435 of this Title.

    (b)  Construction-related Noise Near Residential Uses. Construction work or related activity which is adjacent to or across a street or right-of-way from a residential use, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Sunday and Saturday. No such construction is permitted on Federal holidays. As used in this Article, “construction” shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or on any private property, public or private right-of-way, streets, structures, utilities, facilities, or other similar property. Construction activities carried on in violation of this Article may be enforced as provided in Section 4-11-1130, and may also be enforced by issuance of a stop work order and/or revocation of any or all permits issued for such construction activity.

    (c)   Conflicts with Residential Uses. Subject to the restrictions on constructions contained in subdivision (b), the sustained operation or use between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any electric or gasoline powered motor or engine or the repair, modification, reconstruction, testing or operation of any automobile, motorcycle, sweeper, vacuum, public address system, whistle muffler, motorized scooter, machine or mechanical device or other contrivance or facility unless such motor, engine, automobile, motorcycle, sweeper, vacuum, public address system, whistle muffler, motorized scooter, machine or mechanical device is enclosed within a sound insulated structure so as to prevent noise and sound from being plainly audible from any residential property line.

    (d)  Loud Music in Parks. The use of electronic equipment, including but not limited to amplifiers, radio loudspeakers, phonographs, tape amplifiers, electronically operated or acoustic musical instruments or other device of like design used for producing sound in or upon any public street, park or grounds, or any other open area to which the public has access, whether publicly or privately owned, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. is unlawful. At any other time of day, such equipment may not be used in a manner which disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity who are using such areas. This subsection shall not apply to events for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to Chapter 4-20.

    (e)   Music, Stereos and Electronics.

    (1)  Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, audio equipment, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound at any time of day in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity. The operation of any such instrument, audio equipment, television set, machine or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.

    (2)  The conducting of or carrying on of band or orchestral concerts, rehearsals or practice between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. sufficiently loud as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of persons of ordinary and normal sensitivity who reside in the immediate vicinity of such band or orchestral concerts or rehearsals or practice.

    (3)  Using, or operating, or permitting to be used or operated, for any purpose, any loud speaker, loudspeaker system, public address or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity, except for any noncommercial public speaking, public assembly or other activity for which a permit has been issued pursuant Chapter 4-20 of this Title.

 

4-1-1120 EXEMPTIONS.
    The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Title:

    (a)   Emergency Work. The provisions of this title shall not apply to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or in the performance of emergency work, and activities involving the execution of the duties of duly authorized governmental personnel and others providing emergency response to the general public, including, but not limited to, sworn peace officers, emergency personnel, utility personnel, and the operation of emergency response vehicles and equipment.

    (b)  Entertainment Events. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to those reasonable sounds emanating from authorized school bands, school athletic and school entertainment events and occasional public and private outdoor or indoor gatherings, public dances, shows, bands, sporting and entertainment events conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and special events for which a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 4-20 of this Title.

    (c)   Federal or State Preempted Activities. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any other activity the noise level of which is regulated by State or Federal law.

    (d)  Maintenance to Residential Property. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to noise sources associated with maintenance to property used for residential purposes, provided the activities take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

    (e)   Public Health, Welfare and Safety Activities. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to construction maintenance and repair operations conducted by public agencies, franchisees of the City and/or utility companies or their contractors which are deemed necessary to serve the best interests of the public and to protect the public health, welfare and safety, including, but not limited to, trash collection, street sweeping, tree removal, debris and limb removal, removal of downed wires, restoring electrical service, repairing traffic signals, unplugging sewers, vacuuming catch basins, repairing of damaged poles, removal of abandoned vehicles, repairing of water hydrants and mains, gas lines, oil lines, sewers, storm drains, roads, sidewalks, etc.

 

4-1-1125 EXCEPTIONS.
    If an applicant can show to the City Manager or his/her designee that a diligent investigation of available noise abatement techniques indicates that immediate compliance with the requirements of this Article would be impractical or unreasonable, a permit to allow exception from the provisions contained in all or a portion of this chapter may be issued, with appropriate conditions to minimize the public detriment caused by such exceptions. Any such permit shall be of as short duration as possible up to six months, but renewable upon a showing of good cause, and shall be conditioned by a schedule for compliance and details of methods therefor in appropriate cases. Any person aggrieved with the decision of the City Manager or his/her designee may appeal to the City Council pursuant to Article 4 of Chapter 1-12 of this Code.

 

4-1-1130 ENFORCEMENT.
    Any violations of the provisions of this Article are expressly deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-005, 3/17/03 (Sections 4-1-1100—4-1-1130); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 4-1-1125))

 

ARTICLE 12. CULTIVATION OF MEDICAL CANNABIS
4-1-1200 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. “Cannabis” also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 1407 of the Statutes of 1972. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

    (b)  “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

 

4-1-1205 CULTIVATION OF MEDICAL CANNABIS PROHIBITED.
    Unless an exemption applies, it is declared to be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in medical cannabis cultivation activities, including cultivation activities within any building or structure or upon any land, in the City of San Leandro.

 

4-1-1210 EXEMPTION.
    Cultivation of medical cannabis is exempt from the provision of this Article if performed in accordance with subsection (g) of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.77.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-001, 2/1/16 (Sections 4-1-1200—4-1-1210))

CHAPTER 4-2 SALE AND DISPLAY OF NARCOTIC AND OTHER PARAPHERNALIA
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-2-100 DEFINITION—DRUG PARAPHERNALIA STORE.
    As used herein “drug paraphernalia store” shall mean any establishment or place where drug paraphernalia is displayed, grouped, advertised, or promoted for the purpose of sale, either as a primary business or as an incident of some other business. “Drug paraphernalia store” as used herein does not include an establishment or place specifically licensed or authorized by the State or Federal Government or any agency thereof to sell or offer for sale marijuana, hashish, cocaine, or any controlled substance as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, when drug paraphernalia is displayed, advertised, or promoted for the purpose of sale to persons authorized by prescription or otherwise to legally possess such marijuana, hashish, cocaine, or other such controlled substance with which the drug paraphernalia item is so used; nor does “drug paraphernalia store” include any establishment or place licensed by the State or Federal Government, or any agency thereof to lawfully sell drug paraphernalia.

 

4-2-105 DEFINITION—DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
    As used herein, “drug paraphernalia” means any of the following when displayed, grouped, advertised or promoted for sale:

    (a)   Any item whether useful for non-drug related purposes or not, which is displayed, grouped with other items, advertised, or promoted in a manner to reasonably suggest its usefulness in the growing, harvesting, processing, manufacturing, preserving, inhaling, injecting or ingesting of marijuana, hashish, cocaine, or any controlled substance as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

    (b)  Any item, whether useful for non-drug related purposes or not, which is designed, decorated or adorned in a manner to reasonably suggest its usefulness in the growing, harvesting, processing, inhaling, injecting, or ingesting of marijuana, hashish, cocaine, or any controlled substance as deemed in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

    (c)   Any item defined by any statute of the State of California as drug paraphernalia.

 

(Legislative History; Ordinance No. )

 

ARTICLE 2. LICENSE REQUIRED
4-2-200 LICENSE REQUIRED.
    Every person conducting or managing a drug paraphernalia store shall first procure a license, and pay in addition to any other fees required by law, a license fee in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).

 

4-2-205 MINORS.
    Any person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on a drug paraphernalia store, shall not (a) permit persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to enter, unaccompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, any area of such establishment or store, where such person under the age of eighteen (18) years may view drug paraphernalia; (b) sell drug paraphernalia to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.

 

4-2-210 SALE AND DISPLAY—SIGNS.
    Any drug paraphernalia store licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall maintain a sign posted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that drug paraphernalia are sold or offered for sale and that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded.

 

4-2-215 PRIOR CONVICTIONS.
    No person shall be eligible for a license to conduct or manage a drug paraphernalia store if such person has been convicted of violating §§ 11351, 11352, 11353, 11354, 11359, 11360, 11361 and 11364 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

4-2-220 PRIOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
    No person shall be eligible for a license to conduct or manage a drug paraphernalia store if such person has violated § 11364.5 of the Health and Safety Code or any local ordinance regulating the sale and/or display of drug paraphernalia and, as a consequence of such violation has had revoked any license, permit or entitlement issued by a city, county or city and county for the privilege or engaging in such a business.

 

4-2-225 PROCEDURES APPLICABLE.
    The procedures for issuance, investigation, denial, revocation, suspension and renewal of licenses provided in Chapter 2 of Title II of this Code shall be applicable to licenses issued hereunder.

 

4-2-230 VIOLATION AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    Any violations of the provisions of this Chapter are expressly deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, and such violations shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-083, 12/11/81; Ordinance No. 82-012, 3/15/82; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12-9-02 (Section 4-2-230))

CHAPTER 4-3 MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-3-100 PERSON.
    “Person” shall mean any corporation, association, partnership, or any natural person.

 

4-3-105 MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
    “Mechanical or electronic amusement devices” shall mean any machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance or device which may be operated or played upon the placing or depositing therein of any coin, check, slug, ball, plate, disk or key or any other article or device, or by paying therefor either in advance of or after use, and as a result of the action or operation of such machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance, or device, dependent upon skill and not dependent upon hazard or chance, a score or result of such play, action or operation is in any way recorded, exhibited or made known, including, but not limited to, tape machine, card machine, pinball machine, bowling game machine, shuffle board machine, marble game machine, horse racing machine, basketball game machine, baseball game machine, football game machine, pool game machine, electronic video game or any other similar machine or device.

 

4-3-110 AMUSEMENT CENTER.
    “Amusement center” shall mean any business establishment or portion thereof open to the public which has five (5) or more mechanical or electronic amusement devices located on the premises.

 

4-3-115 SCHOOL.
    “School” shall mean any educational institution, public, private, secular, or parochial which offers instruction of high school grade or below.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No.)

 

 

ARTICLE 2. EXEMPTIONS
4-3-200 ON-SALE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
    With the exception of Sections 4-3-300, 4-3-305, 4-3-345, 4-3-350 and 4-3-360 the other provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to business establishments licensed by the State Department or Alcoholic Beverage Control for on-sale consumption of alcoholic beverages and which exclude minors entirely from the premises.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. )

 

ARTICLE 3. GENERAL REGULATIONS
4-3-300 LICENSE—MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any mechanical or electronic amusement device intended for use by the public in any business establishment without first having obtained a license for each device.

 

4-3-305 LICENSE APPLICATION FEE.
    Any application for any mechanical or electronic amusement device license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the City Council. The application fee shall be used to defray the costs of investigation and report, and is not in lieu of any other fees or taxes required under this Code.

 

4-3-310 LICENSE TERM—NONTRANSFERABILITY.
    Mechanical or electronic amusement device licenses required by this Chapter shall be issued for one year, or portion thereof, commencing January 1, of each year, and shall not be transferable.

 

4-3-315 LICENSE—POSTING.
    Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place in close proximity to the machines. Such license shall show the license number, the number of amusement devices and the date of expiration of the same, in addition to whatever additional information is deemed necessary.

 

4-3-320 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT—AMUSEMENT CENTER.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any amusement center in any business establishment without first having obtained a conditional use permit for the appropriate zoning districts where such amusement centers may be located under the provisions of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro. The issuance of a conditional use permit shall be a prerequisite to and in addition to the requirements for obtaining a mechanical or electronic amusement device license, as provided in Sections 4-3-300 and 4-3-305.

 

4-3-325 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS.
    Any business establishment containing mechanical or electronic amusement devices or which establishments would have qualified as amusement centers as of April 19, 1982, shall have until sixty (60) days from the effective date of this Chapter to conform to the provisions hereof. The person owning or operating said business establishment shall have the burden of establishing the precise number of devices located on the premises as of April 19, 1982.

 

4-3-330 MINORS—WHEN ALLOWED.
    During the academic year for public schools within the City of San Leandro corporate limits, no person under eighteen (18) years of age shall play or use any mechanical or electronic amusement device in any business establishment between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., except during school holidays or Saturday and Sunday, nor at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Any person owning, operating or employed in any business establishment where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is kept or used shall refuse to allow any person under eighteen (18) years of age unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian to play or use such devices between the above stated hours. A sign specifying the above hours and age restrictions shall be conspicuously posted at the location of the devices in the business establishment.

 

4-3-335 VIEW FROM STREET.
    Every business establishment where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is kept or used shall be located and designed and lighted so that a complete view of the interior portion thereof devoted to such devices is available at all times from an adjacent street or exterior walkway area. Provided, that no structural alteration of any public place where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is kept or used in existence and operation on the effective date of this Chapter shall be required.

 

4-3-340 PROXIMITY TO SCHOOLS.
    No person shall place, allow, keep, maintain, permit, or locate any mechanical or electronic amusement device within three hundred (300) feet of the nearest boundary of the ground of any school in the City of San Leandro.

 

4-3-345 FREE GAMES.
    No person shall keep or use in any public place any mechanical or electronic amusement device equipped with any device which records free games won and is equipped to allow cancellation of free games won without the actual playing of said free games by the player.

 

4-3-350 ILLEGAL MACHINES.
    No person shall keep or use in any public place any game or device commonly known as a “claw,” “scoop,” or “grab” machine or any automatic pay-off machine the operation, use, or play of which is controlled by placing therein any coin, plate, disk, plug, key, or other device, or by the payment of fee.

 

4-3-355 PROHIBITED IN LIQUOR STORE.
    Notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any mechanical or electronic amusement device in any public place wherein the principal business being conducted is the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-sale consumption.

 

4-3-360 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
    Any application for a license may be denied and any license issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Finance Director or the Police Chief for violation of any provisions of this Chapter, or for any other reason hereinafter in this Chapter specifically provided. An applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the Finance Director or the Police Chief concerning the denial, revocation or suspension of a license pursuant to the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 75-17; Ordinance No. 78-54; Ordinance No. 82-057, 8/2/82; Ordinance No. 82-079, 9/20/82; Ordinance No. 91-024, 12/2/91 (Section 4-3-315); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 4-3-360))

CHAPTER 4-4 DANCE HALLS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-4-100 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   The words “dance hall” as used in this Chapter, shall mean any place where any persons dance and where either:

    (1)  Such persons pay admission to each dance; provided, however, this Chapter shall not apply to dances where admission charges are to be used for charitable, eleemosynary, educational, religious, or social groups which do not contemplate the distribution of profits to the sponsors or to the members thereof; or

    (2)  Such place is connected to a place where distilled spirits or wine or beer are sold.

    (b)  The word “person” as used in this Chapter shall mean any person, firm, partnership, or corporation.

    (c)   The words “brightly lighted” as used in this Chapter shall mean lighted by not less than two and one half (2 1/2) foot candles of illumination when measured on a horizontal plane at any place on the dance floor.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. )

 

ARTICLE 2. LICENSE REQUIRED
4-4-200 LICENSE.
    No person shall own or operate any dance hall in this City without first having obtained a license to do so from this City in the manner provided herein and in Chapter 2 of Title II of this Code.

 

4-4-205 UNLICENSED DANCE HALL.
    No persons shall dance in this City in any unlicensed dance hall.

 

4-4-210 LICENSE APPLICATION.
    No license shall be issued except upon application made upon forms supplied by the Finance Officer. All applications shall, upon presentation to the Finance Officer be referred by him or her to the Chief of Police for investigation and recommendation. The investigation shall determine whether the activity will violate any law of the State or any ordinance of the City, or will constitute a menace to the health, peace, safety, morals or welfare of the City. No license shall be issued unless favorably reported upon by the Chief of Police. If the Chief reports unfavorably or fails to report within ten (10) days, the applicant may petition the City Council for a license upon payment of the fee therefor. The City Council shall hold a hearing thereon at its meeting following the meeting at which the petition is presented, and its decision shall be final.

 

4-4-215 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
    Any license issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police for any false statement in the application or when the conduct or activity maintained is in violation of the rules of conduct hereinafter prescribed or the laws of the State, or is maintained or carried on in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or be injurious to the public peace, health, safety or welfare. No license shall be revoked or suspended except upon a hearing given the license holder. The license holder shall receive prior notice of the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for the revocation or suspension of the license. Any licensee aggrieved by the decision rendered by the hearing may petition the City Council for reinstatement of the license as provided in Section 4-4-210 hereof.

 

4-4-220 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
    The following rules and regulations governing dance halls are hereby adopted:

    (a)   They shall at all times remain brightly lighted;

    (b)  No immoral or obscene dancing shall be permitted;

    (c)   No dancing shall be permitted between 1:45 a.m. and noon;

    (d)  No intoxicated person shall be permitted to dance;

    (e)   No intoxicating liquor shall be consumed or permitted on the dance floor;

    (f)   Minors under eighteen (18) years of age shall not be permitted to attend such dances unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.

    (g)  A copy of these rules shall be posted conspicuously on the premises at all times.

    (h)  No public dance, marathon dance, or marathon walk shall be conducted where persons are employed to dance with patrons of such dance either for a fixed compensation or for a percentage of the charge made to its patrons.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 691 N.S.; Ordinance No. 695 N.S.; Ordinance No. 1140 N.S.; Ordinance No. 63-73, 12/2/63; Ordinance No. 72-70, 12/11/72; Ordinance No. 82-030, 5/17/82)

CHAPTER 4-5 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-5-100 PERSON.
    “Person” shall mean any natural person, corporation, association, co-partnership, or any other organization however organized.

 

4-5-105 PEDDLER.
    “Peddler” shall mean any person traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, truck, van, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products, or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automobile, truck, van, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

 

4-5-110 SOLICITOR.
    “Solicitor” shall mean any person traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, truck, van or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, or whose activities may, in any way, result in such sale or the furnishing of such services, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sale or not, provided that such definitions shall include any person who, for himself, or for another firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.

 

4-5-115 ITINERANT MERCHANT.
    “Itinerant merchant” shall mean any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, agency, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits or other food products, within the City of San Leandro, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any nonresidential building, structure, shop, or room in any hotel, motel, auto court, within the City, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise provided that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who while occupying such location does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery, and further shall not include sales of pumpkins or Christmas trees. For purposes of this Chapter 4-5, the term “temporary business” shall mean a lawfully permitted business conducted for less than seven (7) consecutive days in any calendar year. Any business conducted for more than seven (7) consecutive days shall obtain a business license in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2-2 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

4-5-120 PUSHCART.
    “Pushcart” shall mean a piece of vending equipment which is intended to store all materials and merchandise related to vending activity, and is easily moved by a person.

 

4-5-125 RESERVED.
 

4-5-130 TRAILER.
    “Trailer” shall mean any non-motorized vehicle which is attached to a motorized vehicle.

 

4-5-135 RESERVED.
 

4-5-140 HANDCART.
    “Handcart” shall mean a cart drawn or pushed by hand.

 

4-5-145 DOLLY.
    “Dolly” shall mean a platform on a roller or on wheels or coasters used to move objects.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-039, 12/17/07 (Sections 4-5-115—4-5-145); Ordinance No. 2014-009, 6/16/14 (Sections 4-5-100—4-5-145))

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT
4-5-200 PERMIT.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant within the City of San Leandro without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided herein.

    This section does not apply to events which require a special event permit.

 

4-5-205 APPLICATION.
    Applicants for permits under this Chapter must file with the Finance Director a sworn application in writing on a form furnished by the Finance Director which shall give the following information:

    (a)   Name and description of the applicant;

    (b)  Permanent home address of applicant;

    (c)   A brief description of the goods to be sold;

    (d)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, and the capacity in which the applicant is employed;

    (e)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same together with license number and other means of identification;

    (f)   For peddlers and solicitors only, the fingerprints of the applicant shall be provided for the initial application, and for renewals, every even numbered year thereafter;

    (g)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, including violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed; and

    (h)  For itinerant merchants only, a written statement signed by the owner or authorized agent, consenting to applicant’s use of the subject property.

 

4-5-210 APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEE.
    The application and any renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee in such amount or amounts, as designated by the City Council, to cover administrative costs. No part of such fees shall be refunded whether such permit is issued or not.

 

4-5-215 VERIFICATION OF APPLICATION.
    The applicant shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury that the information contained or submitted with the application is true.

 

4-5-220 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
    The Finance Director shall deny the permit if he or she finds:

    (a)   That any information contained in or submitted with the application is not true; or

    (b)  That the activity as proposed by the applicant would not comply with any provision of this Chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of San Leandro or any statute or regulation of the State of California or of the United States; or

    (c)   That the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State of California:

    (1)  An offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony;

    (2)  Burglary (P.C. § 459);

    (3)  Robbery (P.C. § 211);

    (4)  Fraud, misrepresentation (P.C. §§ 351, 531, 532); or

    (d)  That, for any other reason, the activity as proposed would be detrimental to the public peace, health, morals or welfare.

 

4-5-225 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
    The Finance Director shall, within twenty (20) days after receipt of an application complying with the provisions of this Chapter, issue a permit or deliver to the applicant, personally or by mail, written notice of denial of the permit, setting forth the reason or reasons therefor, in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-5-220. If the permit is issued, the permit shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance, and the length of time (not to exceed one year) the same shall be operative as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle, if any, used in such business. The Finance Director shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. Permits shall be renewed annually upon payment of the renewal fee and business license fee. If the permit is for peddling at the Shoreline Recreation Area, the permit shall indicate the area or areas where the permittee may peddle.

 

4-5-230 BADGES.
    The Finance Director shall issue to each permittee at the time of delivery of his or her permit such identification badges as deemed necessary by the Finance Director. Badges (peddlers and solicitors only) shall be carried and shall be exhibited to any police officer or other authorized city official on demand and to any person upon whom such peddler or solicitor shall call.

 

4-5-235 TRANSFER.
    No identification badge issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.

 

4-5-240 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
    The Finance Director shall revoke a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter if:

    (a)   He subsequently determines that facts exist which, under the provisions of Section 4-5-220 would have required denial of the permit at the time of application; or

    (b)  Subsequent occurrences create a situation which, under the provisions of Section 4-5-220 would have required denial of the permit had the situation existed at the time of application; or

    (c)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement is contained in the application; or

    (d)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement was made in the course of carrying on the business of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant; or

    (e)   Any violation of this Chapter or of the terms and conditions of the permit; or

    (f)   Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or constitute a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

 

4-5-245 HEARING.
    Notice of the hearing before the Finance Director for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the basis for revocation and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.

 

4-5-250 APPEAL.
    Any person who has been denied a permit pursuant to Section 4-5-225, or has had his or her permit revoked pursuant to Section 4-5-240, may appeal that decision to the City Manager.

 

4-5-255 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES—PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE.
    (a)   If a permit is for peddling from a conveyance located from the public right-of-way, it shall not be issued until the applicant provides evidence to the satisfaction of the Finance Director of public liability and property damage insurance in such form and amount as may be required by the Finance Director to protect the City, its officials, directors, officers, employees and agents from claims which may arise from permittee’s activities under the permit. Such insurance shall be maintained during the term of the permit.

    (b)  The permittee shall be responsible for all liability for personal injury or property damage which may result from permittee’s activities under the permit, or proximately caused by failure on the permittee’s part to perform his or her obligations under said permit. If any claim or such liability is made against the City, its officers, or employees, permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them and each of them, harmless from such claim including any claim based on the active or passive negligence of the City, its officers or employees, insofar as permitted by law.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-037, 10/21/85; Ordinance No. 87-026, 1/4/88; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-5-250); Ordinance No. 2007-039, 12/3/07 (Sections 4-5-200, 4-5-230, 4-5-235); Ordinance No. 2009-003, 3/16/09 (Section 4-5-205); Ordinance No. 2014-009, 6/16/14 (Sections 4-5-200—4-5-255))

 

ARTICLE 3. EXEMPTIONS
4-5-300 REGULAR CONTACT.
    Persons regularly calling on persons, firms or corporations shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.

 

4-5-305 SHORELINE RECREATION AREA (MARINA).
    No person engaged in the business of peddler, or itinerant merchant shall conduct business on public or private property within the Shoreline Recreation Area.

 

4-5-310 NEWSPAPERS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the solicitation of subscriptions or advertising for, or sale of, newspapers, magazines or other periodicals published for the dissemination of news and intelligence of a general character and printed or published at regular intervals.

 

4-5-315 MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to mobile food vending as defined in Chapter 4-34 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 83-007, 2/7/83; Ordinance No. 87-026, 1/4/88; Ordinance No. 2007-039, 12/3/07 (Section 4-5-305); Ordinance No. 2014-009, 6/16/14 (Sections 4-5-300—4-5-315))

 

ARTICLE 4. BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
4-5-400 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
    Every person carrying on the business of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant who is not exempted from the provisions of this Chapter shall pay as a license fee the sum prescribed in Chapter 2 of Title II of this Code in addition to the application fee provided in this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-009, 6/16/14 (Section 4-5-400))

 

ARTICLE 5. GENERAL
4-5-500 LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
    No permittee or anyone acting in his or her behalf shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any other sound device including any loud speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the City or upon any private premises in the City where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, or parks, or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such permittee proposes to sell.

 

4-5-505 USE OF STREETS.
    (a)   No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location (unless otherwise provided) or be permitted to operate in any congested area where his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public.

    (b)  No peddler shall stand or park any motorized vehicle or trailer for more than five (5) hours in any particular location, nor shall any peddler stand or park any motorized vehicle or trailer in violation of any section of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    Regardless of the length of time parked at any particular location, no peddler shall stand or park any motorized vehicle or trailer within five hundred (500) feet, as measured in any direction, of any area where he or she previously parked at the beginning of the five (5) hour period, until twenty-four (24) hours have elapsed from the end of said five (5) hour period.

    (c)   No peddler shall stand or park any motorized vehicle or trailer within fifteen (15) feet of any curb return, driveway or fire hydrant.

 

4-5-510 INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
    None of the fees provided for by this Chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a fee is believed by a solicitor to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the Finance Director for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable, or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the Finance Director may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The Finance Director shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant’s business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he or she shall determine whether the fee is unfair, unreasonable, or discriminatory as to the applicant’s business and shall fix as the business license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Finance Director under this section may appeal to the City Manager.

 

4-5-515 ITINERANT MERCHANT DEPOSIT.
    Before any permit may be issued to an itinerant merchant, the applicant must deposit with the Finance Director the sum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) in lawful money of the United States, which deposit shall be retained as a guaranty that the premises occupied by such applicant shall be left in a clean condition. Upon presentation of a certificate to be issued by the Building Inspector that said premises are clean, such deposit may be refunded to applicant, otherwise, the same shall be retained by the City and expended to clean said premises.

 

4-5-520 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS—RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS—HOURS PERMITTED—NOTIFICATION.
    (a)   Except as allowed by subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant within a residential zoning district, as described in the San Leandro Zoning Code, except during the hours of 7:00 a.m., to 10:00 p.m., on each day.

    (b)  Where a person has an appointment with the occupants of a residence, that person may engage in the business of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant at that residence.

    (c)   Every permit issued for the purpose of engaging in the business of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall contain the language set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above, and shall also contain a map depicting the residential zoning districts of the City.

 

4-5-525 PUSHCARTS PROHIBITED.
    No person shall vend from or locate a pushcart, handcart or dolly within the City of San Leandro.

 

4-5-530 RESERVED.
 

4-5-535 PEDDLING FROM A VEHICLE OR TRAILER.
    (a)   Any and all vehicles and trailers used for the business of peddling shall be legally parked and capable of being self-propelled at all times. Peddlers engaged in the business of peddling from a vehicle or trailer may peddle their wares within the public rights-of-way on City streets, but shall not have exclusive rights to any particular location.

    (b)  No peddler shall dispense or sell any type of merchandise within two (2) blocks or six hundred (600) feet, whichever is greater, of an established business which sells the same type of merchandise as the peddler.

 

4-5-540 REFUSE COLLECTION.
    Prior to leaving any location from which a peddler has engaged in the activity of peddling, peddlers shall pick up, remove and properly dispose of all trash or refuse which consists of materials originally dispensed by the peddler, including any packages or containers, or parts thereof, used with or for dispensing of such goods.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 954 N.S.; Ordinance No. 63-72, 12/2/63; Ordinance No. 73-51, 8/13/73; Ordinance No. 82-050, 6/21/82; Ordinance No. 86-026, 8/4/86; Ordinance No. 2007-039, 12/3/07 (Sections 4-5-505, 4-5-525—4-5-540); Ordinance No. 2008-009, 7/28/08 (Section 4-5-530); Ordinance No. 2014-009, 6/16/14 (Sections 4-5-500—4-5-540))

CHAPTER 4-6 ALARM SYSTEMS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-6-100 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings hereafter respectively ascribed:

    (a)   Alarm Agent. “Alarm agent” shall mean any person employed or hired by an alarm business and whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, or servicing an alarm system or responding to same.

    (b)  Alarm Business. “Alarm business” shall mean any activity carried on by any person operating for any consideration which includes in the sale and installation, maintenance, alteration or servicing of alarm systems or which responds to such alarm systems.

    (c)   Alarm System. “Alarm system” shall mean any assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of any condition upon premises within the City of San Leandro to which an emergency response by public safety personnel would commonly occur. The term “alarm system” shall include any equipment which is designed to detect an emergency or which is designed to be activated by a person to report to an emergency.

    (d)  Alarm User. “Alarm user” shall mean any person who owns, operates or manages or is entitled to possession or any premises in the City of San Leandro on which an alarm system has been installed and operates.

    (e)   Audible Alarm. “Audible alarm” shall mean any alarm system, which, when activated, is capable of being heard within the premises and the immediate area thereof.

    (f)   Automatic Dialing System. “Automatic dialing system” shall mean any alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of a condition upon premises within the City to which an emergency response by public safety personnel would commonly occur.

    (g)  Central Station. “Central station” shall mean an office to which monitored alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and where personnel may be maintained continuously to respond to and investigate signals, and which signaling devices are listed by Underwriters’ Laboratory.

    (h)  False Alarm. “False alarm” shall mean any improper or accidental activation of an alarm system, including, but not limited to, activation due to negligent acts or omissions or to equipment malfunction.

    (i)   Monitored Alarm System. “Monitored alarm system” shall mean an alarm signaling system which, when activated by an alarm device, transmits a signal to a central station where appropriate action is taken to investigate and respond to the signal.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-026, 8/19/85; Ordinance No. 94-023, 10/3/94 (Section 4-6-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. ALARM BUSINESS
4-6-200—4-6-205 RESERVED.
 

4-6-210 NOTIFICATION OF INSTALLATION OF AN ALARM SYSTEM.
    Each time an alarm business sells, installs, operates, and/or maintains an alarm system within the City of San Leandro, it shall notify the Police Department, in writing, within ten (10) days thereof. The notice shall include the following:

    (a)   The name and dispatch telephone number of the alarm business or its alarm agent;

    (b)  The name of the alarm user and the alarm location address and telephone number.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-026, 8/19/85; Ordinance No. 94-023, 10/3/94 (Sections 4-6-200, 4-6-205, 4-6-210))

 

ARTICLE 3. ALARM SYSTEM
4-6-300 AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEM.
    It shall be unlawful to buy, sell, install, or operate within the City of San Leandro an audible alarm system which upon activating emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. For the purpose of this section, any electronic sounding device that produces a variable pitch tone shall be considered similar to an emergency vehicle siren. This section shall not apply to sirens mounted inside a building which cannot be heard from outside of the building.

 

4-6-305 AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEM SILENCING.
    It shall be unlawful to operate an audible alarm system which does not silence within a maximum time of fifteen (15) minutes from the time of activation. If the alarm system has an automatic cutoff with a rearming phase, the rearming phase must be capable of distinguishing between an open and closed circuit, and if the circuit is broken, the system shall not rearm.

 

4-6-310 INSTRUCTION AS TO OPERATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.
    Each alarm business and alarm agent shall provide accurate and complete written instruction to the alarm system user in the proper use and operation of said system including but not limited to the avoidance of false alarms. All businesses which sell alarm systems, but which are not “alarm businesses” or “alarm agents” as defined in this Chapter are similarly responsible for instructing the buyer of the alarm system in the proper use of said system.

 

4-6-315 NOTICE OF NAME OF SERVICER OR OCCUPANT.
    Every audible alarm system shall have a sign or notice posted on or near the audible device with the name and telephone number of the person or company responsible for the maintenance of the system. The notice shall be posted in such a position as to be readable from the ground level outside and adjacent to the building.

 

4-6-320 RESPONSE UPON NOTIFICATION.
    Upon notification by the San Leandro Police Department, the person or company named in the notice required by Section 4-6-315 of this Chapter or the representative of such person or company shall promptly proceed within at least thirty (30) minutes to the scene of the alarm and render necessary service. This service shall include, when necessary, the opening of the premises so that the origin of the alarm may be determined and appropriate action may be taken.

 

4-6-325 MONITORED ALARM SYSTEMS.
    The provisions prescribed in this section shall apply to all monitored alarm systems whether operated as a silent alarm, audible alarm or a combination of both.

    (a)   Alarm systems terminating in the communication center or the San Leandro Police Department shall be restricted to banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and similar organizations, except that alarm users who are considered subject to high risk of crime by the Police Department, in its sole discretion, may receive approval for such alarms.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful to buy, sell, install or operate any alarm system which, when activated, causes an alarm to be sent directly to the San Leandro Police Department by an automatic dialing system.

    (c)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to advertise, sell or install an automatic dialing system with the intent or instructions that said system may be utilized or operated to directly call the San Leandro Police Department.

    (d)  Any alarm business or alarm agent which operates a monitored alarm, shall, if notified by the San Leandro Police Department, provide a representative of the alarm user to respond within thirty (30) minutes to the scene of the alarm and render necessary service. This service shall include opening the premises in order that the origin of the alarm may be determined and appropriate action may be taken.

    (e)   When the alarm business operating a monitored alarm system notifies the San Leandro Police Department’s communication center of an alarm, the following information shall be provided:

    (1)  The exact location of the area covered by the alarm and the name of the business and the exact building or suite number of the business if located in a multiple unit structure;

    (2)  The name and estimated time of arrival of an agent representing the business or residence who has access to the building and knowledge of the operation of the alarm system as required in Section 4-6-320;

    (3)  The name or serial number of the alarm dispatch operator who calls in the alarm to the Police Department.

 

4-6-330 STANDBY BACKUP POWER SERVICE.
    All alarm systems shall have a standby backup power supply which will automatically assume the operation of the alarm system should any interruption occur in power to the system. The transfer of power from the primary source to the backup source must occur in a manner which does not activate the alarm.

 

4-6-335 CONDITION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of an alarm system to maintain the system in good repair to assure reliability of operation.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-026, 8/19/85; Ordinance No. 94-023, 10/3/94 (Sections 4-6-325, 4-6-335))

 

ARTICLE 4. FALSE ALARMS
4-6-400 RESPONSIBLE PARTIES—FALSE ALARMS—PENALTIES.
    (a)   No alarm user shall have or permit more than two (2) false alarms at the same premises within any ninety (90) day period.

    (b)  After the second false alarm at the same premises, the alarm user will be given written notice by mail that any further false alarms within the same time period shall be deemed excessive and a false alarm charge, established by City Council resolution, shall be levied for any such false alarm to which police respond unless no other false alarm occurs for an additional period of ninety (90) days.

    (c)   Alarm users are responsible for the proper maintenance of their alarm systems. Alarm users are also responsible for the proper training of anyone who has access to their alarmed premises.

    (d)  Alarm users shall file an “Emergency Information” form with the Police Department annually and notify the Department immediately upon any changes in the status or their alarm emergency notification information.

 

4-6-405 FALSE ALARMS CHARGE—A DEBT.
    (a)   The amount of any false alarm charge imposed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City.

    (b)  Such charge plus accumulated interest on unpaid accounts past ninety (90) days at the option of the City:

    (1)  Shall constitute an assessment against the alarm user’s real property and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof, which lien shall continue until the amount thereof, including all interest, is paid or until it is discharged of record;

    (2)  Shall be sent to an outside agency for collection.

 

4-6-410 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT FALSE ALARM CHARGES.
    During July of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a report of delinquent false alarm charges. A time, date and place for hearing of the report and any objections or protests thereto shall be fixed by the City Clerk. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the City Manager shall mail written notice thereof to the owner of each of the premises affected thereby, using for this purpose the names and addresses which appear on the last equalized tax assessment roll.

    (a)   At said hearing the City Council shall hear any objections or protests of owners of premises liable to be assessed for delinquent charges. The City Council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which the report shall be confirmed by resolution. The delinquent charges set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective premises and are a lien on the premises for the amounts of such delinquent charges.

    (b)  Prior to August 10, a certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the County Auditor, who shall enter each assessment on the tax roll against the respective premises. Said assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessments.

    (c)   The lien created attaches upon recordation of a certified copy of the confirmed report in the office of the County Recorder and shall continue until the charges are fully paid.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-026, 8/19/85; Ordinance No. 90-017, 10/1/90 (Section 4-6-400); Ordinance No. 92-034, 10/5/92 (Sections 4-6-400 — 4-6-410); Ordinance No. 94-023, 10/3/94 (Sections 4-6-400, 4-6-405))

 

ARTICLE 5. PENALTIES
4-6-500 INFRACTION.
    (a)   Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction or an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in Government Code § 36900. After the third conviction for a violation or this Chapter within any twelve (12) month period any subsequent violation within the twelve (12) month period may be punished as a misdemeanor.

    (b)  For the purpose of this Chapter, each alarm user shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every false alarm committed or continued by said alarm user in violation of Section 4-6-400.

 

4-6-505 APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING ALARM SYSTEMS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to an alarm user who uses, operates or maintains on his or her premises an alarm system installed on or before July 1, 1985, thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter.

 

4-6-510 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
    Notwithstanding Sections 4-6-400 and 4-6-500, any violations of Subsection 4-6-400 (a), or any other of the provisions of this Chapter are expressly deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 1-12.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-026, 8/19/85; Ordinance No. 90-017, 10/1/90 (Section 4-6-500); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-6-510))

 

ARTICLE 6. APPEALS
4-6-600 APPEALS.
    (a)   Any alarm user, alarm agent, or alarm business aggrieved by the assessment of any penalty, or by any other administrative decision taken pursuant to any provision of this Chapter, may appeal such decision in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of any penalty or other decision, to the Police Department. The appeal will be reviewed by the Department’s Records Coordinator or the Coordinator’s designee and a decision made in writing within ten (10) days.

    (b)  Any appeal of the determination of the Records Coordinator may be made to the City Manager or the Manager’s designee in accordance with the appeal procedure set forth in Title I, Chapter 9 of this Code.

 

4-6-605 NOTICE.
    Any notice herein required shall be deemed as having been served when the notice is posted in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid and addressed to the person’s business or residence address as shown on the records of the City Manager.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 90-017, 10/1/90 (Section 4-6-600); Ordinance No. 92-034, 10/5/92 (Section 4-6-605); Ordinance No. 94-023, 10/3/94 (Section 4-6-600))

CHAPTER 4-7 USED VEHICLE DEALERS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-7-100 VEHICLE CODE DEFINITIONS.
    Unless otherwise defined herein, the words and phrases used herein shall have the meaning as defined in the California Vehicle Code.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIRED
4-7-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    It shall be unlawful for any dealer within the City of San Leandro to engage in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or permitting the sale or exchange of used vehicles unless he or she has applied for and received a valid permit as provided herein.

 

4-7-205 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    An application for a used vehicle dealer’s permit shall be filed with the Finance Officer on a form furnished by the Finance Officer. The application shall be signed and verified and shall contain the following:

    (a)   The name, and date of birth of the applicant;

    (b)  The residence and business address and the citizenship of applicant, including all members of any association or partnership, or all officers and directors of any corporation applying;

    (c)   The location of the proposed business for which the permit is requested, and the name of the owner and the present use of such premises;

    (d)  The exact nature of the proposed business for which the permit is requested, and the name under which it is to be operated;

    (e)   The past experience of the applicant in the business to which the requested permit appertains, and the name, address, and past experience in such business of the person to be in charge of the premises or business;

    (f)   Whether or not any permit heretofore held by applicant for a similar business has been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of such revocation;

    (g)  The number of the license and certificate issued by the State of California, pursuant to Chapter 4 of Division 5 of the State Vehicle Code (§11700 et seq.);

    (h)  Such additional information as the Finance Officer or City Manager may require; and

    (i)   The dimensions and character of construction of the building, or the dimensions of the lot or premises, in which such business is proposed to be carried on.

 

4-7-210 APPLICATION FEE.
    The application for a used vehicle dealer’s permit shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount designated by the City Council by resolution, to cover administrative costs. No part of such fee shall be refunded whether such permit is issued or not.

 

4-7-215 PLACE OF BUSINESS.
    Prior to the issuance of a permit, any used vehicle establishment in a place other than a building, shall conform to the following conditions:

    (a)   The lot shall be properly graded and paved to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.

    (b)  All motor vehicles kept in said lot shall be parked or stored in an orderly manner.

    (c)   There shall be provided a sales office in conformance with the provisions of the City’s Uniform Building Code.

 

4-7-220 INVESTIGATION.
    The City Manager shall cause to be made such investigation of such applicant and of the facts set forth in such application as he or she shall deem advisable, and shall grant or deny such permit within sixty (60) days. In granting or denying such permit, and in specifying the conditions, if any, upon which it is granted, the City Manager shall exercise a reasonable and sound discretion and shall consider the character of the applicant with respect to honesty, integrity, and financial responsibility, and all pertinent facts which may concern the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. The City Manager may deny any permit applied for if it shall appear to his or her satisfaction:

    (a)   that the applicant is not a fit and proper person, either for financial or other reasons, to conduct or maintain the business to which the application pertains;

    (b)  that the applicant has not complied with the provisions of this Chapter relating to the maintenance or conduct of such business;

    (c)   that any person directly interested in such permit, including all members of any association or partnership and all officers of any corporation, has been convicted of committing any felony, theft, obtaining money or property by false pretense, embezzlement, or violating any provisions of this Chapter, or any other law regulating the conduct of such business; or

    (d)  that the applicant does not possess a valid license and certificate issued by the State of California.

 

4-7-225 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
    Any permit may be revoked or suspended by the City Manager as in his or her discretion may seem meet and just, for any reason for which a granting of such permit might be lawfully denied, or for any other reason hereinafter in this Chapter specifically provided. Such revocation or suspension shall be made only after a hearing has been granted to the holder of the permit to be held before the City Manager or his or her delegated representative, after five (5) days’ written notice to such permit holder, stating the grounds of complaint against him or her and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. In the event of such revocation or suspension, any permit or certificate issued in connection with the granting of such permit shall, by the holder thereof, be forthwith surrendered to the City Manager.

 

4-7-230 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
    Any person excepting to any denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, may appeal in writing to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof. Such notice must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days after notice of such action appealed from. The City Clerk shall forthwith set said matter for hearing before the Council and cause notice thereof to be given to the appellant not less than five (5) days prior to such hearing. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause, on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal, why the action excepted to should not be approved. Such hearings may, by the Council, be continued over from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter.

 

(Legislative History:)

 

ARTICLE 3. GENERAL
4-7-300 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
    Any officer of the City charged with the enforcement or administration of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be permitted to enter and inspect at any reasonable time any premises to which any permit granted under the provisions of this Chapter may pertain, or which are directly affected by such permit, for the purpose of ascertaining, whether or not any of the provisions of this Chapter applicable thereto, are being violated.

 

4-7-305 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
    Every used vehicle dealer shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the purchase, sale, exchange, consignment or storage of any vehicle, or part thereof or accessory thereto. Such records shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or any peace officer and, upon request, information contained therein shall be mailed to the Chief of Police.

 

4-7-310 REPAIRS.
    If repairs are made to any used vehicle such repairs shall be made in a building which has been erected in accordance with the Code of the City of San Leandro pertaining to the construction of public garages or repair shops. Any used vehicle in the process of being repaired and all parts of used vehicles shall be stored out of public view.

 

4-7-315 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
    The permit shall be prominently displayed in the place of business of the used vehicle dealer.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 794 N.S.; Ordinance No, 64-7, 2/3/64; Ordinance No. 82-039, 5/24/82)

CHAPTER 4-8 FIRE AND CLOSING-OUT SALES
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-8-100 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

    (a)   ADVERTISE, ADVERTISEMENT, ADVERTISING, PUBLISH, PUBLICATION. “Advertise,” “Advertisement,” “Advertising,” “Publish,” “Publication” shall mean any and all means, whether oral, written, lettered, or printed, used for conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a closing-out sale, or notice of intention to conduct such sale, including but not limited to oral or written announcement by proclamation or outcry, newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, written or printed notice, printed display, billboard display, poster, and radio announcement.

    (b)  CITY MANAGER. “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager or designee.

    (c)   CLOSING-OUT SALE OR SALE. “Closing-out sale” or “sale” shall mean any sale of or any offer to sell, to the public, or any group thereof, goods, wares, or merchandise on order, in transit, or in stock, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising that such sale is anticipatory to or to avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, removal, dissolution, or abandonment of the business or that portion of the business conducted at any location; and

    (1)  All sales advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the business or that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be removed, be interrupted, discontinued, or changed; and

    (2)  All sales advertised to be “Adjuster’s Sale,” “Assignee’s Sale,” “Bankrupt Sale,” “Benefit or Creditors’ Sale,” “Closing-Out Sale,” Creditors’ Sale,” “Damaged Goods Sale,” “Executors’ Sale,” “Final Days Sale,” “Fire Sale,” “Forced Out Sale,” “Insolvent Sale,” “Insurance Salvage Sale,” “Last Days Sale,” “Lease Expiring Sale,” “Liquidation Sale,” “Mortgage Sale,” “Removal Sale,” “Reorganization Sale,” “Salvage Sale,” “Selling Out Sale,” “Smoke Sale,” “Trustees’ Sale,” “Quitting Business Sale,” or advertised by any other expression or characterization closely similar to any of the foregoing and calculated to convey the same meaning; and

    (3)  All sales advertised in a manner calculated to indicate that the goods, wares, or merchandise to be sold, or any part thereof have been involved in any business failure or have been derived from a business which has failed, been closed, discontinued, or liquidated; and

    (4)  All sales accompanied by notice or advertising indicating that the premises are available for purchase or lease or are otherwise to be vacated; and

    (5)  All sales accompanied by advertising indicating a business emergency or failure affecting the seller or any previous holder of the goods to be disposed of.

    (d)  PERMITTEE. “Permittee” shall mean any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this Chapter.

    (e)   PERSON. “Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, association or organization and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other representative.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. )

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIRED
4-8-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    No person shall publish or conduct any closing-out sale without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager as provided in this Chapter.

 

4-8-205 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    No permit to conduct a closing-out sale shall be granted except upon written application to the City Manager, signed and verified by the person who intends to conduct such a sale, and each application shall set forth and contain the following information:

    (a)   Description by street location at which such sale is to be held;

    (b)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership, lease, or sublease, and if by lease or sublease, the effective date of the termination of such tenancy;

    (c)   A copy of all advertisements proposed to be used in connection with such sale, and a statement of the means or methods of advertising to be used in advertising such sale;

    (d)  The facts in regard to the insurance, bankruptcy, insolvency, assignment, mortgage foreclosure, administration, receivership, trusteeship, removal, executorship removal, or other cause advertised to be the reason for the proposed sale;

    (e)   An inventory or statement, in such form and in such detail as the City Manager may require, setting forth the amount and description of goods, wares, and merchandise to be sold at such a sale, and, when required by the City Manager, the date of acquisition of such goods, wares, or merchandise, the person from whom obtained, the place from which said goods were last taken, and such other information describing the goods as the City Manager may require.

 

4-8-210 INVESTIGATION.
    The City Manager may make or cause to be made an examination, audit or investigation of the applicant and his or her affairs, in relation to the proposed sale.

 

4-8-215 PERMIT.
    If the City Manager finds that the statements in the application are true and complete, that the inventory is complete, that the advertising set forth is not false, fraudulent, deceptive, or misleading in any respect, and that the methods to be used by the applicant in conducting the same are not such as, in the opinion of the City Manager, will work a fraud upon the purchasers, the City Manager shall issue to the applicant a permit to conduct such sale in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter; otherwise, the City Manager shall deny the application and refuse said permit. No application shall be denied unless an opportunity for a hearing before the City Manager has been given the applicant by a ten (10) days’ notice in writing.

 

4-8-220 FILING FEE.
    No application for any such permit shall be accepted by the City Manager for filing unless accompanied by a filing fee in the amount set forth by the City Council by resolution, no part of which shall be refundable.

 

4-8-225 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
    Each permit shall have printed, written, or stamped on the face thereof the following:

 

“This permit is granted by the City Manager and accepted by the permittee upon the condition that such permittee comply with and abide by all the provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code.”

 

with a line thereunder for signature by the permittee and a witness. At the time of the delivery of said permit such statement must be signed by the permittee in the presence of the City Manager who shall sign as a witness.

 

4-8-230 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
    Any permit shall authorize the one type of sale named in the application, at the place named therein, for a period of not more than sixty (60) calendar days, and shall permit the sale of goods only which are set out in said application, all of which goods throughout the duration of the sale must be definitely separated from any other goods displayed at, or within the store or place of business, and all advertising, signs or notices referring to, or calling attention to the sale, must be confined to the display, or displays of goods involved in the sale.

    Provided, however, that the City Manager may, upon a verified application therefor, renew said permit for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days, upon the payment of a renewal fee in the amount set forth by the City Council by resolution. Such verified petition for renewal shall set forth a complete list of goods listed in the original application and remaining unsold, and shall not contain any goods, wares, or merchandise not named in such original application. Upon receipt of such application for renewal the City Manager shall cause an investigation to be made at once, and if satisfied of the truth of the statements therein contained, the City Manager shall grant such renewal, which shall be endorsed and signed as provided for in the original permit. The City Manager may renew any original permit in the manner above provided not to exceed two (2) times, upon the payment of the renewal fee; provided, however, that the City Manager may not issue permits or renewals which will allow the conduct of any closing-out sale, or sales, of any kind, or kinds at any one location for more than one hundred twenty (120) calendar days in any one twelve (12) month period.

    Such permit shall be valid only for the advertising, representation and sale of the particular goods, wares, or merchandise described in the original application therefor, and at the particular time, and particular place stated therein, and by the particular applicant, and any renewal, replenishment or substitution of such goods, wares, or merchandise, or change of such time or place for such closing-out sale, or change of person conducting the closing-out sale, shall be unlawful and shall render such permit void. No person in contemplation of conducting any such closing-out sale or during the continuance of such closing-out sale, shall order any goods, wares, or merchandise for the purpose of selling them at such closing-out sale, and any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of such goods, wares, or merchandise, within sixty (60) calendar days before the filing of such application for a license to conduct such a closing-out sale shall be presumptive evidence that such purchase or additions were made in contemplation of such closing-out sale and for the purpose of selling them at such closing-out sale.

 

4-8-235 POWER TO REVOKE.
    The City Manager shall have the power to revoke at any time any permit granted in accordance with this Chapter whenever any such closing-out sale is being conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or in such manner as to deceive or defraud the public, or if:

    (a)   The permittee has made any material misstatement in the application for such permit;

    (b)  The permittee has been guilty of any fraudulent practice or practices, in the conduct of the sale authorized by such permit;

    (c)   The permittee has failed to include in the inventory required by the provisions of this Chapter the goods, wares, or merchandise required to be contained in such inventory;

    (d)  The permittee has added, caused to be added, or permitted to be added any goods, wares, or merchandise not described in the original inventory; or

    (e)   The permittee has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter of any other law pertaining to advertising.

 

4-8-240 REVOCATION.
    No permit shall be revoked until a hearing has been held by the City Manager. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing, and a brief statement of the grounds for such revocation, shall be served upon the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for such hearing. A person aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager in denying or revoking any permit may, within ten (10) days after notice of decision of the City Manager is served, appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The City Council shall forthwith hold a hearing and its decision shall be final. During the pendency of an appeal, the license shall not remain in effect.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. )

 

ARTICLE 3. GENERAL
4-8-300 LOSS OF IDENTITY.
    Any removal of any goods, wares, or merchandise inventoried and described in the original application from the place of sale mentioned in such application shall cause such goods to lose their identity as the stock of any of the sales defined herein, and no permits thereafter will be issued for the conducting of a sale of any such goods, wares, or merchandise in such manner as to identify them with the store, store name, store owner, or location referred to in the original application.

 

4-8-305 ENFORCEMENT.
    Upon commencement and throughout the duration of any sale the permit shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. A duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant to which such permit was issued, shall at all times be available to the City Manager and the permittee shall permit the City Manager to examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with such stock list.

 

4-8-310 RECORDS BE KEPT.
    Suitable books and records be kept by the permittee and shall at all times be available to the City Manager. At the close of business each day the stock list attached to the application shall be revised and those items disposed of during such day shall be so marked thereon.

 

4-8-315 EXEMPTIONS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons:

    (a)   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;

    (b)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers such as sheriffs and marshals;

    (c)   Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction; and

    (d)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine, or other publication, who publishes any such advertisement in good faith, without knowledge of its false, deceptive, or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this Chapter have not been complied with.

 

4-8-320 VIOLATION.
    In addition to the revocation of a license pursuant to Section 4-8-235, any violation of the provisions of this Chapter may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 1-12. For the purposes of enforcement, each sale of goods, wares, or merchandise as were not inventoried and described in said original applications shall constitute a separate offense under this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 938 N.S., Ordinance No 82-038, 5/24/82; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-8-320))

CHAPTER 4-9 SECONDHAND DEALERS—JUNK DEALERS—PAWNBROKERS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-9-100 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

    (a)   “Junk” means any and all secondhand and used machinery and scrap metal, including tools, implements or parts or portions thereof, and any and all secondhand and used furniture or other personal property, other than livestock, or parts or portions thereof.

    (b)  “Junk Dealer” includes any person engaged in the business of buying, selling and dealing in junk, any person purchasing, gathering, collecting, soliciting or traveling about from place to place procuring junk, and any person operating, carrying on, conducting or maintaining a junk yard or place where junk is gathered together and stored or kept for shipment, sale or transfer.

    (c)   “Junk Yard” includes any yard, plot, space, enclosure, building or any other place where junk is collected, stored, gathered together and kept.

    (d)  “Secondhand Dealer” means and includes any person, whose principal business is primarily that of engaging in buying, selling, exchanging, trading, accepting for sale or consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand personal property of whatever kind or description. “Secondhand Dealer” shall not include any person operating an automobile wrecking establishment or secondhand automobile business.

    (e)   “Pawnbroker” means and includes any person, other than banks, trust companies, or bond brokers, who may otherwise be regulated by laws authorized to deal in commercial paper, shares of stock, bonds or other certificates of value, who is engaged in the business of receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan.

    (f)   “Person” includes any individual or organization, any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other representative.

    (g)  “Organization” includes any partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, or other entity, however organized.

 

4-9-105 VIOLATION.
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-072, 10/19/81)

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIRED
4-9-200 PERMIT.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the business of junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker without a valid permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.

 

4-9-205 APPLICATION.
    All applications for permits shall be filed with the Chief of Police on such forms as he or she may prescribe and shall contain such information as the Chief of Police shall reasonably deem necessary for the proper processing of the application.

 

4-9-210 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
    The Chief of Police shall issue a permit unless he or she finds:

    (a)   That the applicant has been convicted of an attempt to receive stolen property or any other offenses involving stolen property;

    (b)  That the conduct of the business or activity at the location for which application is made, will violate any city, state or federal law or regulation, or is likely to constitute a public nuisance;

    (c)   That the applicant has made any material statement or concealment in the application; or

    (d)  That the applicant is under 18 years of age.

 

4-9-215 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
    The Chief of Police shall cause such investigation of the application to be made as he or she deems necessary and shall grant or deny the permit within forty-five (45) days after application.

 

4-9-220 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
    Any permit may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police when it shall appear to him or her that the activity authorized by such permit is conducted, maintained or carried out in a manner contrary to or in violation of any law of the state, county, city or federal government, or any provision of this Chapter. In addition, the Chief of Police may suspend or revoke the permit upon any grounds which would justify a denial to issue a permit.

    No permit shall be revoked or suspended until a hearing shall have been held by the Chief of Police. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the person to whom the permit was granted at least five (5) working days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending such permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing the same in the U.S. mail in a sealed envelope postage paid, addressed to such person to be notified at his or her address as it appears in his or her application for a permit.

 

4-9-225 APPEAL FROM DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police, relating to the denial of a permit, revocation or suspension, may, within ten (10) days after the decision is communicated to the applicant in writing by the Chief of Police, appeal such decision to the City Council by filing a written notice, thereof with the City Clerk. If such notice is not filed within ten (10) days, the decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.

    The City Council shall hold a public hearing to hear the appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of filing such notice of appeal, and shall, conditionally or otherwise, grant, deny, reinstate or refuse to reinstate such permit.

 

4-9-230 FEES.
    Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee, the amount of which shall be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution upon recommendation of the City Manager or designee. This application fee shall be in addition to any other business license fee or permit fee imposed by the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-072, 10/19/81)

 

ARTICLE 3. RECORDS
4-9-300 RECORDS.
    Any person engaged in, carrying on or conducting the business of junk dealer, secondhand dealer, or pawnbroker shall keep, or cause to be kept, at place of business, a bound book containing the following information, in English:

    (a)   An exact description of all personal property purchased, sold, exchanged, traded, accepted on consignment, accepted for auction, pledged, pawned, or otherwise transferred, which description shall include any serial number and all particular or prominent marks of identification that may be found on such property.

    (b)  The name, signature, address, date of birth, sex and description of the person with whom the junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker transacts the business referred to in subparagraph (a) above.

    (c)   The amount of money paid or received in such transaction and the rate of interest to be charged, if any;

    (d)  The date and hour of the transaction;

    (e)   The name of the junk dealer’s, secondhand dealer’s or pawnbroker’s employee or agent who transacted the business, if other than the junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker himself; and

    (f)   The license number of the vehicle, if any, in which the personal property was transported to the junk dealer’s place of business.

 

4-9-305 COPY OF RECORDS TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
    All persons engaged in carrying on or conducting the business of junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall provide the Chief of Police with copies of the records specified in Section 4-9-300. Such records shall be transmitted to the Chief of Police daily on the day after the transaction, or on the first working day after the transaction.

 

4-9-310 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
    The records specified in Section 4-9-300, shall be open for inspection by any San Leandro Police Officer at any time during regular business hours. Any San Leandro Police Officer shall also have the right to inspect the junk dealer’s, secondhand dealer’s or pawnbroker’s premises to search for lost or stolen property, or to compare the entries kept in one record book with the personal property located on such premises.

 

4-9-315 ALTERATION OF RECORDS.
    It shall be a misdemeanor to alter any records required to be kept under Section 4-9-300.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-072, 10/19/81)

 

ARTICLE 4. RETENTION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
4-9-400 HOLDING PERIOD.
    Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall retain in his or her possession for a period of thirty (30) days, all personal property reported under the provisions of Section 4-9-300 and Section 4-9-305. The thirty (30) day holding period shall commence with the date the copy of the records required to be kept was received by the Chief of Police.

 

4-9-405 EXEMPTION.
    For good cause the Chief of Police may authorize, in writing, the disposition of any personal property prior to the end of the thirty (30) day holding period.

 

4-9-410 HOLD—ORDER.
    The Chief of Police may place a hold-order upon any personal property, except tangible personal property as defined in Business & Professions Code §21627, for a period of sixty (60) days in addition to the thirty (30) day holding period specified in Section 4-9-400. Such additional hold-order may require the junk-dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker to keep a record of the disposition of such property.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-072, 10/19/81)

 

ARTICLE 5. POSTING
4-9-500 POSTING.
    A copy of this ordinance shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business of all junk dealers, secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers. In the alternative, a summary of the salient provisions of this ordinance, approved by the Chief of Police, may be so posted.

 

4-9-505 POSTING OF ORDINANCE REQUIRING PROPER IDENTIFICATION.
    A copy of Section 4-1-830 of this Code shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business of all junk dealers, secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers.

CHAPTER 4-10 ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION AND ANTI-LITTER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-10-100 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

    (a)   ADVERTISING MATTER. “Advertising Matter” shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, advertisement, broadside, handbill, card, poster, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.

    (b)  COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER. “Commercial Advertising Matter” shall mean and include any advertising matter as herein defined which:

    (1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or

    (2)  Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or

    (3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this State, or under any ordinance of this City; or

    (4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.

    (c)   NEWSPAPER. “Newspaper” shall mean and include any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with Section 132.2 and following, of the Postal Manual, as the same exist upon the date this Chapter becomes effective, any bona fide publication disseminating news of a general nature, even though such publication has not been published for a sufficient time to obtain a decree of court determining the same to be a newspaper of general circulation, and, in addition thereto, shall include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.

    (d)  NON-COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER. “Non-commercial Advertising Matter” shall mean and include any advertising matter as herein defined which is not included in the aforesaid definitions of commercial advertising matter or a newspaper.

    (e)   PERMIT OFFICER. “Permit Officer” shall mean the officer or person charged with the issuance of business licenses in the City of San Leandro.

    (f)   PUBLIC PLACE. “Public Place” shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. )

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS
4-10-200 PERMIT NUMBER TO APPEAR ON ADVERTISING MATTER.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate, or directly or indirectly cause to be distributed or circulated, any advertising matter as herein defined, unless there is printed, stamped, written, lithographed, or otherwise designated upon each piece of advertising matter the permit number issued to the distributor by the City of San Leandro. Said permit number shall be shown in the following form: “San Leandro Permit No.       .”

 

4-10-205 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED FOR COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate, or directly or indirectly cause to be distributed or circulated, any commercial advertising matter, as herein defined, unless such person has a business license as provided in Chapter 2 of Title II of this Code.

 

4-10-210 THROWING ADVERTISING MATTER IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter in or upon any public place within the City of San Leandro; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any advertising matter in any public place to any person willing to accept such advertising matter.

 

4-10-215 THROWING ADVERTISING MATTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter from any moving automobile or other motor vehicle.

 

4-10-220 PLACING ADVERTISING MATTER IN OR UPON VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting, or distributing of any advertising matter to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the same.

 

4-10-225 DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATTER ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PRIVATE PREMISES PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, or where a previous day’s distribution of advertising matter has not been removed.

 

4-10-230 DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED WHERE PROPERTY POSTED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, and so as to be clearly readable from the sidewalk, a sign bearing the words, “No Advertising,” indicating that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such advertising matter left upon such premises.

 

4-10-235 DISTRIBUTING ADVERTISING MATTER AT INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, or distribute any advertising matter in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such advertising matter directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided herein, such person, unless requested in writing by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such advertising matter in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such advertising matter is so prepared, placed, or deposited on the porch or other covered area of the building so as to secure or prevent such advertising matter from being blown or drifting about such premises, or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by Federal postal laws or regulations.

 

4-10-240 EXEMPTION FOR MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon private property.

 

4-10-245 OFFENSIVE ADVERTISING MATTER PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate, or cause to be distributed or circulated, any advertising matter which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or which urges any unlawful conduct, or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public peace or good order of the community; or which is offensive to public morals or decency, or which contains blasphemous, obscene, libelous, or scurrilous language.

 

4-10-250 POSTING IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
    No person, other than a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty, shall post any advertising matter in any public place, whether by affixing such advertising matter to a building or structure therein, or otherwise.

 

4-10-255 ADVERTISING MATTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER.
    Except as provided in Section 4-10-235, it shall be unlawful for any person, except a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty or a private person in giving a legal notice, to place, paste, post, paint, print, nail, tack, or otherwise fasten any advertising matter, or notice of any kind, upon any private property without the written consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent, or trustee thereof.

 

4-10-260 PERMIT—APPLICATION.
    Any person desiring to engage, as principal, in the business of distributing commercial or non-commercial handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive from the permit officer a permit in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this ordinance and by all relevant provisions of the Municipal Code. Such applicant shall make written application to the permit officer upon a form or forms provided for such purpose by the permit officer. Such permit shall contain among other things that may be required, the name, the business address, and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the probable number of agents or employees so to be engaged, together with a request for a permit for the period for which the applicant seeks to engage in such business.

 

4-10-265 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
    Without excluding other grounds for revocation, the permit officer may revoke any permit obtained under application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with intent to obtain a permit by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this Chapter, or any other grounds specified by law. Before revoking any permit, the permit officer shall order a hearing. Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the permit holder not less than one week before the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be served by depositing a copy thereof in the United States Post Office enclosed in an envelope addressed to the permit holder at his or her last known business address with the postage fully prepaid thereon. Service shall be deemed complete when such copy is deposited in the Post Office.

 

4-10-270 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the permit officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within five (5) days following the effective date of the action or decision from which the appeal is taken.

    (a)   Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of facts relied upon to avoid such order.

    (b)  At the time of filing any such appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the permit officer herein. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. Written notice of such hearing of appeal shall be served upon the permit holder not less than one week before the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be served by depositing a copy thereof in the United States Post Office enclosed in an envelope addressed to the permit holder at his or her last known business address, with the postage fully prepaid thereon. Service shall be deemed complete when such copy is deposited in the Post Office.

    (c)   The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 62-11, 4/2/62; Ordinance No. 74-28, 4/22/74; Ordinance No. 82-050, 6/21/82)

CHAPTER 4-11 ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-11-100 DEFINITION OF TERMS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:

    (a)   ANIMAL. “Animal” shall mean any mammal, including but not limited to, horse, cow, goat, sheep, dog, or cat.

    (b)  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. “Animal Control Officer” shall be the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

    (c)   AREA. “Area” shall mean the incorporated area of the City of San Leandro.

    (d)  AT LARGE. “At large” shall mean a dog off the premises or its owner and not under restraint by leash, or chain or not otherwise controlled by a competent person.

    (e)   DANGEROUS DOG. “Dangerous dog” shall mean any dog which, according to the records of the Animal Control Officer, has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being while on public or private property, or a dog determined to be dangerous in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of this Chapter

    (f)   DIRECTOR. “Director” shall mean the Animal Control Shelter providing contract services to the City or authorized deputy or representative.

    (g)  DOG. “Dog” shall mean any member of the canine family and shall include female as well as male dogs.

    (h)  HEALTH OFFICER. “Health Officer” shall mean the Alameda County Health Officer.

    (i)   HORSE. “Horse” shall include mule, burro, pony, jack, hinny or jenny.

    (j)   LICENSING AUTHORITY. “Licensing authority” shall mean the City Finance Director or designated representative.

    (k)  OWNER. “Owner” shall mean any person, firm or corporation owning, having an interest in, or having control or custody or possession of any animal.

    (l)   POT-BELLIED PIG. A pot-bellied pig shall mean any swine that does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) pounds.

    (m) PERSON. “Person” shall include any person, partnership, corporation, trust, and association of persons.

    (n)  SEVERE INJURY. “Severe injury” shall mean any physical injury that results in major muscle or nerve trauma, broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.

    (o)  SHELTER. “Shelter” shall mean facility designated by Director for impoundment of animals.

    (p)  WILD ANIMAL. “Wild animal” shall mean any animal not ordinarily and customarily domesticated, including, but not limited to skunk, raccoon, opossum, squirrel, and fox, but under human control.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-019, 11/2/87; Ordinance No. 87-024, 12/21/87; Ordinance No. 98-01, 2/17/98 (Section 4-11-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. DOG LICENSE
4-11-200 ANIMAL CONTROL—DOG LICENSING.
    (a)   Every person within the area owning, possessing, controlling, harboring, or keeping any dog over four (4) months of age shall procure from the Licensing Authority dog license tag for each dog, as long as ownership of the dog continues, or within ten (10) days after acquiring or bringing into the area any dog over the age of four (4) months, and annually or triennially thereafter, so long as the ownership of the dog continues.

    (b)  Every person authorized by State law to administer an anti-rabies vaccination who offers that service within the area shall supply to the Licensing Authority on a weekly basis the name and address of the owner of each dog so vaccinated within the preceding week, the vaccination date and the expiration date of the certificate.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-021, 9/6/88)

 

4-11-205 EXEMPTIONS.
    This article does not apply to dogs found within the area under any of the following conditions:

    (a)   When the dog is owned by, or in the care of, any person who is a non-resident or who is traveling through the area, or who is temporarily sojourning therein for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days, if the dog is not permitted to run at large.

    (b) When the dog is brought into the area and kept therein for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, for the exclusive purpose of entering the dog in any bench show, dog exhibition, field trials, or competition, if the dog is not permitted to run at large.

    (c)   When the dog is brought or sent into the area for the exclusive purpose of receiving veterinary care in any dog hospital, if the dog is not permitted to run at large.

    (d)  When the dog has a valid license from either the County of Alameda or a City within the County of Alameda, it shall not be subject to the license requirement of this Article.

 

4-11-210 TERM OF LICENSE.
    The license period of each dog license shall be either one or three (3) years commencing on the first day of the month following the month of issuance of an anti-rabies vaccination certificate. The license fee shall be either one-twelfth (1/12) the annual license fee chargeable times the number of months remaining in the annual license period, or one-thirty-sixth (1/36) the triennial license fee chargeable times the number of months remaining in such license period.

 

4-11-215 LICENSE APPLICATION.
    The owner shall state at the time application is made, and upon standard printed form of application provided for such purpose, his or her name, address, telephone and the name, breed, and sex of the dog.

 

4-11-220 ANTI-RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
    As a condition for the issuance of a license all applicants for such license shall procure and deliver to the Licensing Authority a certificate issued by a duly licensed Veterinarian certifying that the dog to be licensed has been administered an anti-rabies vaccination within thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of said license, or has received anti-rabies vaccination sufficient to immunize said dog against rabies for the current license period.

 

4-11-225 ISSUANCE OF TAGS AND CERTIFICATES.
    A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding number shall be furnished by the Licensing Authority, upon payment of the appropriate fee prescribed in Article 5 of this Chapter.

 

4-11-230 OWNER MUST ATTACH LICENSE.
    The said Licensing Authority shall keep a record of the name of such owner or person making payment of said license fee and to whom a certificate and tag shall have been issued, and the number and date of such certificate and such tag. Such metal tag issued shall be securely fixed to a collar, harness, or other device to be worn at all times by the dog for whom the registration is issued.

 

4-11-235 TAG MUST BE SHOWN.
    No person shall fail or refuse to show to Director, Animal Control Attendant, Deputy Sheriffs or any Police Officer of the City of San Leandro the license certificate and the tag for any duly registered dog kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under his or her immediate control.

 

4-11-240 REMOVAL OF REGISTRATION TAGS PROHIBITED.
    No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached a registration tag for the current year, or to remove such tag therefrom.

 

4-11-245 LOST AND DESTROYED TAGS TO BE REPLACED IMMEDIATELY.
    If the dog license tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall immediately procure a new duplicate license tag from the licensing authority.

 

4-11-250 COUNTERFEIT AND IMITATION TAGS.
    No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags prescribed by this Article, or have in his or her possession any imitation or counterfeit tags.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-086, 11/15/82; Ordinance No. 87-024, 12/21/87)

 

ARTICLE 3. ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE—BITING ANIMALS
4-11-300 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
    No owner or keeper of a dog shall allow or permit such dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to be or run at large in or upon any public place or premises, or in or upon any private place or premises other than those of said owner or keeper except with the consent of the person in charge of said private place or premises, unless such dog is securely restrained by a substantial leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and is in charge and control of a person competent to keep such dog under effective charge and control; provided, however, nothing in this section shall prevent a dog from being used without leash to hunt wild birds or game or to herd, guard, gather, or otherwise work domestic animals or fowls in or upon a public place or premises so long as such dog is under the charge and control of a person competent to keep such dog under effective charge and control and so long as such dog does not wrongfully harm or damage or threaten to harm or damage any person or public or private property. For purposes of this section, any dog in or upon any vehicle shall be deemed to be on the premises of the operator thereof.

 

4-11-305 BITING ANIMALS TO BE QUARANTINED.
    Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person or animals, or exhibits evidence of rabies, no owner or person having custody or possession thereof, upon order of the Health Officer, shall fail, refuse, or neglect to quarantine such animal and keep it tied up or confined for a period of ten (10) days, or shall fail, refuse, or neglect to allow the Health Officer or his or her deputies to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during said period. No such dog or animals shall be removed or released during the quarantine period without written permission of the Health Officer of his or her deputies. Unless otherwise specified by the Health Officer, such animals shall be confined in a shelter or veterinary hospital at the owner’s expense.

 

4-11-310 ANIMALS DYING WHILE UNDER ISOLATION.
    The head of an animal dying while under isolation shall be submitted to the laboratory of the Alameda County Health Department for examination for rabies.

 

4-11-315 KNOWLEDGE OF BITE—DUTY TO REPORT.
    Whenever any person having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of any animal has knowledge that such animal has bitten any person or animal, or has been bitten by another animal, the person having charge, care, control, custody or possession or such animal shall report said fact forthwith to the San Leandro Police Department. The report shall state the name and address of the person bitten, and description of the animal bitten, if any, and the time and place where such person or animal was bitten, and any other information as requested by the San Leandro Police Department. A copy of the report shall be forwarded by the San Leandro Police Department to the Health Officer within forty-eight (48) hours.

 

4-11-320 POLICE DOGS—INTERFERENCE WITH—MISTREATMENT OF.
    No person shall wilfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the County Sheriff or Police Department in the performance of the functions or duties of such department, or interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by said department or any member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties or said department of such officer or member.

 

4-11-325 CANINE DEFECATION—REMOVAL THEREOF.
    (a)   Any person having the custody or control of any dog shall have the duty to remove immediately any feces left by such animal on any public place and to dispose of such feces in a sanitary manner.

    (b)  Any person having the custody or control of any dog in or on a public place shall have in such person’s immediate possession a device or equipment for the picking up and removal of animal feces. For purposes of this section, such device or equipment shall be deemed to be in a person’s immediate possession if such device or equipment is in a person’s hand or is on the person, such as within a pocket.

    (c)   No person shall fail or refuse to show to any Police or Animal Control Officer or other designated representative of the City Manager, such device or equipment if the device or equipment is not visible.

    (d)  The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) above shall not apply to any disabled person when the person’s disability requires a dog to accompany the person nor to a person using a dog in emergency or rescue activities.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 89-020, 11/6/89 (Section 4-11-325))

 

ARTICLE 4. IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS
4-11-400 IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS.
    It shall be the duty of the Director to impound and safely keep any of the animals enumerated in this ordinance and found running at large, staked, tied, or being herded or pastured in any street, lane, alley, court, square, park, or other place belonging to or under the control of the City of San Leandro, or upon any private property, contrary to the provisions of this ordinance when such animals have been delivered to him or her by the City of San Leandro.

 

4-11-405 STRAY ANIMALS.
    Every person taking up any stray animal or such animal which is running at large contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall within eight (8) hours thereafter give notice to the San Leandro Police Department of:

    (a)   The fact that he or she has such animal in his or her possession.

    (b)  The complete description of such animal.

    (c)   The license number of such animal, if any, and by what county or municipal corporation issued. If such animal has no license, such person shall so state.

    (d)  The place where such animal is confined.

    Every such person and any person in whose custody such animal may, in the meantime, be placed may deliver such animal to the shelter without fee or charge; and the Director shall thereupon hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had been found at large and brought to him or her the City of San Leandro pursuant to Section 4-11-400.

 

4-11-410 NOTIFICATION TO OWNER.
    The Director shall immediately upon impoundment of dogs or other animals make every reasonable effort to notify the owner of such dogs or other animals impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals. If the dog has a valid license, the owner shall be notified. Such notice shall be either personal or by deposit in the mails properly addressed and postage prepaid.

 

4-11-415 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
    All animals impounded at the shelter shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the Director. Unless such unlicensed animals shall have been redeemed within five (5) days after being impounded, or licensed animals seven (7) days after notification provided for in Section 4-11-410, they may be sold by the Director to the person offering to pay a cash amount set by the Director, but not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) therefor, provided that the purchaser shall not be given possession of any dog or dogs until he or she shall have paid to the Licensing Authority the license fee or fees prescribed for such dog or dogs. If any dog or other animal impounded by the Director shall not have been redeemed within said period and cannot be sold within a reasonable time thereafter, it may be destroyed by the Director in a humane manner. In lieu of destruction, the Director may release without charge animals to any humane organization that provides an adoption service. The San Leandro Police Department and the Director shall each maintain a file describing each animal impounded therein, for at least the prescribed period beginning on the day any such animal is taken or delivered into the possession of the shelter. The owner must, within five (5) days, show proof of a current, valid anti-rabies vaccination.

 

4-11-420 RECLAIMING LICENSED ANIMALS.
    The owner of any licensed impounded animal shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the lawful disposition thereof upon payment to the Director of the costs and charges hereinafter provided in this ordinance for the impounding and keeping of said animals.

 

4-11-425 RECLAIMING OF UNREDEEMED ANIMAL BY OWNER.
    The owner of any impounded animal may, at any time, within thirty (30) days after sale by Director, redeem from the purchaser by paying him or her the amount of the purchase price paid by him or her to the Director, and any license fee paid an in addition thereto the sum equal to rates established in Section 4-11-530 per day for the number of days from the date of sale to and including the date of such redemption.

 

4-11-430 DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS UNFIT FOR USE BY REASON OF AGE, DISEASE, OR OTHER CAUSE.
    It shall be the duty of the Director, and he or she is hereby authorized to forthwith destroy any animal lawfully impounded which is by reason of age, disease, or other cause unfit for adoption, or is dangerous to keep impounded.

 

4-11-435 NUISANCES BY ANIMALS.
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for:

    (a)   Any person owning, keeping or having in his or her care or custody any animal to knowingly permit or suffer such animal, by any barking or other noise or sound, to disturb any other person’s peace and quiet. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the keeping of any watchdog, provided the keeper thereof takes immediate steps to quiet such dog whenever it barks, and provided such keeper never leaves such dog unattended on the premises in a place where its barking, if prolonged or if repeated an undue number of times, disturbs any other person’s peace and quiet.

    (b)  Any person owning, keeping or having in his or her care or custody any animal to allow, permit or suffer such animal to damage or destroy the property of another person or public property, or to repeatedly deposit its body waste fluid or matter upon such property.

    (c)   Any person owning, keeping or having in his or her care or custody any animal to allow, permit or suffer such animal to cause unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions due to inadequate care or facilities, or due to the size, type of number of animals maintained at a single location.

    (d)  Any person owning, keeping or having in his or her care or custody any animal to allow, permit or suffer such animal to molest, attack or otherwise interfere with the freedom of lawful movement of persons or to chase vehicles or to attack other domestic animals or in any other way, create a nuisance.

    No person, after being informed orally or in writing by the Animal Control Officer that his or her animal has violated this section, shall fail, refuse or neglect to take whatever steps or use whatever means are necessary to assure that such animal or condition does not continue to be a nuisance.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-019, 11/2/87)

 

ARTICLE 5. FEES
4-11-500 LICENSE FEE.
    The annual dog license fee shall be that amount established by resolution of the Council and shall be paid within forty-five (45) days of the date such license is required to be obtained.

 

4-11-505 LICENSE FEE—NEUTERED OR SPAYED DOG.
    The license fee prescribed in Section 4-11-500 shall be reduced by one-half for a neutered or spayed dog. In order to qualify for the reduced fee provided for by this Section, an applicant for a license shall exhibit to the Licensing Authority a certificate issued by a duly licensed veterinarian or an affidavit executed by applicant under penalty of perjury certifying that the dog to be licensed has been neutered or spayed.

 

4-11-510 LICENSE FEE PENALTY.
    Any person who fails to obtain a license and pay the appropriate fee within the time limit prescribed in Section 4-11-500, in addition to any other penalty prescribed by this Chapter, shall pay together with the license see a penalty in the amount established by resolution of the City Council.

 

4-11-515 EXCEPTION—”SEEING EYE” DOGS.
    “Seeing Eye” dogs owned and actually used by a blind person shall be exempt from a license fee as specified in this Article.

4-11-520 EXCEPTION—”POLICE” DOGS.
    Any dog owned by the County of Alameda or the City of San Leandro and used by the Sheriff or Police Department in the performance of the functions or duties of such department shall be exempt from a license fee as specified in this Article.

 

4-11-525 DUPLICATE TAGS.
    The fee for replacement of a current tag which has been lost or stolen shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

 

4-11-530 CHARGES UPON IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
    The City Manager shall, by administrative rule, establish and the Director shall charge, receive and collect in accordance therewith, charges for impounded animals and for the care and feeding thereof.

 

4-11-535 CHARGES FOR SPECIAL SERVICES.
    The City Manager shall, by administrative rule, establish and the Licensing Authority shall charge, receive and collect in accordance therewith, charges for special services pertaining to animal control other than those provided for in Section 4-11-530.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-086, 11/15/82; Ordinance No. 82-032, 5/24/82; Ordinance No. 87-024, 12/21/87)

 

ARTICLE 6. DANGEROUS DOGS
4-11-600 PURPOSE.
    The provisions of this Article are supplementary to any other provision of law governing the same and are intended to afford the protection to the public consistent with reasonable and ascertainable standards of conduct.

 

4-11-605 PROHIBITIONS.
    No person shall possess any dog in the City that is or has been determined to be a dangerous dog except in conformance to the provisions of this Article.

 

4-11-610 DETERMINATION OF DANGEROUS DOG.
    A dog may be determined to be dangerous when any of the following requirements are met:

    (a)   Any dog which, according to the record of the Animal Control Officer, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal without provocation while off the dog owner’s property;

    (b)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting;

    (c)   Any dog which without provocation chases or approaches beings on the streets, sidewalks, public grounds or property other than that of the owner of the dog, in a threatening and menacing manner or with apparent attitude of attack, or whose behavior requires a defensive action by any human being to prevent bodily injury when the human being and the dog are off the property of the owner of the dog;

    (d)  Any dog not owned by a governmental entity or law enforcement agency and used exclusively to guard public or private property;

    (e)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, bites a human being, causing a less severe injury than as defined in Section 4-11-100(e).

 

4-11-615 EXCEPTION FOR ANIMALS THAT ARE PROVOKED.
    No dog may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

 

4-11-620 CONDUCT OF HEARING.
    (a)   A determination hearing shall be conducted by the Animal Control Officer whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a dog may be a “dangerous dog” as defined in Section 4-11-610. Said hearing shall be conducted no less than five (5) working days nor more than ten (10) working days after serving notice to the owner by certified mail.

    (b)  Pending the outcome of such a hearing and unless otherwise impounded, the dog must be securely confined in a humane manner either on the premises of the owner or with a licensed veterinarian.

    (c)   The Animal Control Officer shall determine whether to declare the animal to be a “dangerous dog” based upon evidence and testimony presented at the time of the hearing by the owner, witnesses to any incident(s) which may be considered germane to such a determination, Health Department personnel, Animal Control personnel, police or any other person possessing relevant information.

    (d)  The Animal Control Officer shall issue written findings within five (5) working days after the determination hearing. The owner or possessor of the animal found to be dangerous by this hearing has the right to appeal the decision to the City Manager within five (5) days of receiving such decision.

    (e)   The Animal Control Officer may decide all issues for or against the owner of the dog even if the owner fails to appear at the hearing.

 

4-11-625 AUTOMATIC DETERMINATION/RIGHT TO CONTEST.
    No prior hearing shall be required in those circumstances defined in Section 4-11-100(e) where a dog has, without provocation, inflicted severe injury on a human being. Provided, however, the owner of such a dog shall have the right to contest such designation in the manner provided in Section 4-11-620. Such right shall be afforded only to an owner reporting knowledge of a bite pursuant to Section 4-11-315 and if made within five (5) days of such bite.

 

4-11-630 IDENTIFICATION OF DANGEROUS DOG.
    The owner or a dangerous dog shall, at his or her own expense, have the license number assigned to such dog, or other such numbers the City shall determine, tattooed upon such dangerous dog by a licensed veterinarian or person trained as a tattooist and authorized as such by the State or Police Department. The Animal Control Officer may, in his or her sole and exclusive discretion, designate the particular location of said tattoo. The Animal Control Officer may also determine any alternative means of identifying a dangerous dog which, in his or her sole and exclusive discretion, will provide sufficient notice to the public.

 

4-11-635 CHANGE IN STATUS.
    The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the Animal Control Officer within twenty-four (24) hours if a dangerous dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal, has attacked a human being, has died or has been sold or given away. If the dog has been sold or given away the owner or keeper shall provide the Animal Control Officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, who, if a resident of the City, must comply with the requirements of this Chapter.

 

4-11-640 HUMANE CONFINEMENT.
    While on the owner’s property, a dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the dog. The Animal Control Officer may, in his or her sole and exclusive discretion, establish additional or alternative standards to adequately protect the public.

 

4-11-645 NOTICE OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
    The owner shall display a sign on his or her premises warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway or thoroughfare. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous dog.

 

4-11-650 MUZZLE REQUIRED.
    A dangerous dog may be off the owner’s premises if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length and under the control of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. The Animal Control Officer may, in his or her sole and exclusive discretion, establish additional or alternative standards to adequately protect the public.

 

4-11-655 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
    The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall present to the Animal Control Officer proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance coverage in an amount specified by the Finance Director of the City. This policy shall contain a provision requiring the City of San Leandro to be named as an additional insured.

 

4-11-660 DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
    A dog declared dangerous may be destroyed by order of the Animal Control Officer when it is found, after proceedings conducted pursuant to Section 4-11-6-20 or Section 4-11-625 that the release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare.

 

4-11-665 IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL OR ALTERNATIVE CONDITIONS.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 4-11-630 through 4-11-655, the Animal Control Officer may impose any additional or alternative conditions upon the release of a dangerous dog he or she deems necessary or appropriate for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

4-11-670 SEIZURE OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
    The Animal Control Officer may seize and impound an animal for violation of any provision of this Chapter or State law prior to hearing where the owner is not present and where the officer reasonably believes it is necessary:

    (a)   To protect public health, safety and property; or

    (b)  To protect an animal which is injured, sick, or starving.

    When the person owning or having the right to control any dog is present, the Animal Control Officer may, prior to a hearing, seize or impound any such dog he or she reasonably believes to be infected with disease transmittable to humans or to be a dangerous dog and a threat to public health, safety or property. Such seizure or impoundment may be made even though the animal is confined at the time or the seizure or impoundment.

    If the owner or person with the right to control the animal wishes to challenge the seizure or impoundment, he or she shall so advise the Animal Control Officer, in writing, within five (5) days after the seizure or impoundment.

    The Animal Control Officer shall promptly set the time and place for the hearing before him or her and shall cause notice of such hearing to be mailed to the requesting party no later than five (5) days before the hearing.

 

4-11-675 CIVIL FINES.
    Notwithstanding the provisions or Section 4-11-415 to the contrary, any dog impounded pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-11-660 may be redeemed only upon satisfying the requirements of Section 4-11-415 and upon the payment or a civil penalty of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250) for the first violation, Five Hundred Dollars ($500) for the second violation and One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for the third violation.

 

4-11-680 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
    In addition to the penalties prescribed by Section 4-11-665, any person violating the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined or imprisoned as provided in Section 1-12-200 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-019, 11/2/87; Ordinance No. 94-07A, 5/20/94 (Sections 4-11-610, 4-11-620, 4-11-630, 4-11-660, 4-11-665, 4-11-670, 4-11-675, 4-11-680); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-11-680))

 

ARTICLE 7. POT-BELLIED PIGS
4-11-700 POT-BELLIED PIG LICENSE REQUIRED.
    Every person within the area owning, possessing, controlling, harboring, or keeping any pot-bellied pig as permitted by Section 3-5-100 over four (4) months of age shall procure from the Licensing Authority a pot-bellied pig license tag for each potbellied pig, as long as ownership of the pot-bellied pig continues, or within ten (10) days after acquiring or bringing into the area any pot-bellied pig over the age of four (4) months, and annually thereafter, so long as the ownership of the pot-bellied pig continues.

 

4-11-705 LICENSE FEE.
    A license fee in the same amount as established by resolution of the City Council for licenses for dogs that have not been neutered or spayed shall be paid within forty-five (45) days of the date the license is required to be obtained. A person who acquires ownership, custody or control of any pot-bellied pig not currently licensed pursuant to provisions of this Chapter shall be immediately liable for the payment of the license fee.

 

4-11-710 TERM OF LICENSE.
    The license period is one year.

 

4-11-715 CERTIFICATE OF SPAY OR NEUTER.
    A pot-bellied pig license shall not be issued unless and until the owner presents to the Licensing Authority a valid certificate of neutering or spaying.

 

4-11-720 EXEMPTIONS.
    This licensing requirement shall not apply to pot-bellied pigs found within the area under any of the following conditions:

    (a)   When the pot-bellied pig is owned by, or in the care of, any person who is a nonresident or who is traveling through the area, or who is temporarily sojourning therein for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, if the pot-bellied pig is not permitted to run at large.

    (b)  When the pot-bellied pig is brought or set into the area for the exclusive purpose of receiving veterinary care in any animal hospital, if the pot-bellied pig is not permitted to run at large.

 

4-11-725 LICENSE APPLICATION.
    The person owning or having control of the pot-bellied pig shall furnish to the Licensing Authority a description of the pot-bellied pig sufficient for identification, which description shall be entered in a record kept by the Licensing Authority for that purpose. A metallic or plastic identification tag having a number corresponding with the registration of the pot-bellied pig shall be issued to the owner of the pot-bellied pig. Upon such registration, a permit to keep a pot-bellied pig shall be issued to the applicant.

 

4-11-730 IDENTIFICATION TAG.
    Every pot-bellied pig shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar or other device to which the pot-bellied pig license tag shall be attached. If the pot-bellied pig license tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall immediately procure a new duplicate license tag from the Licensing Authority.

 

4-11-735 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any license tag for any other pot-bellied pig than for the one for which it was originally issued. The owner of a licensed pot-bellied pig shall preserve the license permit upon the premises where the registered pot-bellied pig is kept and shall, upon demand of the Licensing Authority, or any health officer, or a police officer of the city, show to such officer the license tag and permit to keep such pot-bellied pig. No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags prescribed by this Article, or have in his or her possession any imitation or counterfeit tags.

 

4-11-740 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
    No owner or keeper of a pot-bellied pig shall allow or permit such pot-bellied pig, whether licensed or unlicensed, to be or run at large in or upon any public place or premises, or in or upon any private place or premises other than those of said owner or keeper except with the consent of the person in charge of said private place or premises, unless such pot-bellied pig is securely restrained by a substantial leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and is in charge and control of a person competent to keep such pot-bellied pig under effective charge and control. For purposes of this section, any pot-bellied pig in or upon any vehicle shall be deemed to be on the premises of the operator thereof.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 98-01, 2/17/98 (Sections 4-11-700 — 4-11-740))

ARTICLE 8. ANIMAL CONTROL ATTENDANTS
4-11-800 ANIMAL CONTROL ATTENDANT.
    The position of animal control attendant is hereby established and the Chief of Police is authorized to designate persons to staff it from the employment classification of maintenance worker.

 

4-11-805 DUTIES.
    Animal control attendants shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter and other laws pertaining to the control and protection of animals.

 

4-11-810 ARREST POWER.
    Pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5, persons designated as animal control attendants are authorized to arrest persons without warrant or to issue citations whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested or cited has committed in their presence a misdemeanor which is a violation of a statute or ordinance which, under Section 4-11-705, the animal control attendant has the duty to enforce.

 

(Legislative History: Adopted by Ordinance No. 68-45, amended by Ordinance Nos. 73-40, 73-53, 74-46, 75-23, 78-5, 78-54, 82-021; Ordinance No. 98-01, 2/17/98 (Sections 4-11-800 — 4-11-810))

 

 

ARTICLE 9. ANIMAL WASTE
4-11-900 ANIMAL WASTE.
    No owner shall permit to remain any waste animal matter on any property, other than that of the owner, or on any public right-of-way, public park or public grounds.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 98-001, 2/17/98 (Section 4-11-900))

 

ARTICLE 10. PENALTIES
4-11-1000 VIOLATIONS.
    Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12. For the purposes of enforcement pursuant to Section 1-12-200 of this Code, any violation of this Chapter except Article 6 shall constitute an infraction.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 87-019, 11/2/87; Ordinance No. 98-001, 2/17/98 (Sections 4-11-1000); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-11-1000); Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13 (Section 4-11-1000))

 

ARTICLE 11. GENERAL
4-11-1100 CERTAIN USES PROHIBITED.
    (a)   Except for household pets, the maintenance, feeding, or keeping of exotic animals, horses, cows, sheep, goats, or other animals of any kind is prohibited. Household pets include cats, caged birds, not over two (2) spayed or neutered pot-bellied pigs licensed in accordance with this Chapter, fish, mice, rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, not more than two (2) dogs, and similar domesticated pet animals, all of the aforesaid kept as household pets. Special regulations shall apply to the keeping of chickens, as described in Article 12.

    (b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to the following:

    (1)  Owners who use animals for diagnostic purposes or research, and who have a valid permit issued by a governmental agency, and whose animals are kept on the premises specified in the permit.

    (2)  Owners who use animals for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions and whose animals are kept on the premises of the institution or other authorized place.

    (3)  Owners of establishments that treat or board animals on the premises, and that are owned or operated by a veterinarian licensed by the state.

    (4)  Owners who are engaged in animal husbandry as a permitted use pursuant to the zoning ordinance as described in Section 4-11-1105.

    (5)  Owners of horse-riding academies and public and private horse stables and premises on which they are operated, as a conditional use pursuant to the zoning ordinance.

    (6)  Owners of licensed pet shops.

    (7)  Other circumstances when specifically authorized by the Animal Control Director after a determination that such authorization would be consistent with the intent of this Chapter.

 

4-11-1105 EXISTING USES.
    Any person raising or keeping chickens, or other animals in the RO (Residential Outer) Zoning District at the time this Chapter takes effect or afterwards may continue to do so if they are in compliance with the Zoning Code related to the RO District and Animal Husbandry and any other applicable regulations. However, such persons must demonstrate compliance with the housing and care requirements listed in Section 4-11-1110 below.

 

4-11-1110 HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ANIMALS.
    Animal owners must be able to demonstrate compliance with the following:

    (a)   Feeding and Watering. Feeding and watering shall be done daily in sufficient quantity and nutritional value to meet the normal daily requirements for the conditions and size of the animal(s) except in such cases where hibernation, the nature of the animal, or its feeding habits dictate otherwise.

    (b)  Treatment and Sanitation.

    (1)  All animals shall be handled in a humane manner and kept free from parasites, sickness and disease. When they are afflicted and/or become unsightly, they shall be given immediate medical attention and treatment by a licensed veterinarian at the owner or keeper’s expense.

    (2)  If any animals are in need of medical treatment, and the owner has failed to provide such treatment, the animals will be treated by a veterinarian upon order of the Animal Control Officer in accordance with Section 597f of the California Penal Code.

    (3)  All cages or other enclosures shall be cleaned regularly and their surroundings shall be kept in a sanitary condition and free from offensive odor.

    (4)  The storage of animal feces shall be in a fly-proof container to be properly disposed of a minimum of once weekly.

    (5)  If animal manure is composted on-site, it shall not create odor issues or attract vermin or insects.

    (6)  Adequate and effective vector control shall be maintained at all times.

    (7)  Where the natural climate of the species of the animal differs from the climate of San Leandro, provisions must be made to adjust housing and treatment of the animal to the natural habitat.

    (c)   Cages and Enclosures.

    (1)  Household pets are not required to be maintained in cages or enclosures.

    (2)  When cages, enclosures, or housing facilities for animals are used, the cages shall be of such strength and type of construction that the animal cannot escape, ample space for exercise is provided, the animal is adequately protected from predators, and overcrowding is avoided.

    (3)  In the case of animals kept outdoors, sufficient shade shall be provided to prevent overheating or discomfort from sun exposure. Animals kept outdoors shall also be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during inclement weather.

    (4)  Animals with a propensity to fight, or that are otherwise incompatible, shall be kept separated.

    (5)  Cages shall have tops to prevent escape by climbing or jumping.

    (6)  Shelter, cages and enclosures shall be kept in good repair with no protrusions or devices on which the animal could injure itself.

    (7)  No cage or structure shall be permitted in any front yard area of the property.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13 (Sections 4-11-1100—4-11-1110))

 

ARTICLE 12. CHICKENS
4-11-1200 LIMITATION ON NUMBER.
    Up to four (4) chickens may be kept on parcels with an area of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet or larger. Chickens may be kept on parcels of less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet with an Animal Permit. Up to ten (10) chickens may be kept on a parcel with an Animal Permit, but in no case may more than ten (10) chickens be kept on any single parcel. No roosters are to be kept on the property.

 

4-11-1205 KEEPING OF CHICKENS.
    Chickens shall be kept outside in the rear yard, in a fenced area, and must be provided with a coop. They may not roam in any area outside the fenced rear yard. The total area of all chicken coops on a lot may not exceed sixty (60) square feet. No single coop, or combination of coops, shall exceed seven (7) feet in height. No coop shall be located less than five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line on which the primary use is residential and twenty (20) feet from an adjacent dwelling. Cages shall remain stationary in the back yard. Chicken coops must comply with all other applicable cage and enclosure requirements of Section 4-11-1110.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13 (Sections 4-11-1200, 4-11-1205))

 

 

ARTICLE 13. ANIMAL PERMIT
4-11-1305 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    (a)   Permit Required. An Animal Permit is required for the keeping of chickens on parcels smaller than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet, and for the keeping of any animals in a manner that would otherwise exceed the limits or regulations set forth in the Municipal Code. Applicants for an Animal Permit shall provide a complete application form and a fee as set forth in the City’s fee schedule for the required review and inspection. The permit will specify animals covered and number of animals permitted. Permit holders will be entitled to keep up to the number of animals permitted.

    (b)  Inspection. Prior to issuance of an Animal Permit, Animal Control Services shall conduct an inspection of the premises at any reasonable hour for inspection in order to make the following determinations, to the extent they are applicable to the particular animal:

    (1)  All applicable housing and care requirements set forth in Section 4-11-1110 are met.

    (2)  Adequate Fencing Exists. Depending on the animals and the specific features of the lot, additional fencing can be mandated as a prerequisite to Animal Permit approval in order to ensure the safety of both the animals and the public.

    (c)   Required Findings. In order to grant the Animal Permit, the following additional findings must be made:

    (1)  The keeping of the animals at the location specified in the application will not violate any ordinance or other City or State regulations.

    (2)  The keeping and maintenance of the animal will not endanger the peace, health or safety of persons in the immediate vicinity or in the City as a whole and will not constitute a nuisance.

    (3)  The premises and housing where the animal(s) will be kept are in clean and sanitary condition, and the animal(s) will not be subject to suffering, neglect, cruelty or abuse.

    (d)  Mediation. Upon receipt of a nuisance complaint regarding the holder of an Animal Permit, Animal Control Services may require the complainant(s) to mediate with the Animal Permit holder as a precondition of investigation, citation and abatement of the nuisance. Such cases may be referred to the Alameda County Mediation Program. If the Animal Control Director determines mediation is appropriate and the complainants agree to mediate but the alleged violator refuses, the Animal Control Director may proceed with investigation and any appropriate enforcement.

    (e)   Renewal of Permit. Every two (2) years a renewal permit shall be obtained by a holder of an Animal Permit. The fee for the issuance of a permit and each renewal permit shall be established by City Council resolution, and the renewal permit fee is due and payable each year on the anniversary of the date of the issuance of the initial permit. The renewal fee shall become delinquent thirty (30) days after it becomes due and payable, and upon delinquency, an additional delinquent fee established by resolution of the City Council may be added to the succeeding year’s renewal fee.

    (f)   Inspection of Permit. Animal Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be surrendered for inspection by the permit holder upon the request of the Animal Control Director or an Animal Control Officer.

    (g)  Additional Inspections. The premises on which an animal is maintained pursuant to an Animal Permit may be open at any reasonable hour for inspection by the Animal Control Director or designee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13 (Section 4-11-1305))

 

ARTICLE 14. BEEKEEPING
4-11-1400 BEEKEEPING PERMIT.
    A beekeeping permit is required for the keeping of any number of hives on any lot or parcel of land within the City.

 

4-11-1405 INSPECTION AND CONDITIONS OF BEEKEEPING PERMIT.
    (a)   Inspection. Prior to issuance of a beekeeping permit, Animal Control Services shall conduct an inspection of the premises.

    (b)  Conditions. The beekeeping permit applicant must be able to demonstrate compliance with the following conditions:

    (1)  No hive shall be kept or maintained on any parcel of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.

    (2)  No more than three (3) hives shall be maintained on any property or parcel of land.

    (3)  The owner’s name, address, and location of all such hives shall be registered with Animal Control Services.

    (4)  Hives shall be located in the rear of the property of the applicant and no less than five (5) feet from any side or rear lot lines. No hives shall be located in any front yard area of the property.

    (5)  Hives must be situated more than fifty (50) feet from any existing dwelling or any proposed dwelling for which a building permit has been issued.

    (6)  All hives shall be oriented so that their entrances face a house or building on the premises and shall be surrounded by a solid fence, located no farther than thirty (30) feet from such hives, that is not less than six (6) feet in height and no more than the height specifically approved with the beekeeping permit application to comply with zoning regulations. Said fence may be open on the side facing a house or building on the premises.

    (7)  A reliable water supply adequate to serve the needs of the hives located on the premises shall be maintained at all times on such premises. Running water is ideal; however, a pond or fountain, or similar, meet the requirements of the code.

    (c)   Required Finding. The Animal Control Officer reviewing the permit application shall find that the hives will not cause unreasonable disturbance to the health or safety of residents occupying properties adjoining the property or parcel before permit issuance.

    (d)  Personal Permit. Beekeeping permits shall be personal to the applicant and shall not run with the land.

    (e)   Renewal Permit. Every two (2) years, a renewal permit shall be obtained by a holder of a beekeeping permit. The fee for the issuance of a permit and a renewal permit shall be established by City Council resolution, and the renewal permit fee is due and payable each year on the second anniversary of the date of the issuance of the initial permit. The renewal fee shall become delinquent thirty (30) days after it becomes due and payable, and upon delinquency, an additional delinquent fee established by resolution of the City Council may be added to the succeeding year’s renewal fee.

    (f)   Inspection of Permit. Beekeeping permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be surrendered for inspection by the permit holder upon the request of the Animal Control Director or an Animal Control Officer.

    (g)  Additional Inspections. The premises on which bees are maintained pursuant to a beekeeping permit may be open at any reasonable hour for inspection by the Animal Control Director or designee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13 (Sections 4-11-1400, 4-11-1405))

 

ARTICLE 15. MISCELLANEOUS
4-11-1500 APPEALS.
    Persons aggrieved by determinations of Animal Control Officers or the Animal Control Director made pursuant to this Chapter may appeal such determination to the City Manager within fifteen (15) days from the date of such determination. Decisions of the City Manager, or his/her designee for these purposes, shall be final.

 

4-11-1505 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
    The Animal Control Director may formulate rules and regulations in conformity with, and for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Chapter. Compliance with such rules and regulations shall be a prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any permit provided for in this Chapter.

 

4-11-1510 INSPECTIONS.
    Upon reasonable suspicion of a violation of this Chapter, the Animal Control Director shall be permitted to obtain an inspection warrant and enter onto the property.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2013-007, 9/16/13 (Sections 4-11-1500—4-11-1510))

CHAPTER 4-12 SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL ,
Note
*Editor’s Note: The majority of Chapter 4-12, consisting of Sections 4-12-100 through 4-12-1000 has been preempted by State law. See California State Labor Code, Section 6404.5.

 

Note
**Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2009-011 repealed and replaced Chapter 4-12 in its entirety.

 

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-12-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The intent of this Chapter is to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare by discouraging the inherently dangerous behavior of tobacco use around non-tobacco users; by protecting children from exposure to smoking and tobacco while they play; by reducing the potential for children to associate smoking and tobacco with a healthy lifestyle; and by affirming and promoting the family atmosphere of the City’s public places.

 

4-12-105 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall govern unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

    (a)   “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes or that has an employee, as defined in this section.

    (b)  “Dining area” means any area available to or customarily used by the general public, that is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink.

 

    (c)   “Employee” means any person who is employed; retained as an independent contractor by any employer, as defined in this section; or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer, association, nonprofit, or volunteer entity.

    (d)  “Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation, association, nonprofit or other entity who employs or retains the service of one or more persons, or supervises volunteers.

    (e)   “Enclosed” means:

    (1)  Any covered or partially covered space having more than fifty percent (50%) of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a covered porch with more than two (2) walls; or

    (2)  Any space open to the sky (hereinafter “uncovered”) having more than seventy-five percent (75%) of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a courtyard;

    (3)  Except that an uncovered space of three thousand (3000) square feet or more is not enclosed, such as, for example, a field in an open-air arena.

    (f)   “Nonprofit entity” means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code Section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section.

    (g)  “Place of employment” means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the normal course of operations, but regardless of the hours of operation, including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities, warehouses, enclosed common areas of multi-family housing buildings, and private residences that are used as child care or health care facilities subject to licensing requirements regardless of their hours of operation.

    (h)  “Playground” means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on City grounds.

    (i)   “Public place” means any place, public or private, open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, for example, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, shopping malls, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis, and buses.

    (j)   “Reasonable distance” means a distance that ensures that occupants of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to secondhand smoke created by smokers outside the area. This distance shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.

    (k)  “Recreational area” means any area, public or private, open to the public for recreational purposes regardless of any fee requirement, including, for example, parks, gardens, sporting facilities, stadiums, and playgrounds.

    (l)   “Service area” means any area designed to be or regularly used by one or more persons to receive or wait to receive a service, enter a public place, or make a transaction whether or not such service includes the exchange of money including, for example, automated teller machines (ATMs), bank teller windows, telephones, ticket lines, bus stops, and cab stands.

    (m) “Significant tobacco retailer” means any tobacco retailer that derives seventy-five percent (75%) or more of gross sales receipts from the sale or exchange of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia.

    (n)  “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term “smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke and electronic cigarette vapors. The term “smoke” also includes vapor generated through the use of an electronic cigarette in any manner or in any form.

    (o)  “Smoking” means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as for example: possessing a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe or shisha pipe, an operating electronic cigarette, a lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or lighting or igniting of a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, cigarette of any kind, or any other weed or plant.

    (p)  “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 (Sections 4-12-100, 4-12-105); Ordinance No. 2014-017, 10/20/14 (Section 4-12-105))

 

ARTICLE 2. PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT, AND CERTAIN OTHER AREAS
4-12-200 PROHIBITION IN ENCLOSED PLACES.
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed places within the City of San Leandro except in places listed in Section 4-12-210, and except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by State or Federal law in which case the State or Federal law applies:

    (a)   Public places;

    (b)  Places of employment;

    (c)   Enclosed areas adjacent to an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by any other section of this code, State law, or Federal law and that have a common or shared air space such as, without limitation, openings, cracks, air ventilation systems, doorways, hallways, and stairways. Notwithstanding any other provision, the fact that smoke enters one enclosed area from another enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air space;

    (d)  Enclosed areas that have a common or shared ventilation, air conditioning or heating system with an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provision, the fact that smoke enters one enclosed area from another enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air space.

 

4-12-205 PROHIBITION IN UNENCLOSED PLACES.
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following unenclosed places within the City of San Leandro, except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by State or Federal law in which case the State or Federal law applies:

    (a)   Places of employment;

    (b)  Service areas;

    (c)   Public places, including dining areas;

    (d)  Ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of transit depots and bus stops;

    (e)   City and private parks, playgrounds, athletic facilities, and golf practice facilities (i.e., driving range and practice putting/chipping greens);

    (f)   The sites of public events including, but not limited to, for example, sports events, entertainment, speaking performances, ceremonies, pageants, farmers’ markets, festivals, carnivals, and fairs.

 

4-12-210 EXCEPTIONS.
    (a)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, smoking is permitted in the following enclosed places:

    (1)  Significant tobacco retailers, if at all times minors are prohibited from entering the store;

    (2)  Private residential units, except those used as a child care or health care facility subject to licensing requirements; and

    (3)  Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of hotel and motel guest rooms, if the hotel or motel permanently designates particular guest rooms as nonsmoking rooms such that seventy-five percent (75%) or more of its guest rooms are nonsmoking and ashtrays and matches are permanently removed from such nonsmoking rooms. Permanent “No Smoking” signage shall be posted in nonsmoking rooms.

    (b)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, smoking is permitted in the following unenclosed places:

    (1)  Eighteen (18) hole Tony Lema Golf Course and nine (9) hole Marina Golf Course.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 (Sections 4-12-200—4-12-210))

 

ARTICLE 3. REASONABLE SMOKING DISTANCE REQUIRED
4-12-300 REASONABLE SMOKING DISTANCE REQUIRED—TWENTY (20) FEET.
    Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from:

    (a)   Any entrance, window, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while actively passing on the way to another destination and so long as smoke does not enter any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except that bars are exempt from the outside reasonable distance requirements of this section, provided that the smoke does not enter adjacent areas in which smoking is prohibited by law or by the owner, lessee, or licensee of the adjacent property.

    (b)  Any unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited under Section 4-12-205 except while actively passing on the way to another destination.

 

4-12-305 DISTANCE REQUIRED FROM ANY SCHOOL—THREE HUNDRED (300) FEET.
    Smoking shall be prohibited on public property within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of a primary or secondary school.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 (Sections 4-12-300, 4-12-305))

 

ARTICLE 4. DUTIES OF PERSON, EMPLOYER, BUSINESS OR NONPROFIT ENTITY
4-12-400 GENERAL DUTIES.
    (a)   No person, owner, landlord, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of the person, owner, landlord, employer, business, or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law and the person, owner, landlord, employer, business or nonprofit entity is not otherwise compelled to act under State or Federal law.

    (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any owner, landlord, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or other person who controls any property, establishment, or place of employment regulated by this Chapter may declare any part of such area in which smoking would otherwise be permitted to be a nonsmoking area.

    (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any owner, landlord, manager, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or other person who controls any property, establishment, or place of employment regulated by this Chapter may adopt policies relating to smoking which are more restrictive than those provided herein, or declare such property, establishment or place of employment regulated by this Chapter as entirely nonsmoking.

 

4-12-405 DUTY TO POST SIGNS.
    “No Smoking” or “Smoke Free” signs, with letters of no less than one inch in height or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every enclosed and unenclosed place in which smoking is prohibited by this Chapter, by the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of such place. For purposes of this Chapter, the City Manager or designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in part by the City. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provision of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 (Sections 4-12-400, 4-12-405); Ordinance No. 2014-017, 10/20/14 (Section 4-12-400))

 

ARTICLE 5. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
4-12-500 PUBLIC ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Violations of this Chapter may, in the discretion of the District Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors.

    (b)  Violations of this Chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first violation; Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second violation within one year; and Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this Article within one year. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

    (c)   Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited is guilty of trespass and, if the area is accessible by the public or any employee during the normal course of operations, such smoking constitutes a public nuisance.

    (d)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall also constitute a violation.

    (e)   The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity.

    (f)   Enforcement of this Chapter shall be the responsibility of the San Leandro Police Department.

 

4-12-505 PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public (hereinafter “the private enforcer”) may bring a civil action to enforce this Chapter. Upon proof of a violation, a court shall award the following:

    (1)  Damages in the amount of either:

    (i)   Upon proof, actual damages; or

    (ii)  With insufficient or no proof of damages, Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each violation of this Chapter (hereinafter “statutory damages”). Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no private enforcer suing on behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages based upon a violation of this Chapter if a previous claim brought on behalf of the general public for statutory damages and based upon the same violation has been adjudicated, whether or not the private enforcer was a party to that adjudication.

    (2)  Restitution of the gains obtained in violation of this Chapter.

    (3)  Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice, or a conscious disregard for the public health.

    (b)  The private enforcer may also bring a civil action to enforce this Chapter by way of a conditional judgment or an injunction. Upon proof of a violation, a court shall issue a conditional judgment or an injunction.

    (c)   Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar against a private enforcer seeking relief on its own behalf, a private enforcer may bring an action to enforce this Chapter solely on behalf of the general public. When a private enforcer brings an action solely on behalf of the general public, nothing about such an action shall act to preclude or bar the private enforcer from bringing a subsequent action based upon the same facts but seeking relief on its own behalf.

    (d)  Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the private enforcer from bringing a civil action in small claims court to enforce this Chapter, so long as the amount in demand and the type of relief sought are within the jurisdictional requirements of small claims court as set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 116.220.

 

4-12-510 SECONDHAND SMOKE—DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
    Secondhand smoke constitutes a nuisance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a private citizen may bring a legal action to abate secondhand smoke as a nuisance.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 (Sections 4-12-500—4-12-510))

 

ARTICLE 6. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 repealed Article 6 (Section 4-12-600))

 

ARTICLE 7. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 repealed Article 7 (Section 4-12-700))

 

ARTICLE 8. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-12-800); Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 repealed Article 8 (Section 4-12-800))

 

ARTICLE 9. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-022, 9/6/88; Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 repealed Article 9 (Section 4-12-900))

 

ARTICLE 10. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 89-07, 3/6/89, (4-12-1005); Ordinance No. 2009-011, 12/7/09 repealed Article 10 (Sections 4-12-1000, 4-12-1005))

CHAPTER 4-13 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-13-100 GENERAL.
    All property with a value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more found in this City, ownership of which is unknown or unclaimed, shall be delivered to, and held by the Police Department until such time as such property is disposed of as herein provided.

 

4-13-105 RESTORATION TO OWNER OR FINDER.
    The Chief of Police shall attempt to ascertain the owner of such property and shall restore the same to him or her, if found, upon proof of ownership satisfactory to the Chief and payment of the costs herein provided. If the owner of such property fails to appear and prove ownership of such property within ninety (90) days, the Police Department shall cause notice of the property to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. If, after seven (7) days following the publication of such notice, no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the property and the person who found the property pays the costs of publication and any applicable storage charges, the title shall vest in the person who found the property unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property shall be sold at public auction as provided in Section 4-13-115.

 

4-13-110 STORAGE CHARGES.
    The Finance Director shall establish a schedule of storage charges for property held by the Department as herein provided, based upon the amount of space and care required to preserve said property, but small articles held for short periods may be restored to their owner or to the finder thereof without charge. Records shall be kept of the actual costs of locating the owner of such property, including advertising costs, if any. Such charges and costs shall be paid to the City by the owner or the finder as provided above.

 

4-13-115 PUBLIC AUCTION.
    If within four (4) months any such property remains unclaimed either by the owner or the finder or the charges thereon have not been paid, the Finance Director may sell the same at public auction to the highest bidder for cash in lawful money of the United States. The Finance Director shall give notice of the time and place of sale, describing the property by publishing such notice one time in the official newspaper or the City at least five (5) days before the time fixed for the sale. Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Finance Director. If the City Manager determines that any such property is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the City and need not be sold.

 

4-13-120 DISPOSITION OF AUTOMOBILES.
    Any unclaimed automobiles shall be disposed of as provided in California Vehicle Code Section 22851.2 et seq.

 

4-13-125 PROCEEDS OF SALE.
    All proceeds from such sales shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 64-8, 2/10/64 (4-13-120); Ordinance No. 686 N.S. (4-13-125); Ordinance No. 92-03, (2/24/92); Ordinance No. 2013-021, 12/16/13 (Section 4-13-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. STOLEN OR EMBEZZLED PROPERTY
4-13-200 DISPOSITION OF STOLEN OR EMBEZZLED PROPERTY.
    All property described in Section 1411 of the California Penal Code which comes into the possession of the Chief of Police shall be disposed of by the Chief of Police in the manner provided in this Article.

 

4-13-205 RETENTION PERIOD.
    All such unclaimed property described above shall be held by the Chief of Police for a period of at least four (4) months, except that unclaimed bicycles shall be held for a period of at least three (3) months.

 

4-13-210 RESTORATION TO OWNER.
    The Chief of Police shall attempt to ascertain the owner of such property and shall restore the same to him, if found, upon proof of ownership satisfactory to the Chief and payment of the costs provided in Section 4-13-110.

 

4-13-215 PUBLIC AUCTION.
    If within four (4) months (or three (3) months, in the case of bicycles) such property remains unclaimed or the charges thereon have not been paid, the Finance Director may sell the same at public auction to the highest bidder for cash in lawful money of the United States. The Chief of Police shall give notice of the time and place of sale, describing the property, by publishing such notice one time in the official newspaper of the City at least five (5) days before the time fixed for the sale. Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Finance Director. If the City Manager determines that any such property is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the City and need not be sold.

 

4-13-220 PROCEEDS OF SALE.
    All proceeds from such sales shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.

 

(Legislative History: Ord. No. 82-010, 3/1/82)

CHAPTER 4-14 FIREARMS
ARTICLE 1. REGULATION OF FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION
4-14-100 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
    No person shall discharge any firearm within the City of San Leandro except:

    (a)   Peace officers in the performance of their duties,

    (b)  Persons using the San Leandro rifle range or an indoor safety range,

    (c)   Persons in defense of life or property, and

    (d)  Persons otherwise permitted to do so by law, provided however, possession of a hunting license issued by the State of California shall not be considered “permitted by law” within the meaning of this section.

 

4-14-105 DISCHARGE OF SLINGSHOTS, ETC.
    No person shall discharge any slingshot, air gun or spring gun within the City of San Leandro.

 

4-14-110 AMMUNITION.
    No person shall, within the City of San Leandro, sell, loan or give any ammunition to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

 

4-14-115 CONFISCATION.
    Any equipment being used in violation of Sections 4-14-100, 4-14-105, 4-14-110 hereof, may be confiscated by any law enforcement officer and retained at the Police Department until claimed by the owner thereof in person, and, in the event the equipment so confiscated is a firearm and the owner is a minor, until he or she is accompanied by one of his or her parents.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-079, 11/19/81; Ordinance 82-021, 4/19/82; Ordinance No. 96-014, 10/7/96)

 

ARTICLE 2. RIFLE RANGE
4-14-200 LEASE REQUIREMENTS.
    The San Leandro Rifle Range may be leased to a regularly organized group incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of California. Such group shall have power and shall be required by the lease to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to safety, use and operation or the range. Such group may be authorized by the lease to charge reasonable fees for the use of such range and to issue permits to users of the range. No citizen of the City of San Leandro not legally disqualified therefrom may be denied a permit to use the range under the rules and regulations prescribed by the lessee.

 

4-14-205 PROHIBITIONS.
    It shall be unlawful while using the San Leandro Rifle Range, to:

    (a)   Fire from any point other than the designated firing point;

    (b)  Fire in any direction except directly at designated targets;

    (c)   Violate any of the rules or regulations promulgated by the lessee;

    (d)  Fire at any object other than targets approved by the National Rifle Association, National Revolver Association or Muzzle Loaders Association;

    (e)   Use the Rifle Range without a valid permit issued to the user thereof;

    (f)   Commit any act which endangers the safety of any person or property other than a designated target; or

    (g)  Use the Rifle Range while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 81-079, 11/19/82; Ordinance No. 82-021, 4/19/82)

 

ARTICLE 3. REQUIREMENT THAT FIREARMS DEALERS SELL OR PROVIDE TRIGGER LOCKS OR SIMILAR SAFETY DEVICES FOR EACH FIREARM SOLD, LEASED, OR TRANSFERRED—POSTED NOTICE
4-14-300 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article, shall be construed as defined in this section:

    (a)   FIREARM. “Firearm” shall mean any device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a weapon, from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion.

    (b)  FIREARMS DEALER. “Firearms dealer” shall mean a person engaged in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or offering or exposing for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm.

    (c)   PERSON. “Person” shall mean natural person, association, partnership, firm, or corporation.

    (d)  TRIGGER LOCK. “Trigger lock” shall mean a mechanical locking device which blocks or impairs the action of the trigger, rendering the firearm inoperable until removed.

 

4-14-310 REQUIREMENT TO SELL OR PROVIDE TRIGGER LOCKS OR SIMILAR DEVICES.
    Firearms dealers doing business within the City of San Leandro shall not sell, lease, or otherwise transfer any firearm without also selling or providing a nonreturnable trigger lock, or similar safety device, to prevent the unintentional discharge of the firearm.

 

4-14-320 EXEMPTION.
    Persons providing firearms for temporary use only within a designated firing range, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article, so long as such firearms are not permitted to be removed from the firing range premises and the period of use does not exceed eight (8) hours.

 

4-14-330 POSTED NOTICE.
    Firearms dealers operating within the City of San Leandro shall conspicuously post the following notice at their place of business in the area in which the firearms are sold, leased or transferred. The letters on the notice must be legible, at least one inch (1”) in height, and shall read:

 

    A TRIGGER LOCK OR OTHER SAFETY DEVICE MUST BE SOLD OR PROVIDED WITH EACH FIREARM. THESE DEVICES PREVENT THE UNINTENTIONAL DISCHARGE AND USE OF YOUR FIREARM. SAN LEANDRO MUNICIPAL CODE TITLE IV CHAPTER 14.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 96-011, 9/3/96 (Sections 4-14-300 — 4-14-330))

 

ARTICLE 4. CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYEES OF FIREARMS DEALERS
4-14-400 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article, shall be construed as defined in this section:

    (a)   APPLICANT. “Applicant” shall mean any person applying for a certification pursuant to this Article.

    (b)  CERTIFICATION. “Certification” shall mean the receipt of a document issued to the employee by the Chief of Police, signifying that the employee has met the requirements of this Article.

    (c)   CHIEF OF POLICE. “Chief of Police” shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of San Leandro, or authorized designee.

    (d)  EMPLOYEE. “Employee” shall mean a person who is employed by a firearms dealer, and who assists in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or offering or exposing for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm.

    (e)   ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. “Engaged in the business” shall mean the conduct of a business by the selling, transferring, or leasing of any firearm; or the preparation for such conduct of business; or the holding of one’s self out as engaged in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing of any firearm, or the selling, transferring, or leasing of firearms in quantity, in series, or in individual transactions, or in any other manner indicative of trade.

    (f)   FIREARM. “Firearm” shall mean any device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a weapon, from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion.

    (g)  FIREARMS DEALER. Firearms dealer” shall mean a person engaged in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or offering or exposing for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm.

    (h)  PERSON. “Person” shall mean natural person, association, partnership, firm, or corporation.

 

4-14-410 REQUIRED CERTIFICATION.
    It shall be unlawful for any employee to sell, transfer, or lease, or advertise for sale, transfer or lease, or offer for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm without first obtaining a certification from the Chief of Police except for the interim period provided in Section 4-14-470 for persons who are employees as of the effective date of this Article.

 

4-14-420 APPLICATION FORMS AND FEES.
    An applicant for a certification under this Article shall file with the Chief of Police a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the City. The Chief or Police may require additional information of an applicant reasonably necessary to complete the investigation. The applicant shall provide all information reasonably requested, or the application will not be deemed complete. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the City of San Leandro license/permit fee schedule. To the extent practicable, the fee amount shall reflect the cost of enforcing the requirements of this Article 4.

 

4-14-430 APPLICATION—INVESTIGATION.
    The Chief of Police shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine for protection of the public health, safety and welfare whether the certification may be issued. Such determination shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of a completed application.

 

4-14-440 APPLICATION DENIAL.
    The Chief of Police shall deny the issuance of a certification when any of the following conditions exist:

    (a)   The applicant, or employee, is under the age of twenty-one (21) years.

    (b)  The applicant, or employee, has made a false or misleading statement of a material fact, or an omission or a material fact in the application for a certification.

    (c)   The applicant, or employee, has been convicted of:

    (1)  Any offense so as to disqualify the applicant, or employee, from owning or possessing a firearm under applicable Federal, State, and local laws.

    (2)  Any offense relating to the manufacturing, sale, possession, use or registration of any firearm or dangerous or deadly weapon.

    (3)  Any felony offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another.

    (4)  Any felony offense involving theft, fraud, dishonesty, or deceit.

    (5)  Any offense involving the manufacture, sale, possession, or use of any controlled substance as defined by the California Health & Safety Code as said definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to read.

    (d)  The applicant, or employee, is an unlawful user of any controlled substance as defined by the California Health & Safety Code as said definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to read, or is an excessive user of alcohol to the extent that such use would impair his or her fitness to be a seller of firearms.

    (e)   The applicant, or employee, has been adjudicated as a mental defective, or has been committed to a mental institution, or suffers from any psychological disturbance which, without a reasonable accommodation, would impair his or her fitness to be a seller of firearms.

 

4-14-450 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATION.
    In addition to any provisions contained in this Article, any circumstances constituting grounds for denial shall also constitute grounds for revocation.

 

4-14-460 CERTIFICATION/REVOCATION—HEARING.
    (a)   Any person whose application for a certification under this Article has been denied, or whose certification has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of this Article, shall have the right to a hearing before the Chief of Police prior to final denial or prior to revocation.

    (b)  The Chief of Police shall give the applicant or employee written notice of the intent to deny the application or to revoke the certification. The notice shall set forth the ground(s) for the Chief of Police’s intent to deny the application or to revoke the certification, and shall inform the applicant or employee that he or she has ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the notice to file a written request for a hearing. The application may be denied or the certification revoked if a written hearing request is not received within the ten (10) day period.

    (c)   If the applicant or employee files a timely hearing request, the Chief of Police shall set a time and place for the hearing. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and to confront and cross examine any witnesses against them. The decision of the Chief of Police whether to deny the application or revoke the certification is final and non-appealable.

 

4-14-470 COMPLIANCE.
    Any employee as of the effective date of this Article shall have a period of ninety (90) days after such effective date to submit an application for certification to comply with the provisions of this Article. All other persons shall obtain the certification required by this Article prior to becoming an employee.

 

4-14-480 SEVERABILITY.
    This Article shall be enforced to the full extent of the authority of the City of San Leandro. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or word of this Article is deemed to be invalid or beyond the authority of the City of San Leandro, either on its face or as applied, the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the other sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, or words of this Article, and the applications thereof; and to that end the section, subsections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this Article shall be deemed severable.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 96-012, 9/3/96 (Sections 4-14-400 — 4-14-480))

 

ARTICLE 5. PROHIBITION ON THE SALE OF SATURDAY NIGHT SPECIALS, ALSO KNOWN AS JUNK GUNS
4-14-500 INTENT.
    The purpose of this Article is to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and law enforcement officers of the City by eliminating the sale in the City of cheaply made, inadequately designed and poorly manufactured handguns.

 

4-14-505 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article, shall be construed as defined in this section:

    (a)   SATURDAY NIGHT SPECIAL. “Saturday Night Special,” as used in this Article shall mean any of the following:

    (1)  A pistol, revolver, or firearm capable of being concealed upon the person, as those terms are defined in California Penal Code Section 12001(a), which contains a frame, barrel, breechblock, cylinder or slide that is not completely fabricated of heat treated carbon steel, forged alloy or other material of equal or higher tensile strength.

    (2)  A semi-automatic pistol which:

    (i)   Is not originally equipped by the manufacturer with a locked-breech action; and

    (ii)  Is chambered for cartridges developing maximum permissible breech pressures above 24,100 Copper Units of Pressure as standardized by the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers Institute.

    (iii) For purpose of this subsection (a)(2), “semi-automatic pistol” shall mean a firearm, as defined in California Penal Code Section 12001(b), which is designed to be held and fired with one hand, and which does the following upon discharge: (A) fires the cartridge in the chamber; (B) ejects the fired cartridge case; and (C) loads a cartridge from the magazine into the chamber. “Semiautomatic pistol” shall not include any assault weapon designated in California Penal Code Section 12276.

    (3)  A pistol, revolver, or firearm capable of being concealed upon the person, as those terms are defined in California Penal Code Section 12001(a), which:

    (i)   Uses an action mechanism which is substantially identical in design to any action mechanism manufactured in or before 1898 that was originally chambered for rimfire ammunition developing maximum permissible breech reassures below 19,000 Copper Units of Pressure as standardized by the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers Institute; and

    (ii)  Is chambered to fire either centerfire ammunition or rimfire ammunition developing maximum permissible breech pressures above 19,000 Copper Units of Pressure as standardized by the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers Institute; and

    (iii) Is not originally equipped by the manufacturer with a nondetachable safety guard surrounding the trigger; or

    (iv) If rimfire, is equipped with a barrel of less than 20 bore diameters in overall length protruding from the frame.

    (v)  For purpose of this subsection (a)(3), “action mechanism” shall mean the mechanism of a firearm by which it is loaded, locked, fired and unloaded, commonly known as the cycle of operation.

 

4-14-510 EXCLUSIONS.
    The term “Saturday Night Special” does not include any of the following:

    (a)   Any pistol which is an antique or relic firearm or other weapon falling within the specifications of paragraphs (5), (7) and (8) of subsection (b) of California Penal Code Section 12020; or

    (b)  Any pistol for which the propelling force is classified as pneumatic, that is, of, or related to, compressed air or any other gases not directly produced by combustion.

    (c)   Children’s pop guns or toys; or

    (d)  An “unconventional pistol” as defined in California Penal Code Section 12020(c)(12); or

    (e)   Any pistol which has been modified to either render it permanently inoperable or permanently to make it a device no longer classified as a “Saturday Night Special.”

 

4-14-515 ROSTER OF SATURDAY NIGHT SPECIALS.
    On or before the effective date of this roster, the Chief of Police, or designee, (the “Chief of Police”) shall compile, publish, and thereafter maintain a roster of Saturday Night Specials (the “roster”). The roster shall list those firearms, by manufacturer and model number, which the Chief of Police determines fit the definition of Saturday Night Specials as set forth in this Article. The Chief of Police may retain an independent firearms expert to assist in the determinations.

 

4-14-520 NOTIFICATION.
    Upon completion of a list of firearms to be placed on the roster for the first time, the Chief of Police shall endeavor to send written notification to: (1) the manufacturer of every firearm on said list; and (2) every dealer within the City who is licensed to sell and transfer firearms pursuant to Section 12071 of the California Penal Code. Such notification shall do the following:

    (a)   Identify the model number of the firearm which has been classified as a Saturday Night Special within the meaning of this Article; and

    (b)  Advise the recipient of the notice that he or she may apply for reconsideration of the classification of the firearm as a Saturday Night Special; and

    (c)   Advise the recipient of the notice that the burden of proving that a firearm does not constitute a Saturday Night Special within the meaning of this Article shall be borne by the recipient.

 

4-14-525 RECONSIDERATION BY THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
    (a)   The Chief of Police shall, prior to January 1, 1997, establish standards and procedures for the form and content of an application for reconsideration, conducting an administrative hearing and evaluating evidentiary testimony relating to the decision of the Chief of Police to classify the firearm subject to reconsideration as a Saturday Night Special as defined by this Article. Such standards and procedures shall provide that the Chief of Police shall render a decision within thirty (30) days of the submission of a completed application.

    (b)  Upon timely filing of one or more complete applications for reconsideration, the Chief of Police shall evaluate the evidence submitted by the applicant(s). The Chief of Police may retain an independent firearms expert to assist in the reconsideration. The applicant(s) shall have the burden of demonstrating that the firearm does not constitute a Saturday Night Special as defined by this Article.

 

4-14-530 APPEAL OF CLASSIFICATION.
    (a)   If the Chief of Police determines that the firearm under reconsideration has been properly classified as a Saturday Night special, then the applicant(s) shall have the right to appeal such decision within fifteen (15) days of notification of the Chief of Police’s decision. The applicant(s) shall have the right to appeal such decisions to the City Manager, or designee, and the applicant(s) shall have the right to a hearing before the City Manager prior to inclusion of the firearm in question on the roster.

    (b)  The City Manager is authorized to establish standards and procedures for the form and content of an appeal, conducting an administrative hearing and evaluating evidentiary testimony relating to the decision of the Chief of Police to classify the firearm subject to appeal as a Saturday Night Special as defined by this Article.

    (c)   The appellant(s) shall have the burden of demonstrating that the firearm does not constitute a Saturday Night Special as defined by the Article, and that the determination of the Chief of Police was erroneous.

    (d)  All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issue, and to be represented by counsel.

    (e)   The City Manager shall hear and consider all relevant evidence. The City Manager may retain an independent firearms expert to assist in the evaluation of the appeal. Any such expert would be subject to examination by the parties. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days, based upon the evidence presented and expert information provided, if any.

    (f)   In all instances, the decision of the City Manager is final regarding whether a firearm is a Saturday Night Special and should be listed on the roster.

 

4-14-535 PUBLICATION OF THE ROSTER.
    The Chief of Police shall place on the roster those firearms which have been determined to constitute a Saturday Night Special as defined by this Article, and shall publish such roster in the following manner:

    (a)   Notification of the roster’s completion shall be published at least once in the official newspaper as designated by the City and circulated in the City within fifteen (15) days after completion of the roster; and

    (b)  A copy of the roster, certified as a true and correct copy thereof, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk; and

    (c)   A copy of the roster shall be distributed to every firearms dealer in the City who is licensed to sell and transfer firearms pursuant to Section 12071 of the California Penal Code and local regulations.

 

4-14-540 EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE ROSTER.
    The roster shall become effective on the fifteenth (15th) day following its publication.

 

4-14-545 ADDITIONS TO THE ROSTER.
    The addition of firearms to the roster shall be made in accordance with the following provisions:

    (a)   Semi-Annual Determination. On a semi-annual basis, the Chief of Police shall determine the need to place firearms on the roster upon identifying one or more firearms as a Saturday Night Special, the Chief of Police shall prepare a draft list of additions to the roster.

    (b)  Notification of Additions. In the event that a draft list of additions to the roster is prepared, the Chief of Police shall endeavor to send written notification in accordance with Section 4-14-520.

    (c)   Reconsideration by the Chief of Police and Appeal. Any person who the Chief of Police notifies pursuant to subsection (b) above, may apply for reconsideration of the classification of the firearm as a Saturday Night Special in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-14-525. An appeal of the reconsideration by the Chief of Police may be made to the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-14-530.

    (d)  Additions to Firearms Roster; Publication; and Effective Date. After all appeals have been exhausted, the Chief or Police shall place on the roster those additional firearms which have been determined to constitute Saturday Night Specials within the meaning of this Article. The Chief of Police shall cause the roster, as amended, to be published in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-14-535. Such amended roster shall be effective fifteen (15) days following the date of such publication. The addition of new firearms to the roster shall not operate to preclude the enforcement of the roster with respect to firearms previously listed thereon.

 

4-14-550 SALE PROHIBITED.
    After January 1, 1997, no wholesale or retail firearms dealer as licensed by the federal or state government and operating within the territorial limits of the city, shall sell, offer or display for sale, give, lend, or transfer ownership, of any firearm listed on the roster of Saturday Night Specials. This section shall not preclude a wholesale or retail gun dealer from processing firearms transactions between unlicensed parties pursuant to Section 12702(d) of the California Penal Code.

 

4-14-555 EXEMPTIONS.
    Nothing in this Article relative to the sale of Saturday Night Specials shall prohibit the disposition of any firearms by sheriffs, constables, marshals, police officers, or other duly appointed peace officers in the performance of their official duties, nor to persons who are authorized by the United States Federal Government for use in the performance of their official duties; nor shall anything in this Article prohibit the use of any firearm by the above-mentioned persons in the performance or their official duties.

 

4-14-560 SEVERABILITY.
    The City Council declares that, should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence, or work of this Article be rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or by reason by any preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of said ordinance hereby adopted shall remain in full force and effect.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 96-013, 9/3/96 (Sections 4-14-500 — 4-14-560))

CHAPTER 4-15 FORTUNETELLING
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-15-100 FOR PAY.
    “For pay” shall mean for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.

 

4-15-105 FORTUNETELLING.
    “Fortunetelling” shall mean telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process or knowledge, by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy, or other craft art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, of any kind or nature for pay.

 

4-15-110 PERSON.
    “Person” shall mean only natural persons.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 86-02, 1/20/86)

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT
4-15-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of fortunetelling within the City of San Leandro without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided herein and obtaining a business license as provided in Title II, Chapter 2.

 

4-15-205 APPLICATION.
    Applicants for permits under this Chapter must file with the Finance Officer a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to be furnished by the Finance Officer which shall give the following information:

    (a)   Name and description of the applicant;

    (b)  Permanent home address and full local address of applicant;

    (c)   The address at which the applicant proposes to conduct the business;

    (d)  The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Police Department; and

    (e)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last five (5) years of any crime, including violation of any municipal ordinance, involving moral turpitude or the elements of fraud.

 

4-15-210 APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEE.
    The application and any renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee in such amount or amounts, as designated by the City Council by resolution, to cover administrative costs. No part of such fees shall be refunded whether such permit is issued or not.

 

4-15-215 INVESTIGATION.
    The City Manager shall examine all applications and shall make or cause to be made such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the Manager shall deem necessary in order to perform his or her duties under this Chapter.

 

4-15-220 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
    Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application for a permit, the City Manager shall issue the permit unless he or she finds that the applicant has not complied with the provisions of this Chapter or has been convicted or a crime involving moral turpitude or the elements of fraud within the last five (5) years.

 

4-15-225 TERM OF PERMIT—RENEWAL.
    The term of the permit shall be for one year. A renewal application shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner is a new application.

 

4-15-230 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
    Whenever it shall be shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, Title II, Chapter 2 of the Municipal Code or the provisions of the San Leandro Zoning Code, the City Manager shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permit holder a written notice in person or by mail of the suspension and of a hearing to be held by the City Manager within three (3) working days of such suspension, to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. The notice must contain a statement of the facts upon which the City Manager has acted in suspending the permit.

 

4-15-235 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
    Any applicant who is denied a permit or whose permit has been revoked, may appeal in writing by filing his or her appeal with the City Clerk within seven (7) days after receipt of notification that his or her application for a permit has been denied, or that his or her permit has been revoked. Such appeal shall be heard by the Charitable Solicitations Appeals Board established in Section 4-22-240 of this Code at a time and place to be set by the City Clerk. The Board shall hear the appeal within seven (7) days from the date of filing such appeal. The Board shall, conditionally or otherwise, either grant, deny, reinstate or refuse to reinstate such permit.

 

4-15-240 EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   Entertainment. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any person engaged solely in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mind-reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no questions are answered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.

    (b)  Religious Practice. No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate or ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant (hereinafter collectively referred to as minister) from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that the fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association.

 

4-15-245 TRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT—RETURN UPON EXPIRATION.
    Any permit issued under this Article shall be non- transferable.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 86-02, 1/20/86)

CHAPTER 4-16 OBNOXIOUS CONDUCT
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-16-100 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORIZATION.
    This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this ordinance which also are used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code.

 

4-16-105 THEATER—DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this ordinance, and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code, the phrase “theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances” shall mean a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, upon which theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, and in which the serving of food and/or beverages is clearly incidental to such performances (and for which a city license for a theater is in full force and effect). This definition does not supersede the provisions of Section 4-16-100 of this ordinance.

 

4-16-110 PROHIBITION AGAINST THE DISPLAY OF FEMALE BREASTS.
    Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

    (a)   exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breast are below such straight line, or

    (b)  employs any device or covering, which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast, or

    (c)   wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed.

 

4-16-115 PROHIBITION AGAINST DISPLAY OF PRIVATE PARTS.
    Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

    (a)   exposes his or her private parts or buttocks, or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair of such person, while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer, or

    (b)  permits, procures or assists any person to so expose himself or herself, or to employ any such device.

 

4-16-120 ACCESSORIES.
    Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels, or assists any person to violate any provision of this ordinance.

 

4-16-125 EXCEPTIONS.
    This ordinance does not apply to:

    (a)   A theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances.

    (b)  Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 70-3, 1/12/70; Ordinance No. 78-54, 11/6/7; Ordinance No. 82-030, 5/17/82)

CHAPTER 4-17 DUST CONTROL—NUISANCE
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
4-17-100 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide supplemental legal authority to regulate the use of real property which, in the determination of the City made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, results in the creation of fugitive dust in such amounts and in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance and/or results in the dispersal of mud, dirt or crushed rock on the public right-of-way.

 

4-17-105 FINDINGS.
    The City Council hereby finds and declares that fugitive dust and the dispersal on the public right-of-way of mud, dirt and crushed rock resulting from the industrial and commercial use of real property constitutes a hazard to the public health, causes the depreciation of real estate values, impairs the ability of local industry to maintain precision manufacturing tolerances, reduces tax receipts by impairing the tax base, causes blight, imposes costs for additional public services and maintenance of public rights of way, creates traffic hazards and is otherwise a public nuisance.

 

4-17-110 PREEMPTION.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to conflict with the provisions of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code §§ 7401 et seq.) and the provisions of Parts 3, 4 and 5, Division 26 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with §§ 40000 et seq.). To the extent of any such conflict, it shall be resolved in favor of federal and state statutory authority.

 

4-17-115 EXEMPTIONS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any property used for agricultural, residential or recreational — open space purposes. Classification of any property in the Residence Districts, Commercial Recreation District or Nursery District under the provisions of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro shall be prima facie evidence of exemption under this Chapter.

 

4-17-120 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases are defined as follows:

    (a)   ALL-WEATHER SURFACE. “All-weather surface” is that base treatment or surface material which in the opinion of the City Council upon competent evidence thereof, will to the extent feasible prevent the entrainment of fugitive dust from the source.

    (b)  FUGITIVE DUST. “Fugitive dust” shall mean solid particulate matter emitted from any source other than a stack or chimney and created by natural forces, construction work, mechanical processes, or movement of motor vehicles.

    (c)   PARTICULATE MATTER. “Particulate matter” shall mean any material, except unadulterated water, that exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.

    (d)  SOURCE. “Source” shall mean that real property which is the point of entrainment of fugitive dust.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. ABATEMENT
4-17-200 UNLAWFUL.
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises in this City to conduct any enterprise on such premises in such manner which in the determination of the City Manager is directly resulting in fugitive dust, mud, dirt, crushed rock or other similar material being discharged, carried or entrained from the property to the extent that any of the following conditions result:

    (a)   Injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to the public;

    (b)  Danger to the comfort, repose, health or safety of the public;

    (c)   Injury or damage to business or property;

    (d)  Hazardous conditions on the public right-of-way;

    (e)   Blight or the impairment of property values;

    (f)   Increased costs for maintenance of the public right-of-way; or

    (g)  Any condition set forth in Section 4-17-105 of this Chapter.

 

4-17-205 INITIAL DETERMINATION—NOTICE—ABATEMENT.
    Whenever the City Manager has inspected or caused to be inspected any premises and has found and determined there is reasonable cause to believe that such premises are in violation of Section 4-17-200, he or she shall give written notice to the owner of record of the premises, containing:

    (a)   The street address and such other description as is required to identify the source;

    (b)  A statement describing the conditions believed to be in existence in violation of Section 4-17-200;

    (c)   A statement of the action required to be taken to abate the conditions; and

    (d)  A request to the owner to, within ten (10) days, meet with or communicate with the City Manager to discuss abatement.

    The above notice shall be sent certified mail to the record owner as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll.

 

4-17-210 ABATEMENT—NOTICE OF HEARING—PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    In the event said owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to respond to the notice within the time provided in Section 4-17-205, or if it appears after the expiration of the ten (10) days, that negotiations are not proceeding in a satisfactory manner, the City Manager shall issue a notice ordering the owner to appear at a hearing before the City Council to determine whether any of the conditions specified in Section 4-17-200 exist on the premises and, if such are found to exist, to show cause why the premises should not be declared a public nuisance and the nuisance abated by the City. This notice shall be served upon the owner by the City Clerk not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.

 

4-17-215 NOTICE SERVICE.
    Notice of hearing shall be served in person or by certified mail to the record owner as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll. Service shall be deemed complete at the time notice is personally served or deposited in the mail. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings hereunder. Notice shall be substantially in the format set forth below:

 

    “NOTICE OF HEARING ON ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE

 

    This is a notice of hearing before the City Council to determine whether any of the conditions specified in Section 4-17-200 and set forth below exist in violation of said section on the premises situated in the City of San Leandro, State of California, known and designated as (street address) ________________ in said City and more particularly described as (assessor’s parcel number) ________________ and if the City Council so finds, to provide you the opportunity to show cause why the premises should not be declared a public nuisance and the nuisance abated by the City. If said premises, in whole or in part, are found to contain any of said conditions and the conditions are declared to constitute a public nuisance, and if the same is not promptly abated by the owner, such nuisance may be abated by municipal authorities, in which case the costs of such abatement will be assessed upon such premises and such costs, together with interest thereon, will constitute a lien upon such premises until paid; or you may be cited for violation of the provisions of the Municipal Code and subject to a fine.

    Said alleged conditions consist of the following:

________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________.

    The methods of abatement available are:

___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________.

 

    All persons having an interest in said matters may attend the hearing and their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration.

 

Dated this ______ day of _______________20____.

 

    ________________________

    City Manager

 

Time and Date of Hearing: ____________________

 

Location of Hearing: _______________________ ”

 

4-17-220 HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL.
    At the time stated in the notice, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony relative to such alleged public nuisance and to proposed rehabilitation, demolition or repair of such property. Said hearing may be continued from time to time.

 

4-17-225 HEARING PROCEDURE.
    All hearings shall be tape recorded.

    Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules of evidence.

    Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which seasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

           Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

 

4-17-230 DECISION BY COUNCIL.
    Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall determine whether any of the conditions specified in Section 4-17-200 exist on the premises in violation of said section. If the Council so finds, it shall adopt a resolution declaring such property to be a public nuisance, setting forth its findings and ordering the abatement of the same by having such property rehabilitated, repaired or having installed or constructed an all-weather surface in the manner and means specifically set forth in said resolution. The resolution shall set forth the times within which such work shall be commenced and completed by the owner. The decision and order of the Council shall be final.

 

4-17-235 SERVICE OF ORDER TO ABATE.
    A copy of the resolution of the Council ordering the abatement of said nuisance shall be served upon the owner(s) of said property in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-17-215. Upon abatement in full by the owner, the proceedings hereunder shall terminate.

 

4-17-240 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
    If such nuisance is not abated as ordered within said abatement period, the Council may, among other things, direct the City Manager or designee to cause the same to be abated by City employees or private contract. The City Manager and designees are expressly authorized to enter upon said property for such purposes.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. LIEN PROCEDURE
4-17-300 RECORD OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
    The City Manager shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by the City and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the cost of abatement, including the rehabilitation, demolition or repair of said property, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided that before said report is submitted to the City Council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least ten (10) calendar days upon such property, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the City Council for confirmation. A copy of said report and notice shall be served upon the owners of said property in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-17-215 at least ten (10) calendar days prior to submitting the same to the City Council. Proof of said posting and service shall be made by affidavit filed with the City Clerk. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder.

 

4-17-305 ASSESSMENT LIEN.
    The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a Notice of Lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.

    After such confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of the Council’s decision shall be filed with the Alameda County Auditor-Controller on or before August 1 of each year, whereupon it shall be the duty of said Auditor-Controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes and thereafter said amounts, together with interest on said amounts at ten per cent (10%) per annum from the date of recordation, shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.

    In the alternative, after such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.

    Such Notice of Lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows:

 

“NOTICE OF LIEN

 

(Claim of City of San Leandro)

 

    Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section ________ of the San Leandro Municipal Code, the City Manager of the City of San Leandro did on or about the _____ day of __________ 19_____, cause the property hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the improvement on the property hereinafter described, to be repaired or demolished in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of San Leandro did on the ______ day of ________________, 19______, assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or demolition upon the real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of San Leandro does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, repair, or demolition in the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $_______ and the same, together with interest thereon at 10% (ten per cent) per annum from the date of recordation, shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.

    The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of San Leandro, County of Alameda, State of California, and particularly described as follows:

 

___________________________________________

__________________________________________

__________________________________________

___________________________________________

(description)

 

Dated this ____day of __________________19___ .

 

    _____________________________

    City Manager, City of San Leandro”

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. MISCELLANEOUS
4-17-400 ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS AVAILABLE—VIOLATION AN INFRACTION.
    Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Council from enforcing the terms of this ordinance by ordering the commencement of a civil proceeding, nor to preclude the City from pursuing any other remedy available under Chapter 1-12 or any other applicable law. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter constitutes an infraction punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-12-200 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 83-024, 9/12/83; Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-17-400))

CHAPTER 4-18 LOUD AND UNRULY GATHERINGS
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE
4-18-100 PURPOSE.
    In order to control unnecessary disturbances caused by unruly gatherings in the City, the City declares that it is the City’s policy to prohibit unruly gatherings that create a substantial disturbance in the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood as specified in this Chapter. It is not the intent of the City Council for this Chapter to apply to peaceful gatherings or assemblies.

    The City determines that unruly gatherings are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to the public interest. Therefore, the City Council declares that creating, maintaining, causing, or allowing to be created, maintained, or caused, any unruly gathering in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such in any manner provided by law, including, but not necessarily limited to, the filing of a civil or criminal action.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2018-016, 9/4/18 (Section 4-18-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
4-18-200 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

    (a)   “Gathering” means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a party or social event, occasion, or activity on private property.

    (b)  “Responsible person” means and includes, but is not limited to:

    (1)  The person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has legal control of the property where the gathering takes place; or

    (2)  The person who caused the gathering to occur.

    (c)   “Juvenile” means and includes any person under the age of eighteen (18).

    (d)  “Minor” means and includes any person at least eighteen (18) years old but under the age of twenty-one (21).

    (e)   “Unruly gathering” shall mean a gathering of twenty (20) or more persons on private property that results in conduct that causes a “substantial disturbance” in the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood or presents a threat to the health and safety of those in attendance, responding enforcement personnel, or occupants of immediately adjacent properties. For purposes of this Chapter, conduct that causes a substantial disturbance shall include, but is not limited to, a noise disturbance generating three (3) or more complaints in any four (4) hour period, obstruction of public streets or rights-of-way by people or vehicles, public drunkenness, unlawful possession of alcohol or drugs, serving alcohol to juveniles or minors, fights, disturbances of the peace, urinating or defecating in public, setting off fireworks, vandalism, littering on public property or private property not belonging to the host of the gathering, the observed presence of persons on rooftop areas not designed for occupancy, and throwing bottles or other objects or substances at law enforcement or any other person.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2018-016, 9/4/18 (Section 4-18-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. UNRULY GATHERINGS PROHIBITED
4-18-300 CAUSING OR ALLOWING UNRULY GATHERINGS.
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any responsible person(s) to cause or allow an unruly gathering to occur on any private property within the City. An unruly gathering may be abated by the City by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the unruly gathering to be disbanded, the issuance of citations, and/or the arrests of any law violators under any applicable local laws and State statutes.

 

4-18-400 PARTICIPATING IN UNRULY GATHERINGS.
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any person to attend or participate in an unruly gathering in a manner that contributes to the unruly gathering by engaging in conduct that causes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood, or presents a threat to the health and safety of those in attendance, responding enforcement personnel, or occupants of immediately adjacent properties, as defined in Section 4-18-200(e) of this Chapter.

 

4-18-500 NOTICE OF UNRULY GATHERING—MAILING TO PROPERTY OWNER.
    When a police officer or other duly authorized City employee determines that an unruly gathering is occurring or has occurred, and either the unruly gathering was hosted by a person or persons other than the owner, or responding personnel are unable to determine whether the owner was the host, the police department shall mail a notice to the owner of the property where the unruly gathering occurred. Notice to the property owner(s) will be issued pursuant to Section 1-12-410 of this Code.

 

4-18-600 PERSONS LIABLE FOR A RESPONSE TO AN UNRULY GATHERING.
    If the City is required to respond to an unruly gathering, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for civil penalties as set forth in Section 4-18-700 of this Chapter, in addition to liability for any injuries to City personnel or damage to City property:

    (a)   The person or persons who own the property where the unruly gathering took place; provided, that notice has been mailed to the owner of the property as set forth herein.

    (b)  The responsible person or persons; provided, however, that if the responsible person is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for penalties and liabilities herein.

    (c)   Any persons in attendance at and engaging in conduct contributing to the unruly gathering as set forth in Section 4-18-200(e) of this Chapter.

    (d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on a property owner or responsible person for the conduct of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the property owner/responsible person as long as the property owner or responsible person has taken reasonable steps, including, but not limited to, requesting police assistance to exclude such uninvited participants from the property. Where an invited person engages in conduct which the property owner or responsible person could not reasonably foresee and the conduct is an isolated instance of a person at the gathering violating the law which the property owner or responsible person is unable to reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of that person shall not be attributable to the property owner or responsible person for the purposes of determining whether the gathering constitutes an unruly gathering.

 

4-18-700 ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Any citation issued for an unruly gathering as defined in Section 4-18-200(e) of this Chapter shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this Chapter for purposes of administrative enforcement.

    (b)  Any violation of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor and is subject to criminal, civil or administrative enforcement as provided in this Code. Each hour such violation is committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such.

    (c)   Section 4-18-200(b) of this Chapter shall not be applicable to a property owner when they do not reside or occupy the property where the unruly gathering has occurred and the property owner is entitled to receive rent or other valuable consideration for the use of the property. A property owner that meets the above conditions and continues to allow violations of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and may be subject to civil or administrative enforcement in accordance with Chapter 1-12 of this Code.

    (d)  If administrative enforcement is initiated in accordance with Chapter 1-12, penalties shall be assessed against all responsible persons, and individuals liable for the City’s intervention to abate an unruly gathering pursuant to Section 4-18-300 of this Chapter.

    (1)  Violation(s) of this Chapter will result in a penalty pursuant to Section 1-12-415 of this Code.

    (2)  The administrative citation penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law committed during the course of an unruly gathering.

    (e)   Once a police officer or other duly authorized City employee has determined there has been a violation of this Chapter, the owner(s) of the property where the violation occurred may be subject to administrative action for allowing a subsequent violation of this Chapter to occur on the property, provided the property owner has received notice as required by Section 4-18-500 of this Chapter, and at least fourteen (14) days have elapsed since the date the notice was mailed to the property owner(s). The City may defer or delay administrative action against any property owner who can demonstrate due diligence in preventing future unruly gatherings, such as evicting those responsible for such gatherings.

 

4-18-800 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT FINES.
    Pursuant to Section 1-12-410 of this Code, the City may collect any past due administrative fine, penalty, and interest charge by use of all available legal means.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2018-016, 9/4/18 (Sections 4-18-300—4-18-800))

CHAPTER 4-19 SAN LEANDRO MARINA
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-19-100 PROHIBITIONS.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of San Leandro to swim, skin dive or water ski within the San Leandro Marina Basin, the Marina Park Lagoon (Laguna del Sol), and within three hundred (300) yards of any exterior bank of the San Leandro Marina Basin.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in or on the waters of San Francisco Bay within the City of San Leandro at any location designated and posted as prohibited for fishing as hereinafter provided.

    (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be present beyond the security gates on any pier to which access is restricted by such gate, unless such person is a permittee whose vessel is berthed at such pier or is an authorized guest of such permittee, or unless such person is on official business of the City of San Leandro, the State of California, or the United States of America, or unless such person has been specifically authorized to enter such pier by the City Manager or representative.

 

4-19-105 FISHING.
    The City Manager, or authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to determine those locations at which fishing would be hazardous to the health and safety of the citizens of the City of San Leandro because of specific dangers resulting from the unsupervised nature of the area or from dangerous conflicts with other permitted activities in the area, and to post such areas as location prohibited for fishing.

 

4-19-110 SPECIAL PERMIT.
    The City Manager, or authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a special permit for the activities listed in Section 4-19-100 (a) hereof within the areas where such activities are prohibited, upon the showing of the existence of an emergency or for purposes of special exhibitions or events.

 

4-19-115 SPEED LIMIT.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vessel at a speed in excess of five (5) nautical miles per hour within the launching ramp basin and all points which are east of Mulford Point and within the Marina Basin or Marina Park Lagoon (Laguna del Sol) or entrances thereto.

    (b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any boating activities specifically authorized by the City Manager or representative in connection with a City sanctioned special activity or event.

 

4-19-120 BERTHING OF VESSELS.
    The berthing of vessels and other activities and operations in the Marina not herein regulated shall be in conformance with reasonable regulations established by the City Manager. Such regulations shall be based upon the maintenance within the Marina of sanitary and sightly conditions, orderliness, the preservation of public health, safety, peace, welfare, and the convenience of the public in the use of such area for the purpose for which it is established. One copy of such regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and one copy shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the Marina. Violation of any regulations so established for non-payment of fees shall be cause for revocation of any permit to moor a vessel within the Marina. The City shall have the right and power to remove or impound the vessel of any person violating said regulations of failing to pay required fees, at the sole cost and expense of the permittee.

 

4-19-125 FEES.
    All fees for use of Marina facilities shall be established by the City Manager and a schedule of such fees shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.

 

4-19-130 EXCLUSION OF POWER BOATS FROM LAGOON.
    Power vessels are prohibited from entering the Lagoon except when engaged in compass adjustment on the compass range, or when specifically authorized by the City Manager or representative.

 

4-19-135 DEPOSIT OF FEES.
    Prior to launching a boating vessel via a trailer from the Wes McClure Boat Launch, whether the vessel is motorized or not, any person shall have a current yearly launch permit or deposit the required daily launch fee in the payment kiosk. Yearly permit holders (year is from July 1—June 30) shall display the permit from the rearview mirror of their vehicle. Daily permit holders shall clearly display the permit on the dashboard of their vehicle with the trailer’s license plate number and the date of purchase noted on the permit.

 

4-19-140 BOAT LAUNCH FEES.
    The boat launch fee for the Wes McClure Boat Launch shall be in conformance with the latest adopted City Fee Schedule.

 

4-19-145 USE OF REVENUE.
    The revenue raised by the collection of boat launch fees shall be paid into the treasury of the City of San Leandro, and shall be used for costs of installation and maintenance of the launch ramp facility, costs of regulation of launching, and other related costs.

4-19-150 AUTHORITY TO CITE.
    The City Manager and designee(s) shall have the authority to issue citations for non-payment of the established boat launch fee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 71-38, 11/22/71; Ordinance No. 74-45, 8/12/74; Ordinance No. 82-030, 5/17/82; Ordinance No. 2009-008, 10/5/09 (Sections 4-19-135—4-19-150))

CHAPTER 4-20 PUBLIC MEETINGS, ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-20-100 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   ACTIVITY. “Activity” shall mean any meeting, assembly, block party, or parade.

    (b)  BLOCK PARTY. “Block party” shall mean a planned or organized event which uses a specified portion of any public street for the purpose of celebrating a special event or holiday and which is organized by and for the residents of a specified street or streets or a specified neighborhood.

    (c)   PARADE. “Parade” shall mean a march or procession of any kind.

    (d)  PUBLIC MEETING OR ASSEMBLY. “Public meeting” or “assembly” shall mean a planned or organized gathering of a group of persons, or any ceremony, show, exhibition, or pageant which may reasonably be expected to result in the gathering of a group of persons, upon any public street, park or other public grounds.

 

4-20-105 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in, form, start or carry on any activity as defined in this Chapter, in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds of the City of San Leandro unless and until a permit to conduct such activity has been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, except as herein provided.

 

4-20-110 EXCEPTIONS.
    This ordinance shall not apply to any of the following:

    (a)   Funeral processions. As used herein, funeral procession shall mean a single direct movement from a mortuary or church to the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral director.

    (b)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.

    (c)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such activity is authorized by the school district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity.

 

4-20-115 APPLICATION.
    Application for permits under this Chapter must be filed with the City not less than fourteen (14) calendar days in advance of an activity proposed to be held in whole or in part upon a state highway and not less than ninety-six (96) hours in advance of any other proposed activity.

    The application shall be in writing on a form furnished by the City and shall give the following information:

    (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization shall be stated.

    (b)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the activity.

    (c)   The purpose of the activity.

    (d)  The date, estimated starting and ending time, and location or route of the proposed activity.

    (e)   The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity, and the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals, which will be used.

    (f)   Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the activity, including the times and locations thereof.

    (g)  A statement as to whether the activity will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed.

    (h)  A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained from any other city within which said activity shall commence, terminate or occur in part.

    (i)   Plans for the use of any type of sound amplification equipment.

    (j)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary to a determination of the findings required by Section 4-20-120.

 

4-20-120 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT—FINDINGS REQUIRED.
    The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder unless he or she determines from consideration of the application and from other pertinent information, that:

    (a)   Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail;

    (b)  The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required;

    (c)   The sole purpose of the activity is advertising of any product, good, ware, merchandise or event, and is designed to be held solely for private profit and not for First Amendment expression;

    (d)  The time, route, or size of the activity will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement or traffic contiguous to the site or route, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion;

    (e)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the activity will prevent proper police, fire, or ambulance services to contiguous areas; or

    (f)   The activity shall occur at a time when a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school, and the noise created by the activity would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school.

    If the activity is proposed to be held in whole or in part upon a state highway, no such permit shall be issued unless prior written approval thereof has been obtained from the Department of California Highway Patrol and from the Department of Transportation.

 

4-20-125 PRIOR APPLICATION.
    If a prior permit application shall have been made for an activity proposed to be held at the same time or place, the Chief of Police may refuse approval of the later application if both activities would create undue traffic congestion. In case of such refusal, he or she shall forthwith send the applicant a written notice that he or she may apply for an alternate time and place.

 

4-20-130 APPLICATION FEE.
    The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by the City Council by resolution.

 

4-20-135 NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
    Notice of issuance or denial of the permit shall be by telephone unless there is sufficient time for notice by mail. When notice is by telephone, notice of denial of a permit shall also be mailed to the applicant by the City Clerk within two (2) calendar days stating the reasons for denial.

 

4-20-140 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
    There shall be no right to appeal denial of a permit to hold a proposed activity in whole or in part upon a state highway, if such denial results from disapproval of the application by the Department of California Highway Patrol or the Department of Transportation. In any other case the applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the City Manager. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within two (2) working days after receipt of notice of the denial. The City Manager shall hold a hearing no later than two (2) working days after the appeal is filed and shall render his or her decision no later than one working day after the hearing. The City Manager’s decision shall be final.

 

4-20-145 CONTENTS OF PERMIT—CONDITIONS.
    The Chief of Police may condition the issuance of a permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the activity, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, and the control of traffic; provided such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such conditions may include:

    (a)   Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the activity proposed on the application;

    (b)  Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parade or other activities occurring along a route;

    (c)   Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street transversed;

    (d)  Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;

    (e)   Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities;

    (f)   Requirements for use of monitors, and providing notice or permit conditions to participants;

    (g)  Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures at the activity;

    (h)  Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of City property;

    (i)   Restrictions on use of amplified sound;

    (j)   An application for a special activity permit to conduct a block party may be conditioned on notice and approval by fifty percent (50%) of the residents of dwellings along the affected street(s);

    (k)  Requirements that the permittee hold the City harmless in connection with the activity; or

    (l)   Requirements that the permittee have liability insurance either independently or through coverage offered by the City as provided in the Administrative Code, if such coverage is available.

 

4-20-150 DUTY OF PERMITTEE.
    (a)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms and conditions of said permit and with all applicable laws and ordinances.

    (b)  The written permit obtained pursuant to this Chapter shall be carried by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued.

 

4-20-155 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
    The Chief of Police may revoke any permit issued hereunder upon the failure of the permittee to comply with the terms and conditions of said permit, or if the activity, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any other reason, is jeopardizing those bases of approval set forth in Section 4-20-120.

 

4-20-160 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING A MEETING, ASSEMBLY OR PARADE.
    (a)   No person shall unreasonably obstruct, impede or interfere with any activity or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in any activity for which a permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  The City Council shall by resolution adopt rules and regulations providing a procedure for the temporary closing of a portion of any street on which an activity is proposed to be held when necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use that portion of the street during the time of such activity.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 71-49, 1/3/72; Ordinance No. 85-043, 12/16/85; Ordinance No. 86-03, 1/20/86; Ordinance No. 99-03, 2/01/99 (Section 4-20-100))

CHAPTER 4-21 FAMILY BILLIARD PARLORS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-21-100 FAMILY BILLIARD PARLOR.
    “Family billiard parlor” shall mean any place within the City of San Leandro where one or more billiard, pool, or snooker tables or combination thereof, are maintained for hire, where persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are permitted to attend or participate in such games of billiards, pool or snooker, and where alcoholic beverages are not distributed or sold.

 

4-21-105 PERSON.
    “Person” shall mean an individual, company, firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation or other legal entity.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIRED
4-21-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    No person shall establish or maintain a family billiard parlor without first having obtained a permit to do so from the City Manager.

 

4-21-205 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    Application for a family billiard parlor permit shall be made in writing in such form as may be required by the City Manager. The written application shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

    (a)   The name and address of the proposed business.

    (b)  The name and address of the applicant, and in addition thereto:

    (1)  if the applicant is an individual, the residence address of the applicant;

    (2)  if the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners;

    (3)  if the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of the officers and directors of such corporation;

    (4)  if the applicant is any other legal entity, the names and residence addresses of the principals.

    (c)   a statement whether any person named in the application has ever been convicted of any crime;

    (d)  a sketch or drawing of the proposed family billiard parlor indicating the floor plan, entrance and exists, the number of billiard, pool and snooker tables and their proposed location in the building, the location and number of all coin operated machines, and a vertical profile of the building front.

 

4-21-210 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
    The City Manager shall determine whether establishment and maintenance of the proposed family billiard parlor would be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. In making such determination he or she shall consider the moral character of all persons named in the application. Prior conviction of such a person of any crime involving moral turpitude shall constitute prima facie evidence of unacceptable moral character. In the event that he or she finds that establishment and maintenance thereof would be so detrimental, he or she shall deny the permit. If he or she finds otherwise, he or she shall issue the permit.

 

4-21-215 ZONING APPROVAL ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT.
    Issuance of a family billiard parlor permit by the City Manager shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to obtain zoning approval for establishment and maintenance of the family billiard parlor.

 

4-21-220 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
    The City Manager shall revoke the permit if he or she finds that:

    (a)   false information has been supplied in the application;

    (b)  the applicant or his or her agent has violated or permitted the violation of any law on or related to the licensed premises.

 

4-21-225 REVOCATION HEARING REQUIRED.
    The City Manager shall not revoke the permit pursuant to Section 4-21-220 until he or she has provided the applicant a hearing upon ten (10) days written notice delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested to the licensed premises and to the address of the applicant provided on the application.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. OPERATION OF LICENSED PREMISES
4-21-300 MINORS—WHEN ALLOWED.
    No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall enter or be in any family billiard parlor between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Any person owning, operating, or employed in any family billiard parlor shall refuse to allow any person under eighteen (18) years of age unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian to enter or remain in such place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.

 

4-21-305 HOURS OF OPERATION.
    Every person owning or operating a family billiard parlor shall close said family billiard parlor not later than 2:00 a.m. each day and shall not re-open said family billiard parlor earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the same day.

 

4-21-310 VIEW FROM STREET.
    Every family billiard parlor shall be located at ground level and shall be so designed and lighted that a complete view of the interior thereof is available at all times from an adjacent street or sidewalk. Provided, that no structural alteration of any family billiard parlor in existence and operation on the effective date of this Chapter shall be required.

 

4-21-315 CARD PLAYING PROHIBITED.
    No person shall play cards in any family billiard parlor. Any person owning, operating or employed in any family billiard parlor shall refuse to allow any person to play cards in such family billiard parlor.

 

4-21-320 POSTING OF PERMIT.
    A copy of this ordinance and the approved permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the family billiard parlor premises at all times.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. EXCEPTIONS
4-21-400 EXCEPTIONS.
    This Chapter shall not apply to the maintaining of billiard, pool or snooker tables:

    (a)   by any religious, charitable, benevolent or nonprofit association or corporation solely for the recreation or amusement of its members;

    (b)  in private residences.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 72-43, 7/31/72)

CHAPTER 4-22 SOLICITATIONS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-22-100 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

    (a)   BONA-FIDE MEMBERSHIP. “Bona-fide membership” means membership in an organization entitling the member to an equal voice with every other member, official and other agent thereof in the election of officers and the determination of activities and policies of the organization; such organization being one that conducts its activities in Alameda County on a continuing basis, such as, but not limited to, parent-teacher associations and home-owners and neighborhood improvement organizations.

    (b)  CHARITABLE PURPOSES. “Charitable purposes” means and includes the use, actual or represented, of money or property for the benefit in any manner of poor, impoverished, destitute, underprivileged, needy, sick, refugee, or crippled persons; the use, actual or represented, of money or property for the benefit of any church, congregation, religious society or any other religious sect, group or order; the use, actual or represented, of money or property for the relief or assistance of any veteran, or the benefit of any veterans organization or association, or any purpose purporting to aid the general welfare of any state or nation or for the relief of any race or group of people; the use, actual or represented, of money or property, for civic purposes, such as social or cultural functions or the improvement or beautification of any State, City or other community; the use, actual or represented, or money or property for the benefit of any fraternal or social organization or association, the use, actual or represented, of money or property for the benefit of educational institutions or for the education of any person or group of persons; and the use, actual or represented, of money or property for the benefit of youth service organizations.

    (c)   ORGANIZATION. “Organization” means and includes any partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, society, church, or religious sect, denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other representative thereof.

    (d)  PERSON. “Person” means any individual or organization, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other representative thereof.

    (e)   SOLICIT AND SOLICITATIONS. “Solicit” and “solicitations” mean and include the request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for charitable purposes (as the term “charitable purposes” is hereunder defined), except that it does not include the act of recruiting volunteers to solicit for charitable purposes. “Solicit” and “solicitation” also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for charitable purposes as herein defined:

    (1)  Any oral or written request;

    (2)  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbills, written advertisement, or publication;

    (3)  The making of any announcement to the press, over radio or television, or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith;

    (4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, chance, coupon, device magazine, merchandise, subscription, tax, ticket, membership other than “bona-fide membership” as herein defined or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purposes, or where the name of any organization for charitable purposes is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds of any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable purpose.

    A “solicitation” as defined herein shall be deemed completed when communicated to any person then located within the limits of the City of San Leandro, whether or not the person making the solicitation is located within the limits of the City, and whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to herein.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
4-22-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose in the City without a permit unless such person is expressly exempted from the provisions hereof by Section 4-22-205.

 

4-22-205 EXEMPTIONS.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person organized and operated wholly or partly for charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitation by such person is conducted only among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitation, or if the solicitation is in the form of collections or contributions taken or made at the regular assemblies or services of any such person.

 

4-22-210 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    An application for a permit to solicit for charitable purposes shall be made to the City Manager by the charitable organization and by any person soliciting on behalf of the charitable organization. Such application shall be upon a form prescribed by the City Manager and shall be sworn to or affirmed; it shall be submitted to the City Manager at least twenty (20) days prior to the time at which the permit applied for is to become effective. The City Manager may, for good cause shown, allow the submission of an application less than twenty (20) days prior to the effective date of such permit. All applications shall be open for public inspection at reasonable times. The City Manager may grant to persons actively engaged in charitable solicitations activities upon the effective date of this Chapter the authority to continue such activities pending the City Manager’s action on such person’s application. The application shall contain the information prescribed in the following subsections, or in lieu thereof, a statement, satisfactory to the City Manager, of the reasons why such information is not furnished.

 

    (a)   The applicant’s name and address, including national, state, regional and local headquarters, if any;

    (b)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant’s principal officers and managers;

    (c)   If the application is made by a person soliciting on behalf of the charitable organization, the nature of the relationship between the charitable organization and the said person shall be set forth.

    (d)  The purpose or purposes for which such solicitation is to be made, an outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations, the total amount of funds to be raised thereby, and the uses and disposition to be made of the receipts therefrom;

    (e)   A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by or on behalf of the charitable organization, said statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the costs of raising it, both in amounts and as a percentage, and final distribution thereof may be required to be furnished;

    (f)   If the application is made by a person soliciting on behalf of a charitable organization, a financial statement shall be provided stating the total amount of compensation to be received by said person out of the funds received, either directly or indirectly, such total amount to be stated as a percentage of funds received or in a flat dollar amount, as the case may be;

    (g)  The name and addresses of the person or persons who will be in charge of conducting the solicitation and the names and addresses of all persons who will be engaged in soliciting in connection with the proposed solicitation;

    (h)  The time of day when such solicitation will be made, and the dates for commencement and termination of the solicitation;

    (i)   A statement to the effect that if the permit is granted it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the City or by any department or officer thereof;

    (j)   A statement that the applicant, or if the applicant is not an individual, the applicant’s principal officers and managers, have not been convicted within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application of any crime involving the elements of fraud, which conviction was based on the solicitation of funds from the public.

    If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted hereunder, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall so advise the City Manager in writing within two (2) working days after such change;

    (k)  A copy of the applicant’s Internal Revenue Service or California Franchise Tax Board document verifying the applicant’s tax-exempt status, or the applicant’s document from the California Secretary of State verifying the applicant’s non-profit status, shall be attached to the application;

    (l)   The names and addresses of all solicitors to be used by the organization under the requested permit.

 

4-22-215 INVESTIGATION BY CITY MANAGER.
    The City Manager shall examine all applications and shall make or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the City Manager shall deem necessary in order for him or her to perform his or her duties under this Chapter. Upon request by the City Manager, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the Manager all of the applicant’s financial books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during the time a permit is in effect or within one year after a permit has expired, said financial books, records and papers to be inspected by the City Manager solely for determining the truth of the information contained in the application or the truth of any representation made by the permit holder with regard to receipts of any solicitation conducted under this Chapter.

 

4-22-220 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
    Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of an application for a permit, the City Manager shall issue the permit unless he or she finds that:

 

    (a)   The applicant has not complied with the provisions of this Chapter;

    (b)  The applicant has falsified or intentionally supplied misleading or false information on the permit application;

    (c)   The solicitation is not made for the charitable purposes described in the application;

    (d)  The time, place and manner of soliciting would unreasonably interfere with the public health, safety or welfare.

    In the event the City Manager denies a permit to any applicant, the City Manager, within five (5) business days thereof shall send by registered mail or give the applicant written notice in person of the denial, stating with specificity the reasons for such denial.

 

4-22-225 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
    Permits issued under this Chapter shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit, the date issued, the hours and dates within which the permit holder intends to solicit, the information contained in Section 4-22-210(g) and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City. A permit granted upon the authority hereof shall expire at the termination of the solicitation period specified on the permit.

    The period for which a permit is granted shall not exceed ninety (90) days from its effective date. The City Manager may, however, upon the request of the applicant, issue an annual permit whenever such applicant shall have maintained an office or a fixed place of business or meeting place in the County of Alameda continuously for not less than one year immediately preceding the date of filing the application, and shall have regularly conducted charitable solicitations within such period within the County of Alameda. In addition, the City Manager may, upon the request of an applicant, issue a continuing permit whenever such applicant shall have maintained an office, or a fixed place of business or meeting place in the County of Alameda continuously for not less than three (3) years immediately preceding the date of filing the application with the City Manager, and shall have regularly conducted charitable solicitations during such period within the County of Alameda.

 

4-22-230 CREDENTIALS TO BE ISSUED TO SOLICITORS.
    (a)   All persons to whom permits have been issued under this Chapter shall furnish to each of their individual solicitors, as credentials, a copy of the permit, upon which the permit holder shall cause to be indicated the name and signature of the solicitor to whom each credential is issued. Copies of the permit for this purpose shall, upon request, be provided to the permit holder at a fee to cover the costs thereof, as shall be determined by the City Manager. Reproductions of the permit for this purpose made by the permit holder must be clearly legible, and may be reproduced onto and incorporated in other material made available to solicitors for use in their solicitation activities.

    (b)  No person shall solicit in person under any permit granted under this Chapter unless said person’s name is listed on the permit, nor without the credential required by subsection (a) in his or her possession. Such credential must be shown to all persons solicited, and upon request, to any police officer of the City.

    (c)   If the solicitation is made by any means not involving personal contact with the person solicited, the solicitor shall clearly disclose the information contained in Section 4-22-210(e) at the time of the initial solicitation.

    (d)  No person shall use a credential if the permit to which such credential relates has expired or has been suspended or revoked.

 

4-22-235 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
    Whenever it shall be shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued, or such persons, agents or employees, or those acting in concert with such persons, has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, or that any solicitor or other agent of a permit holder has failed to comply with any provisions hereof or has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, or does any act contrary to any statement in his or her application, or, in the case of an annual or a continuing permit holder, the permit holder has ceased to maintain a bona-fide office or place of business or meeting place in the County of Alameda, the City Manager shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permit holder a written notice in person or by mail of the suspension and of a hearing to be held by the City Manager within three (3) working days of such suspension, to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. The notice must contain a statement of the facts upon which the City Manager has acted in suspending the permit.

 

4-22-240 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
    Any applicant who is denied a permit or whose permit has been revoked, may request a hearing pursuant to Section 1-12-420. Any such hearing and decision will be according to the Administrative Hearing Body hearing, decision and review provisions contained in Sections 1-12-420, 1-12-430 and 1-12-450, respectively.

 

4-22-245 TRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT—RETURN UPON EXPIRATION.
    Any permit issued under this Article shall be non-transferable and shall be returned to the City Manager within seven (7) days of its date of expiration.

 

4-22-250 WRITTEN RECEIPTS REQUIRED—EXEMPTIONS.
    Any persons receiving money in the amount of Five Dollars ($5.00) or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under this Article shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit this solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received.

    The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

    (a)   Contributions collected by means of a closed receptacle;

    (b)  Contributions in connection with special events, whether the contributor is given a printed coupon, ticket or similar printed evidence of the donation, on which appears the name of the permit holder, the amount of the contribution evidenced thereby, the date and a description of the special event to which it relates;

    (c)   Contributions involving the sale of merchandise, where there is affixed on the merchandise, or on the container thereof, the name of the permit holder and the price paid for the merchandise; or

    (d)  Contributions in the form of personal checks.

 

4-22-255 ADEQUATE SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTING.
    No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining an adequate system of accounting, whereby all contributions, costs and expenses, and all disbursements, are entered upon the books or records of such person’s treasurer or other financial officer.

 

4-22-260 REPORT REQUIRED.
    If so requested by the City Manager, it shall be the duty of all persons issued permits under this Article to furnish to the City Manager within thirty (30) days after the expiration of such permit, on a form provided by or acceptable to the City Manager, a detailed report and financial statement showing the total amount raised by the solicitation, an itemization of the amounts expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions, emoluments and expenses paid to all persons in connection with such solicitation, indicating the name, address, amount paid to and services rendered by each such person; and the specific disposition that will be or has been made, itemized by amount, of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation. In the case of a continuing permit holder, the report shall be furnished to the City Manager within thirty (30) days following the close of an annual reporting period to be selected and disclosed on the initial application by the permit holder and shall concern all charitable solicitations for the preceding year.

    All reports shall be available for public inspection at the office of the City Manager at any reasonable time. The City Manager may extend the time for the filing of the report required by this section for an additional period of thirty (30) days upon proof that the filing of the report within the time specified will work unnecessary hardship on the permit holder.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 83-05, 2/7/83; Ordinance No. 2008-010, 9/15/08 (Sections 4-22-210, 4-22-220, 4-22-225, 4-22-230 and 4-22-260); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 4-22-240))

CHAPTER 4-23 REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2016-008 repealed and replaced
        Ch. 4-23 in its entirety.

 

ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE
4-23-100 PURPOSE.
    In enacting these regulations the City Council recognizes that massage therapy is a viable professional field offering the public valuable health and therapeutic services. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and ensure massage services are provided in a lawful and professional manner by doing the following: providing minimum qualifications for massage establishments, and providing minimum building, sanitation, and operation standards for massage services. The City intends to comply with and rely upon Section 4600 et seq., of the California Business and Professions Code, which was adopted as SB 731 by the Legislature in 2008 and subsequently amended by AB 1147 by the Legislature in 2014.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-008, 7/5/16)

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
4-23-200 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

    (a)   “CAMTC” or “California Massage Therapy Council” means the Massage Therapy Organization created and defined under California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

    (b)  “Certified massage technician” means a massage technician certified by the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or as a certified massage therapist pursuant to Section 4604 or 4604.2 of the California Business and Professions Code.

    (c)   “Inspector” means an individual designated by the Permit Administrator to conduct any inspections required or permitted under this Chapter.

    (d)  “Massage” means the scientific manipulation of the soft tissues, in exchange for compensation such as payment, loan, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or thing of value.

    (e)   “Massage establishment” means any business or premises, including a sole proprietorship, where massage is provided. Out-call massage may be provided at a location designated by the patron.

    (f)   “Massage technician” or “technician” means any person who massages, excluding any person licensed under Business and Professions Code Sections 2000 et seq. (medicine), 2600 et seq. (physical therapy), 2700 et seq. (nursing), or 1000 et seq. (chiropractic), as amended.

    (g)  “Operator permit” means the permit required by Section 4-23-305 to operate a massage establishment.

    (h)  “Out-call massage” means massage performed by a certified massage technician at a location other than a massage establishment.

    (i)   “Owner” or “operator” means any of the following individuals: the sole technician of a sole proprietorship operating a massage establishment; any general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage establishment; any person who has ten percent or greater ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage establishment; any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage establishment; and all owners of any other type of business entity that owns a massage establishment.

    (j)   “Patron” means an individual not retained or employed by the massage establishment, who is receiving, waiting to receive, or that has just received massage services, but excludes law enforcement personnel or governmental officials performing governmental business.

    (k)  “Permit Administrator” means the City employee designated by the City Manager to oversee the implementation and enforcement of this Chapter.

    (l)   “Permittee” means the holder of an operator permit.

    (m) “Person” means all domestic and foreign individuals, corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships, firms, joint ventures, limited liability companies, or combination of individuals.

    (n)  “Sole proprietorship” means a business where the owner is the only person employed by that business to provide massage.

    (o)  “Visitor” means a person not retained or employed by the massage establishment and not receiving, waiting to receive, or that has just received massage services, but excludes law enforcement personnel or governmental officials performing governmental business.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-008, 7/5/16)

 

ARTICLE 3. PERMIT AND CERTIFICATIONS
4-23-300 CERTIFICATION BY CAMTC REQUIRED FOR TECHNICIANS.
    It is unlawful for any person to practice massage within the City unless that person is a certified massage technician. Massage establishment owners shall ensure that all employed massage technicians are certified massage technicians. Non-certified massage technicians shall be permitted to practice massage pursuant to a valid masseur or masseuse permit issued by the City of San Leandro until December 1, 2016. Such non-certified massage technicians may be employed by massage establishments.

    The Permit Administrator shall revoke a City-issued masseur or masseuse permit if he or she finds:

    (a)   That any information contained in or submitted with the application for the permit is not true; or

    (b)  That the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the State of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State of California:

    (1)  An offense involving conduct which requires registration pursuant to Section 290 of the Penal Code;

    (2)  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony;

    (3)  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;

    (4)  An offense as defined in Section 315, 316, 318 or 647(b) of the Penal Code of the State of California.

    (c)   Notice of revocation of the permit shall be given in writing to the masseur or masseuse by the Permit Administrator. The masseur or masseuse shall cease all operations under the permit within forty-eight (48) hours of delivery of said notice, unless a notice of appeal is filed consistent with the procedures provided in Section 4-23-315(d) of this Chapter.

 

4-23-305 OPERATOR PERMIT.
    No massage establishment may operate in the City unless and until all owners of the massage establishment have applied for and obtained an operator permit from the Permit Administrator pursuant to this section. Massage establishment owners who have an existing massage establishment permit or who were previously exempt from obtaining a massage establishment permit shall be issued an operator permit without having to submit an application and will be required to renew the operator permit on the date that the existing massage establishment permit would have expired or pursuant to this Chapter.

    (a)   Application for Operator Permit: All owners of the massage establishment, or their duly authorized agent, shall file an application for an operator permit for the massage establishment on a form provided by the Permit Administrator. For purposes of this section, the “applicant” for the operator permit shall refer to and include each and every owner of the massage establishment. The application shall include the following information:

    (1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the massage establishment;

    (2)  The name, residence address and telephone number, and business address and telephone number of the massage establishment owner(s) applying for the operator permit;

    (3)  The form of business under which the applicant will be conducting the massage establishment, i.e., corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability company, or other form. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each shareholder holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a general or limited partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the members. If one or more of the members is a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a partnership, limited liability company, or corporate applicant shall apply, as applicable;

    (4)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon, in, or from which the massage establishment is to be operated. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of any written lease between the applicant and the property owner authorizing use of the premises for a massage establishment, or, alternatively, if there is no written lease, then a written, notarized acknowledgment from the property owner that the property owner has been advised that a massage establishment will be operated by the applicant upon, in, or from the property owner’s property;

    (5)  A description of the proposed massage establishment, including the type of treatments to be administered;

    (6)  For each person that the massage establishment employs or retains to perform massage, a copy of that person’s current certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage technician, and a copy of that person’s CAMTC identification card. The City shall maintain a list of massage technicians retained to perform massage at the massage establishment;

    (7)  Whether any license or permit has ever been issued to the applicant by any jurisdiction under the provisions of any ordinance or statute governing massage, and as to any such license or permit, the name and address of the issuing authority, the effective dates of such license or permit, whether such license or permit was ever suspended, revoked, withdrawn, or denied; and copies of any documentary materials relating to such suspension, revocation, withdrawal, or denial;

    (8)  Whether the applicant has within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application been convicted in any state of any felony;

    (9)  Whether the applicant is currently required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code;

    (10) The applicant’s business, occupation, and employment history for five (5) years preceding the date of application, and the inclusive dates of same;

    (11) One set of fingerprints for each applicant in a form satisfactory to the Permit Administrator. The fingerprints shall be taken at a place designated by the Permit Administrator, and any required fee for such fingerprinting shall be paid by the applicant;

    (12) Such other information as may be required by the Permit Administrator to determine compliance with any other eligibility requirements for issuance of the operator permit as specified by Federal, State, or local law. The Permit Administrator may waive any of the requirements of this section for an owner who is also a certified massage technician.

    (b)  Application and Compliance Fee: Any application for an operator permit under this Chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The fee to issue or to renew an operator permit shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council and shall be included within the City’s Master Fee Schedule. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this Chapter, including, for example, issuing an operator permit, administering this Chapter, establishment inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this Chapter. All fees and interest upon proceeds of fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law.

    (c)   Issuance or Denial: The Permit Administrator shall grant an operator permit for the massage establishment if the massage establishment owners have satisfied the requirements of this section and all other applicable laws including, but not limited to, the City’s building, zoning, and health regulations, unless the Permit Administrator determines any or more of the following to be true:

    (1)  The applicant, or any shareholder, partner, or member of the applicant, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense that relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment whether as a massage establishment operator or as a person practicing massage, or as an employee of either; or has at any time been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment; or

    (2)  The applicant is currently required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code; or

    (3)  The applicant, or any shareholder, partner, or member of the applicant, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any violation of Section 266, 266a, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 315, 316, 318, 647(b), or 653.22 of the California Penal Code, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence, or moral turpitude, or any offense in a jurisdiction outside of the State of California that is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses; or

    (4)  The applicant, or any shareholder, partner, or member of the applicant, has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provision of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California; or

    (5)  The applicant, or any shareholder, partner, or member of the applicant, has knowingly made a false statement or omission of a material fact in the application for the operator permit; or

    (6)  The applicant, if an individual, has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years; or

    (7)  The applicant, or any shareholder, partner, or member of the applicant, within five (5) years of the date of application, and as established by clear and convincing evidence, has engaged in acts prohibited under California Penal Code Section 266, 266a, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 315, 316, 318, 647(b), or 653.22; or

    (8)  The applicant, or any shareholder, partner, or member of the applicant, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, has had a permit or license to practice massage or to own and/or operate a massage establishment revoked or denied in any jurisdiction.

    (d)  Notice to Property Owner: Where the applicant is not the record owner, as shown on the latest County assessment roll, of the property upon, in, or from which the massage establishment is to be operated, then upon issuance of an operator permit, the Permit Administrator may send a written notice to the property owner advising of the issuance of the permit and of the regulations applicable to the massage establishment and the property pursuant to this Chapter. Any other notices sent to the applicant pursuant to this Chapter at any time before or after issuance of the operator permit may also be sent to the property owner.

    (e)   Notice of Denial—Appeal: If an operator permit is denied, the Permit Administrator shall serve on the applicant, in the manner provided in Section 4-23-315 of this Chapter, a written notice of denial that shall specify the grounds for the denial and shall indicate the appeal procedures.

    (f)   Display of Permit: Each holder of an operator permit shall display that permit in an open and conspicuous place on the premises visible from the entrance and/or reception and waiting area of the massage establishment or stored in a binder behind the counter and immediately available upon request from an inspector.

    (g)  Term: An operator permit issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be valid for a term of three (3) years from the date of issuance. A permit that has not expired and has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for another three (3) year period, on submittal of a written application and payment of a renewal application fee to be established by resolution of the City Council.

    (h)  Requirement to Amend Operator Permit Application: In addition to the requirements of Sections 4-23-410 and 4-23-415, whenever the information provided in the application for operator permit on file with the City changes, the operator shall, within ten (10) business days after such change, file an amendment to the operator permit application with the Permit Administrator. The applicant shall file an amendment to the information required by subsection (a)(6) with the Permit Administrator prior to permitting any certified massage technician employed or retained to perform massage to begin providing services on the premises of the massage establishment.

    (i)   Violations and Remedies:

    (1)  Operator Responsible for Employees: For the purpose of enforcing the requirements of this Chapter, the operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all massage employees, agents, independent contractors, or other representatives while such persons are on the premises of the massage establishment.

    (2)  Revocation: An operator permit may be suspended or revoked by the Permit Administrator as provided in Section 4-23-315. Upon revocation, the massage establishment shall immediately cease operation, and, if so ordered by the Permit Administrator, no other massage establishment shall be permitted to operate at that location by any person for a period of not less than three (3) years. If the operator is not also the legal owner of the real property on which the massage establishment is situated, notice of such revocation and the three (3) year prohibition shall be provided by the Permit Administrator to the owner of record of the property as shown on the latest County assessment roll.

    (3)  Cumulative Remedies: The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

 

4-23-310 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION—REASONS.
    Any operator permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Permit Administrator after a hearing, where it is found by clear and convincing evidence that any of the following have occurred:

    (a)   Finding of Violation: The person(s) to whom the operator permit has been issued, or any person employed or retained by the massage establishment, has been found to have violated any provision of this Chapter; or

    (b)  Prohibited Conduct: The permittee or any person employed or retained by the massage establishment has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of having violated, or has engaged in conduct constituting a violation of, any of the following: California Penal Code Section 266, 266a, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 315, 316, 318, 647(b), or 653.22, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense, or any offense in a jurisdiction outside of the State of California that is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses; or

    (c)   Registration under Penal Code Section 290: The permittee or any person employed or retained by the massage establishment is required to register under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; or

    (d)  Nuisance Injunction: The permittee has been subject to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to this Code, or Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provision of law in any jurisdiction outside the State of California; or

    (e)   Fraud or Misrepresentation: The permittee or any employee has engaged in fraud or misrepresentation or has knowingly made a misstatement of material fact while working in or for the massage establishment; or

    (f)   Operation during Suspension: The permittee has continued to operate the massage establishment after the operator permit has been suspended; or

    (g)  Massage without Certification: Massage has been performed on the premises with or without the permittee’s actual knowledge, by any person who is not a CAMTC, or equivalent, authorized, certified massage technician; or

    (h)  Prohibited Acts: There have been one or more acts prohibited under California Penal Code Section 266, 266a, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 315, 316, 318, 647(b), or 653.22 taking place on the premises, whether or not any criminal prosecution has been pursued or conviction obtained for such acts, and whether or not they occurred with or without the actual knowledge of the permittee; or

    (i)   Sexual Touching: The permittee or any person employed or retained by the massage establishment or any other person on the premises of the massage establishment has engaged in conduct or committed acts that a reasonable person in a patron’s position would understand as an offer to perform on or engage in with the patron acts that are sexual in nature or that involve touching of the patron’s genitals, pubic area, anus, and areola.

    (j)   Negligent Supervision: The permittee failed to provide adequate supervision of the massage establishment, resulting in a pattern of at least three violations of this Code or State or Federal law.

 

4-23-315 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION—HEARING PROCEDURE.
    (a)   Written Notice Required: The Permit Administrator, before revoking or suspending any operator permit, shall give the permittee at least ten (10) calendar days’ written notice of the alleged grounds for revocation or suspension and shall conduct a hearing in the matter of whether the permit shall be revoked or suspended. The hearing shall be conducted at least ten (10) calendar days from the date of written notice which shall be provided in the following manner:

    (1)  Service of Notice and Order: All notices shall be posted on the property and also served upon the record owner and any tenant. A copy of the notice shall also be served on each of the following if known to the Permit Administrator or disclosed from official public records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance; the owner or holder of any lease; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the Permit Administrator to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served to relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section.

    (2)  Method of Service: Service shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy by certified First Class U.S. mail to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the Permit Administrator. If no address of any such person appears or is known to the Permit Administrator, then a copy shall be mailed to the address of the parcel of land involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service shall be effective on the date of the mailing.

    (3)  Proof of Service: At the time of service, each person affecting service shall complete a written declaration under penalty of perjury, which declares the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the Permit Administrator.

    (b)  Hearing: The Permit Administrator shall consider all evidence at the hearing. The hearing may, after being commenced within the time specified pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, be continued for good cause by the Permit Administrator from time to time. The Permit Administrator shall, at the conclusion of the hearing, make findings of fact based upon the evidence submitted and shall decide whether or not the permit shall be revoked or suspended.

    (c)   Notice of Decision: The Permit Administrator’s written notice of decision shall be served on the permittee, within thirty (30) business days of the conclusion of the hearing, in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, and, in the case of a revocation or suspension, such notice of decision shall indicate the appeal procedures as set forth hereinafter.

    (d)  Appeal: Any applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal from a decision by the Permit Administrator to deny a permit or renewal application, or to approve such an application with conditions, or to suspend or revoke an operator permit, by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for such appeal, within ten (10) calendar days after the decision has been served on the applicant or permittee. The appeal must also include the appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council and included within the Master Fee Schedule. Such appeal shall be heard by an administrative hearing officer appointed by the City Manager or designee, upon not less than ten (10) business days written notice to the appellant. The designated administrative hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence at the hearing, may continue the hearing for good cause, and shall require such legal briefing as may be required to address any issues raised by the appeal. Within a reasonable time, but not more than twenty (20) business days following the conclusion of the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision affirming, denying, or modifying the decision from which the appeal was taken, supported by factual findings and determinations referenced by supporting evidence. The written decision shall be served on the appellant as provided in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6(b), with a copy submitted to the City Clerk and the City Attorney. The written decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review according to the provisions and time limits set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

 

4-23-320 IMMEDIATE INTERIM SUSPENSION.
    (a)   Grounds for Immediate Suspension of Permit: The Chief of Police may immediately suspend an operator permit on an interim basis if he or she determines that an immediate suspension is necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public and:

    (1)  Determines that the permitee is operating or managing the massage establishment or providing services in the massage establishment in a manner which poses an immediate danger to the health or safety of employees, clients, or the public; or

    (2)  The permitee or any massage technician has been arrested for any offense involving lewdness, indecent exposure, prostitution, sexual battery, human trafficking, or any sex-related crime in connection with the massage establishment.

    (b)  Notice of Suspension: If the Chief of Police immediately suspends a permit, the Chief of Police shall provide written notice to the permittee by personal notice or certified mail. The notice shall contain a statement that the permit is immediately suspended and such suspension shall remain in effect during the period of time that an appeal may be filed or an appeal is under consideration. The notice shall provide information on the appeal process and explain that the suspension may lead to permanent revocation of the permit.

    (c)   Appeal: Within fifteen (15) calendar days of service of the immediate suspension (the date of mailing or personal service), the permittee may file an appeal of the suspension and request a hearing in accordance with Section 4-23-315(b) of this Chapter.

    (d)  Effect of No Appeal—Final Decision: If after the passage of fifteen (15) calendar days from service of the suspension notice, the permittee has not filed an appeal, the decision of the Chief of Police to suspend the permit shall become final and the operator permit shall be revoked by the Permit Administrator.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-008, 7/5/16)

 

 

ARTICLE 4. REQUIREMENTS
4-23-400 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT INSPECTION.
    (a)   The inspector shall have the right to enter any massage establishment during regular business hours, without a search or inspection warrant, to make reasonable inspection to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  The massage establishment operator shall take immediate action to correct each violation noted by the inspector. A re-inspection will be performed within thirty (30) business days to ensure that each violation noted by the inspector has been corrected.

 

4-23-405 REQUIREMENTS—ALL MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
    (a)   Operational Requirements: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the following operational requirements shall be applicable to massage establishments located within the City:

    (1)  No massage establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. Massage begun any time before 9:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 9:00 p.m. The hours of operation shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the reception area and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment.

    (2)  Patrons and visitors shall be permitted in the massage establishment only during the hours of operation.

    (3)  Except for a patron who is inside a room for the purpose of receiving a massage, no patrons or visitors shall be permitted in or on the massage establishment premises at any time who are less than fully clothed in outer garments of nontransparent material, or who display or expose themselves in underclothing or similar intimate apparel.

    (4)  During the hours of operation, visitors shall not be permitted in massage rooms except as follows: (i) the parents or guardian of a patron who is a minor child may be present in the room with that minor child; (ii) the minor child of a patron may be present in the room with the patron when necessary for the supervision of the child; and (iii) the conservator, aid, or other caretaker of a patron who is elderly or disabled may be present in the room with that elderly or disabled person.

    (5)  During the hours of operation, patrons shall be permitted in massage rooms only if at least one duly authorized certified massage technician is present on the premises of the massage establishment.

    (6)  A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises, or provided to patrons before services are rendered. The services shall be described in English and may also be described in such other languages as may be convenient. No operator shall permit, and no person employed or retained by the massage establishment shall offer to perform, any services or fees other than those posted.

    (7)  For all employees employed or retained by the massage establishment but who do not provide massage, the following documents shall be available to City staff upon inspection pursuant to Section 4-23-400: (i) for individuals over the age of eighteen (18) years old, a copy of a valid driver’s license or identification card showing the employee’s age; or (ii) for individuals under eighteen (18) years of age, a copy of a permit to employ or to work as required by California Labor Code Section 1299 and Education Code Section 49160.

    (8)  No massage establishment, including a massage establishment providing out-call massage, shall employ a certified massage technician who has had his or her CAMTC certification revoked or suspended pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4609 or 4610.

    (9)  No massage establishment, including a massage establishment providing out-call massage, shall engage in sexually suggestive advertising or permit a certified massage technician to engage in sexually suggestive advertising in violation of Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a)(1)(A).

    (10) An operator shall notify CAMTC of any certified massage technicians that commit any violation of Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a) that occur while the certified massage technician is employed by the operator’s massage establishment.

    (11) Condoms, pornographic material and sexually oriented paraphernalia or novelty items must not be kept or used for any purpose in a massage establishment.

    (b)  Physical Facility and Building and Fire Code Requirements: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the following physical facility and building code requirements shall be applicable to all massage establishments located within the City:

    (1)  Front Door and Reception Area: One front door shall be provided for patron entry, which shall open to an interior patron reception and waiting area immediately inside the front door. All patrons and any persons other than individuals employed or retained by the massage establishment shall be required to enter and exit through the front door.

    (2)  Visibility: No massage establishment located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs, blurs, or unreasonably darkens the view into the premises.

    (3)  Locks: All interior doors, including rooms or cubicles in which massage occurs, but excluding individual dressing rooms and toilet rooms, shall be incapable of being locked and shall not be blocked to prevent opening. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are acceptable on all inner rooms or cubicles. All entrance and exit doors on the premises of a massage establishment shall remain unlocked during business hours unless the massage establishment is a business entity owned by one individual with one or fewer employees or independent contractors.

    (4)  Lighting: Minimum lighting equivalent to at least one forty (40) watt light shall be provided in each room or cubicle in which massage is provided.

    (5)  Tables, Mats, and Beds: A massage table shall be used for all massage, with the exception of “Thai,” “Shiatsu,” and similar forms of therapy, which may be provided on a padded mat on the floor, provided the patron is fully attired in loose clothing, pajamas, scrubs, or similar style of garment. Massage tables shall have a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches. Beds, floor mattresses, and waterbeds are not permitted on the premises of the massage establishment. These restrictions shall not apply to limit specific massage techniques recognized by CAMTC as legitimate. No massage establishment shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes.

    (6)  Lockers: All locker facilities that are provided for the use of patrons shall be fully secured for the protection of the patrons’ valuables, and each patron shall be given control of the key or other means of access.

    (7)  Building and Fire Codes: The massage establishment shall comply with all applicable State and local building standards (as adopted in Chapter 7-5 of this Code) and the fire code (as adopted in Chapter 3-3 of this Code).

    (c)   Health and Safety Requirements: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the following health and safety requirements shall be applicable to all massage establishments including massage establishments that provide out-call massage, as applicable, located within the City:

    (1)  Towels and Linens: The massage establishment shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings, and linens, and all massage tables shall be covered with a clean sheet or other clean covering for each patron. After a towel, covering, or linen has been used once, it shall be deposited in a closed receptacle and not used again until properly laundered and sanitized. Towels, coverings, and linens shall be laundered either by regular commercial laundering, or by a noncommercial laundering process that includes immersion in water at least one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit for not less than fifteen (15) minutes during the washing or rinsing operation. Clean towels, coverings, and linens shall be stored in closed, clean cabinets when not in use.

    (2)  Cleaning and Disinfecting: All rooms or cubicles, wet and dry heat rooms, toilet rooms, shower compartments, hot tubs, and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each business day when the premises are open and such facilities are in use. All bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.

    (3)  Liquids, Creams, and Powders: All liquids, creams, or other preparations used on or made available to patrons shall be kept in clean and closed containers. Powders may be kept in clean shakers. All bottles and containers shall be distinctly and correctly labeled to disclose their contents. When only a portion of a liquid, cream, or other preparation is to be used on or made available to a patron, it shall be removed from the container in such a way as not to contaminate the remaining portion.

    (4)  Invasive Procedures: No invasive procedures shall be performed on any patron. Invasive procedures include, but are not limited to: (i) application of electricity that contracts the muscle; (ii) penetration of the skin by metal needles; (iii) abrasion of the skin below the nonliving, epidermal layers; (iv) removal of skin by means of any razor-edged instrument or other device or tool; and (v) use of any needle-like instrument for the purpose of extracting skin blemishes; and (vi) other similar procedures.

    (5)  Garments Provided to Patrons: All bathrobes, bathing suits, and/or other garments that are provided for the use of patrons shall be either fully disposable and not used by more than one patron, or shall be laundered after each use pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section.

    (6)  Combs and Brushes: All combs, brushes, and/or other personal items of grooming or hygiene that are provided for the use of patrons shall be either fully disposable and not used by more than one patron, or shall be fully disinfected after each use.

    (7)  Footwear: No patrons shall be allowed to use any shower facilities of the massage establishment unless such patrons are wearing slip-resistant sandals or flip-flops while in the shower compartment. All footwear such as sandals or flip-flops that are provided for the use of patrons either shall be fully disposable and not used by more than one patron, or shall be fully disinfected after each use.

    (8)  Draping and Contact with Genitals: The patron’s genitals, pubic area, anus, and areola must be fully draped at all times while any individual employed or retained by the massage establishment to practice massage, or any other employee or operator, is in the room or cubicle with the patron. No massage shall be provided to a patron that results in intentional contact, or occasional and repetitive contact, with the genitals, pubic area, anus, or areola of a patron.

    (9)  Alcohol: No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished to any patron; nor shall any alcoholic beverages be kept or possessed on the premises of a massage establishment.

    (d)  Attire and Hygiene: The following attire and physical hygiene requirements shall be applicable to all employees, and any other persons who work permanently or temporarily on the premises of a massage establishment or while performing out-call massage, as applicable, within the City, including, but not limited to, all persons who are employed or retained to practice massage:

    (1)  Garments: All persons shall comply with the dress requirements specified in Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a)(10) while providing massage.

    (2)  Exposure: No operator, employee, or visitor shall, while on the premises of a massage establishment, and while in the presence of any patron, customer, employee or visitor, expose his or her genitals, buttocks, or chest.

    (3)  Clean Skin: All persons shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water or any equally effective cleansing agent immediately before providing massage. No massage shall be provided upon a surface of the skin or scalp of a patron where such skin is inflamed, broken (e.g., abraded or cut), or where a skin infection or eruption is present.

    (e)   Display of Permits and Certifications: Each massage establishment shall require any person employed or retained to perform massage in or on the premises to display on his or her person a copy of the valid photograph-bearing identification card issued to that employee by the CAMTC. A copy of each such identification card shall also be displayed in an open and conspicuous place visible from the entrance and/or reception and waiting area of the massage establishment. The home address of any employee need not be displayed.

 

4-23-410 CHANGE OF BUSINESS NAME OR LOCATION.
    No person permitted to operate a massage establishment under this Chapter shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the operator permit and City business license. Upon a change of location where there is no change of ownership, an application for an amended operator permit shall be made to the Permit Administrator, and such application shall be granted, provided all applicable provisions of this Code are complied with as to the new location.

 

4-23-415 SALE OR TRANSFER OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT OR OWNERSHIP INTERESTS.
    Upon a sale or transfer of any massage establishment, or upon the sale or transfer of some or all of the interest of any massage establishment owner to a person who is not already an owner, a new operator permit shall be required.

 

4-23-420 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
    (a)   Compliance with this Chapter shall be monitored by the Police Department. The City may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this Chapter.

    (b)  Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the Police Department to determine, at a minimum, if the massage establishment is conducting business in a manner that complies with this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-008, 7/5/16)

 

 

ARTICLE 5. MISCELLANEOUS
4-23-500 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
    The requirements of this Chapter shall be in addition to any business license and business license tax requirements imposed pursuant to Chapter 2-2 of this Code for operation of a massage establishment.

 

4-23-505 EXEMPTIONS.
    The permit requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals and businesses while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:

    (a)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, physical therapists, nurses, or any other person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code when engaging in such practice within the scope of his or her license;

    (b)  Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional, or professional athlete or athletic team, so long as such persons do not practice massage as their primary occupation at any location where they provide such services in the City;

    (c)   Barbers, estheticians and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses;

    (d)  Individuals in the City temporarily for educational events or disaster relief;

    (e)   Individuals administering massages or health treatments involving massage to persons participating in road races, track meets, triathlons, educational events, conferences or similar single-occurrence athletic, recreational, or educational events;

    (f)   Somatic technicians who use no physical touch of any kind at any time in their practice;

    (g)  Enrolled students of an “approved school” or “approved massage school,” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 4601(a), when they are performing massage within the City as part of a formal supervised internship or training program operated by the school, without compensation other than school credit, on the premises of a massage establishment duly authorized to operate pursuant to the terms of this Chapter; and provided that the operator has first notified the Permit Administrator in writing of the name, residence address, and school of the students and the dates of the trainings.

 

4-23-510 VIOLATIONS A MISDEMEANOR AND A NUISANCE.
    Any massage provided or massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, a misdemeanor and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. Such remedies shall be in addition to any other judicial and administrative penalties and remedies available to the City under this Code or State or Federal law.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-008, 7/5/16)

CHAPTER 4-24 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-24-100 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
    It shall be the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.

 

4-24-150 PERMITS REQUIRED.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of San Leandro, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the City of San Leandro as herein required.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit from the City of San Leandro as herein required.

    (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed at an adult-oriented business in any capacity unless such person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit from the City of San Leandro as herein required. This subsection shall not apply to persons rendering construction, cleaning, delivery, or other temporary services to the adult-oriented business pursuant to a contract between the person’s employer and the adult-oriented business unless the person is otherwise required to obtain a permit pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) of this section.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 98-011, 9/8/98 (Sections 4-24-100 — 4-24-150))

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
4-24-200 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the provisions or context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this Article shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

 

4-24-205 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
    “Adult-oriented businesses” means any of the following:

    (a)   Adult Arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

    (b)  Adult Bookstore. An establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. Items sold over the Internet shall be included in determining the substantial portion.

    (c)   Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which:

    (1)  Regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear seminude; and/or (3) shows films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

    (d)  Adult Hotel/Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

    (1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with dosed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or

    (2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or

    (3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.

    (e)   Adult Motion Picture Theater. A business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown, a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

    (f)   Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

    (g)  Modeling Studio. A business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paving such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available “specified sexual activities.”

 

4-24-210 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATOR.
    A person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

 

4-24-215 APPLICANT.
    A person who is required to file an application for a permit under this Chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business.

 

4-24-220 BAR.
    For the purposes of this chapter, a bar is defined as any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.

 

4-24-225 DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON.
    The dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 CalApp.3d 151 (1981).

 

4-24-230 FIGURE MODEL.
    Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.

 

4-24-235 NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY.
    The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

 

4-24-240 OPERATE AN ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS.
    The supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.

 

4-24-245 PERMITTEE.
    The person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued.

 

4-24-250 PERSON.
    Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

 

4-24-255 POLICE CHIEF.
    The Police Chief of the City of San Leandro or the authorized representatives thereof.

 

4-24-260 REGULARLY FEATURES.
    The term “regularly features” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more occasions within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one hundred eighty (180) day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

 

4-24-265 SEMI-NUDE.
    Means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

 

4-24-270 SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
    As used herein, specified anatomical areas shall mean and include the following:

    (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

    (b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

    (c)   Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (a) of (b) of this section.

 

4-24-275 SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
    As used herein, “specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

    (a)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

    (b)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

    (c)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;

    (d)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (a) through (c) of this section.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 98-011, 9/8/98 (Sections 4-24-200 — 4-24-275))

 

ARTICLE 3. APPLICATION AND PERMITS
4-24-300 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT REQUIRED.
    Every person who proposes to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult-oriented business in the City of San Leandro shall file an application with the Police Chief on a form provided by the City and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time, which shall not be refundable.

 

4-24-305 APPLICATIONS.
    (a)   Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 4-24-320. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information:

    (1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least twenty-one (21) years of age.

    (2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

    (3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

    (b)  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is someone other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

    (c)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

    (d)  A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site.

    (e)   The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

    (f)   The names of all employees, independent contractors, and persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by 4-24-150 to obtain an adult-oriented business performer or employee license (for ongoing reporting requirements, see Section 4-24-150).

    (g)  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.

    (h)  A certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to the application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and (1) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is requested; and (2) the property lines of any place of religious assembly, school, park, residentially zoned land, day care center, or boys and/or girls clubs within one thousand (1,000) feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business.

    (i)   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by Section 4-24-400(c).

    (j)   If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the Police Chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten (10) days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the Police Chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

    (k)  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

 

4-24-310 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT.
    (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

    (b)  The Police Chief shall mail notice of the application to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property that is the subject of the application. This notice shall provide the name of the applicant, the address of the premises and the name of the property owner. This notice shall also be posted on the property and in no less than five (5) but no more than ten (10) public places within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property. This notice shall be provided solely for the purpose of assisting the Police Chief in determining whether any sensitive uses, as defined in Article 16-4-1683(B)(2) are within one thousand (1,000) feet of the premises. The failure to provide this notice shall not be grounds for the denial or revocation of the license.

    (c)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application, the Police Chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

    (1)  The Police Chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notification.

    (2)  If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

    (3)  If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

    (4)  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

    (d)  The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the adult-oriented business regulatory permit upon finding that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Article 16-4-1683 of the Zoning Code, and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 4-24-400, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 4-24-315. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises.

    (e)   If the Police Chief grants the application or if the Police Chief neither grants nor denies the application within thirty (30) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 4-24-305(j)), the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 4-24-400.

 

4-24-315 PERMIT DENIAL.
    The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

 

    (a)   The building, structure, equipment, or location for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit is required does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire, and safety laws of the City and the State of California, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations.

    (b)  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder, or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory permit.

    (c)   The applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age.

    (d)  The required application fee has not been paid.

    (e)   The adult-oriented business does not comply with the zoning ordinance locational standards in Article 16-4-1683.

    (f)   The applicant, or his or her spouse, has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 4-24-325(d)(5) or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California.

    Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. This decision may be appealed pursuant to Article 4 of Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. The licensee may seek judicial review of the action taken on the license in any court of competent jurisdiction.

 

4-24-320 TRANSFER OF ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMITS.
    (a)   A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit.

    (b)  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the Police Chief in accordance with Sections 4-24-300 and 4-24-305, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, and the Police Chief determines in accordance with Section 4-24-310 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit.

    (c)   No permit may be transferred when the Police Chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

    (d)  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked.

 

4-24-325 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER AND EMPLOYEE PERMITS.
    (a)   No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business performer permit issued by the City. All persons who have been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by Section 4-24-300, with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit or employees required to obtain an adult-oriented business employee permit, within thirty (30) days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business regulatory permit. No person shall be employed at an adult-oriented business, or act as an independent contractor at an adult-oriented business, except those excluded from the permit requirements pursuant to Section 4-24-150(c), without a valid adult-oriented business employee permit issued by the city.

    (b)  The Police Chief shall grant, deny, and renew adult-oriented business performer permits. The Police Chief shall also grant, deny, and renew adult-oriented business employee permits.

    (c)   The application for either permit shall be made on a form provided by the Police Chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the Police Chief.

    (d)  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

    (1)  The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

    (2)  Age, date, and place of birth;

    (3)  Height, weight, hair and eye color;

    (4)  Present residence address and telephone number;

    (5)  Whether the applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years, as of the date of submittal of the application, of:

    (i)   Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b), and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered,

    (ii)  Any violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act at California Health and Safety Code Section 11000, et seq., and any violation of the California Penal Code relating to controlled substances as defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,

    (iii) The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California;

    (6)  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other State to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized;

    (7)  State driver’s license or identification number;

    (8)  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age;

    (9)  The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;

    (10) If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.

    (e)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

    (f)   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application.

    (g)  If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the Police Chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than ten (10) days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the Police Chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

 

4-24-330 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER OR EMPLOYEE PERMIT.
    (a)   Within five (5) days after receipt of the properly completed application, the Police Chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

    (1)  The Police Chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

    (2)  If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

    (3)  If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business performer permit or an adult-oriented business employee permit, as applicable.

    (4)  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage pre-paid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

    (b)  The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (d) of this section.

    (c)   If the Police Chief grants the application or if the Police Chief neither grants or denies the application within five (5) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 4-24-325(g)), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought.

    (d)  The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

    (1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;

    (2)  The applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age;

    (3)  The adult-oriented business performer or employee permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by State or City law;

    (4)  The applicant, or his or her spouse, has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 4-24-325(d) (5) or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California;

    (5)  The applicant has, within the past five (5) years, been convicted in an administrative enforcement action or court action of violation of an adult business ordinance.

    (e)   Each adult-oriented business performer or employee permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted as provided for herein for applications for permits. This decision may be appealed in accordance with Article 4 of Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

4-24-335 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMITS AND ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER OR EMPLOYEE PERMITS.
    An adult-oriented business regulatory permit or adult-oriented business performer or employee permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

    (a)   On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. At the hearing, all parties shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs may be admitted. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The Police Chief’s decision may be appealed in accordance with Article 4 of Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    (b)  A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his or her permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business:

    (1)  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City.

    (2)  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performer or employee, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business:

    (i)   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

    (ii)  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.

    (iii) Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

    (iv) The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Section 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code.

    (v)  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4.

    (vi) Any violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act at California Health and Safety Code Section 11000, et seq., and any violation of the California Penal Code relating to controlled substances as defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act.

    (vii) Knowingly allowing possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.

    (viii) Any other conduct prohibited by this Chapter.

    (3)  Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate City official.

    (c)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the Police Chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, the Police Chief shall impose the following:

    (1)  Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months for a first infraction;

    (2)  Revocation of the permit for a second infraction.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 98-011, 9/8/98 (Sections 4-24-300—4-24-335); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Sections 4-24-315, 4-24-330, 4-24-335))

 

ARTICLE 4. FACILITIES AND EMPLOYEES
4-24-400 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
    (a)   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed, and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

    (c)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.

    (d)  The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

    (e)   Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any particular day.

    (f)   The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under twenty-one (21) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Official or designee. No person under the age of twenty- one (21) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.

    (g)  All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by management at all times.

    (h)  Any adult-oriented business which is also an adult arcade shall comply with the following provisions:

    (1)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more managers stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access from at least one of the managers stations. The view required in this subsection must be in direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

    (2)  The view area specified in subsection (1) shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times.

    (3)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.

    (4)  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

    (5)  Customers, patrons, or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or remain in the common area of such businesses, other than the restrooms, unless actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available or on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering s be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.

    (6)  The floors, seats, walls, and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen, or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension of the owner and operator’s license to conduct the adult-oriented business.

    (i)   All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following footcandles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

 

Area

Footcandles

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

Theaters and cabarets

5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 footcandles)

Arcades

10

Motels/hotels

20 (in public areas)

Modeling studios

20

 

    (j)   The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for females, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any adult material. Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with the sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons or the general public.

    (k)  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.

    (1)  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. “Entertainer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who, with or without compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business.

    (2)  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use.

    (3)  The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

    (4)  The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

    (5)  No entertainer, either before, during, or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

    (6)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or accept gratuity from any patron.

    (7)  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

    (l)   Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

    (1)  Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty-five (35) persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.

    (2)  Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the Police Chief that their presence is required to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section 4-24- 335(b)(2) from occurring on the premises.

    (3)  Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of State law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

    (m) In addition to the sign requirements in Section 4-24-400(b), the following sign requirements shall apply to adult-oriented businesses:

    (1)  The maximum total sign area shall be twenty-four (24) square feet, per frontage;

    (2)  Freestanding signs shall not be permitted;

    (3)  Projecting signs shall not be permitted;

    (4)  Any illuminated sign shall consist of individual channel letters or internally illuminated letters. Logo signs and “can-type” signs are prohibited;

    (5)  Except as described above, all signs at adult-oriented businesses shall comply with any and all sign requirements listed in Article 18 of the San Leandro Zoning Code that are applicable to signs in the P and PHD districts.

    The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit approvals and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.

 

4-24-405 REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES.
    Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises, persons holding employee permits, and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer of the City of San Leandro.

 

4-24-410 DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
    (a)   Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the adult-oriented business regulatory permit issued pursuant to this chapter in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.

    (b)  The Police Chief shall provide each adult-oriented business performer and each adult-oriented employee performer required to have a permit pursuant to this Chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and permit number of such performer.

    (c)   An adult-oriented business performer and adult-oriented business employee shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

 

4-24-415 EMPLOYMENT OF AND SERVICES RENDERED TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS PROHIBITED.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 98-011, 9/8/98 (Sections 4-24-100 — 4-24-415))

 

ARTICLE 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
4-24-500 INSPECTION.
    An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, Planning Division, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the law and the performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or open for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.

 

4-24-505 REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE.
    The provisions of this article regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the San Leandro City Council.

 

4-24-510 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL.
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business performer permit or adult-oriented business employee permit.

 

4-24-515 SEVERABILITY.
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, or phrase in this Chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 98-011, 9/8/98 (Sections 4-24-500 — 4-24-515))

CHAPTER 4-25 BINGO GAMES
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-25-100 DEFINITION OF “BINGO”.
    As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers of symbols on a card which conforms to numbers of symbols selected at random. Notwithstanding Section 330c of the Penal Code, as used in this chapter, the game of bingo shall include cards having numbers of symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend, “for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.”

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. LICENSE REQUIRED
4-25-200 BINGO PROHIBITION.
    No person shall operate a bingo game in the City of San Leandro except in conformance with state law, this chapter, and any other applicable City laws.

 

4-25-205 ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
    Organizations which are exempted from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23071e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations are eligible to apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City of San Leandro under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, and the provisions of this chapter, provided, that the proceeds of such bingo games are used only for charitable purposes.

 

4-25-210 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
    For purposes of this chapter, the license issuing authority shall be the City Manager or designee. An eligible organization desiring to obtain a license to conduct bingo games shall file an application in writing therefor with the City Manager in a form to be provided by the City Manager. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed thereafter on an annual basis by payment in advance of the annual license fee.

 

4-25-215 APPLICANT MUST BE QUALIFIED.
    No license shall be issued to any organization unless the applicant is an eligible organization under the terms of Section 4-25-100 and such organization’s application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter.

 

4-25-220 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
    An application for a license shall contain the following:

    (a)   The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under the provisions of Section 4-25-100.

    (b)  The names and addresses of at least two (2) officers, including the presiding officer of the organization and the name and signature of the member of the organization who will be primarily responsible for conducting bingo games.

    (c)   A description of the location of the property owned or leased by the applicant on or in which bingo games will be conducted, together with the rated occupancy capacity of such property.

    (d)  The proposed days of the week and hours of the day for the conduct of bingo games.

    (e)   A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, this chapter, and the same as they may be amended from time to time.

    (f)   The application shall be executed by the presiding officer of the organization under penalty of perjury.

 

4-25-225 LICENSE FEE.
    The license fee shall be as fixed by the City Council by resolution and shall accompany the application of an eligible organization. The provisions of this chapter and the imposition of license fees are for regulatory purposes exclusively and not for the production of revenue.

 

4-25-230 CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION.
    Eligible organizations exempted from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by the provisions of Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall submit with the application a certificate of determination of exemption under the provisions of Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board of the State of California showing such exemption. Mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations shall submit a copy of their corporate bylaws along with their application.

 

4-25-235 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION ORGANIZATION.
    Upon receipt of the complete application and fee the City Manager may refer the application to the Police Department of the City of San Leandro for investigation and shall otherwise make, or cause to be made, such investigation as will enable the City Manager to determine whether the application qualifies for a license under the provisions of this chapter. For the sole and, exclusive purpose of making any determination pursuant to Section 4-25-245(c), the City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to have access to local summary criminal history information in accordance with Section 13300(b)(10) of the Penal Code. The City Manager may require such additional information from the applicant as he or she deems relevant to the inquiry.

 

4-25-240 CONTENTS AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
    If the City Manager determines that the applicant organization is eligible under the terms of state law and this chapter, a license may be issued to the applicant. The license shall contain the following:

    (a)   The name and nature of the organization to which the license is issued.

    (b)  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.

    (c)   The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are conducted.

    (d)  The date of expiration of the license.

    (e)   Such other reasonable conditions as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code.

 

4-25-245 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
    The City Manager will not issue a license to the applicant organization if he or she finds:

    (a)   That the organization is not eligible under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code or this chapter,

    (b)  That any statement made in the application is false,

    (c)   That any person whose name is required to be contained in the license application has been convicted of any felony, or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude (including, but not limited to, conviction for violations of the provisions of Chapters 9 and 10 of Title 9, Part 1 of the California Penal Code), or has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving a violation of the terms of this chapter or Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code.

    (d)  That the bingo games will be a fraud on the public or that the bingo games will be conducted for private profit.

    (e)   That the proposed method or methods of conducting bingo games will be contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

    (f)   That the conduct of bingo games on the premises will not be compatible with existing zoning and land uses in the neighborhood.

    (g)  That the licensed premises do not meet the applicable requirements of Title 19, California Administrative Code (relating to State Fire Marshal Panic and Life Safety Regulations).

 

4-25-250 POSTING OF LICENSE.
    A copy of the license shall be conspicuously posted at the location of the bingo game.

 

4-25-255 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
    (a)   Any license issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the City Manager if he or she determines that the activity authorized by the license has been conducted or is being conducted in violation or this chapter or state law. The City Manager may also suspend or revoke the license upon any grounds which would justify a denial of an application for a license in the first instance.

    (b)  No license shall be revoked or suspended until a hearing has been held by the City Manager or designated representative. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the subject organization at least five (5) days prior to the date set for such hearing. The notice required pursuant to this section shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for such revocation or suspension. Notice shall be served by personal delivery or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the organization at the address listed on its application form.

    (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) and (b) of this section to the contrary, the City Manager or designee may without prior notice summarily suspend any bingo license for a period not to exceed five (5) days if the City Manager or designee finds and determines that the continued operation of a bingo game licensed under the provisions of this chapter constitutes a clear, present and immediate danger to the welfare and good order of the City of San Leandro and that compliance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section could jeopardize the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

4-25-260 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE JUDICIAL REVIEW.
    (a)   A party aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager in denying, suspending or revoking any license or application therefor may, within ten (10) days after notice of the decision of the City Manager is served upon the licensee, or applicant, appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. During the pendency of an appeal of a suspension or revocation, the license shall not remain in effect.

    (b)  If such an appeal is not taken within ten (10) days from the date the decision of the City Manager was served upon the applicant or licensee, such decision of the City Manager shall be final and binding. If a timely appeal is filed, the City Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal and render its decision within thirty (30) days of the date of appeal. Such decision of the Council may deny, suspend or revoke the permit on any of the grounds specified in this chapter for suspension, revocation or initial denial of the application for a license.

 

4-25-265 REAPPLICATION PERIOD.
    When the City Manager has denied or revoked any license as provided in this chapter and the time for appeal to the City Council has lapsed, or, if after an appeal to the City Council the decision of the City Manager has been affirmed by the Council, no application for a bingo license at the same location shall be accepted from the applicant or the former license holder for a period of one year after the date of the action by the City Manager.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. MISCELLANEOUS
4-25-300 TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.
    The privilege conferred by the license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable and each license shall so provide on its face. Any attempt to transfer, assign, directly or indirectly, hypothecate or pledge as security any bingo license in violation of the provisions of this section shall be void and shall cause the automatic revocation of such bingo license.

 

4-25-305 PROFITS TO BE KEPT IN SEPARATE FUND OR ACCOUNT.
    With respect to organizations exempt from the payment of bank and corporation tax by section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. As a condition of issuance of a bingo license the applicant consents to the examination and audit of its records at reasonable times by authorized representatives of the City. All proceeds shall be used for charitable purposes except as follows:

    (a)   Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

    (b)  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the proceeds after deduction for prizes, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses.

 

4-25-310 CONDITIONS FOR OPERATION OF BINGO GAMES.
    Bingo games authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the following:4-25-310

    (a)   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.

    (b)  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being conducted.

    (c)   No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

    (d)  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the license-holding organization.

    (e)   No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed, sold, given away, served or delivered to any person on the premises where bingo games are being conducted.

    (f)   The rules for the bingo game conducted by the licensed organization shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the location of the bingo games.

    (g)  Attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which the game is conducted as determined by the Fire Chief in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The licensee may not reserve seats or space for any person or persons (except reasonable space may be designated for the physically handicapped).

    (h)  No individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game.

    (i)   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the license-holding organization. Such member shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from the bingo game. Only the licensed organization shall operate, or participate in the promotion or supervision of, any phase of the bingo game.

    (j)   The licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it which is used for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. This paragraph shall not be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.

 

4-25-315 CITY MAY ENJOIN VIOLATION.
    The City of San Leandro, by and through its City Attorney, may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California or any of the provisions of this chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 77-44, 12/5/77: Ordinance 80-7, 3/24/80)

CHAPTER 4-26 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Note
*Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2003-014 repealed and replaced Chapter 4-26 in its entirety.

 

ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE
4-26-100 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the general welfare by providing for the identification, designation, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historical resources including buildings, structures, objects, signs, features, sites, archaeological resources, cultural landscapes, places and areas within the city that reflect special elements of San Leandro’s historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic heritage for the following reasons:

    (a)   To encourage public knowledge, understanding, appreciation and use of the City’s past;

    (b)  To foster civic pride in the beauty and character of the City and in the accomplishments of its past;

    (c)   To enhance the visual character of the City by encouraging the preservation of resources important in the City’s past;

    (d)  To increase the economic benefits of historic preservation to the City and its inhabitants;

    (e)   To protect property values within the City;

    (f)   To identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of historical resources/districts and alternative land uses;

    (g)  To conserve valuable material and energy resources by ongoing use and maintenance of the existing built and natural environment; and

    (h)  To provide property owners with monetary and other incentives to ensure that individual property owners are encouraged to voluntarily participate in the preservation of their property and City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
4-26-200 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   ALTERATION. “Alteration” means any change in the character, composition or structure of a historic resource requiring the issuance of a building permit.

    (b)  ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCE. “Archaeological resource” means any sub-surface or aboveground material remains of past human life or activities that are at least fifty (50) years of age, and may yield additional information about pre-history or history.

    (c)   BUILDING. “Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

    (d)  CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE (CHBC). “California Historical Building Code (CHBC)” means the most recent version of the California Building Code that regulates alterations to qualified historic structures. The Code provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration or relocation of qualified resources.

    (e)   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. “Certificate of approval” means an official certificate issued by the Library-Historical Commission or City Council upon review and approval of any proposed action relating to a designated historic resource, including alteration, demolition or relocation, as pursuant to this Chapter.

    (f)   CHARACTER-DEFINING FEATURE. “Character-defining feature” means the architectural features of a building, structure, object or historic district that help convey the significance of the historic resource.

    (g)  CITY LANDMARK. “City landmark” means a building, structure, object, cultural landscape, site or archaeological site designated as a city landmark by the City Council, pursuant to the criteria and procedures set forth in this Chapter.

    (h)  CITY STAFF. “City staff” means city employees from any city department or agency, which may be called upon by the Library-Historical Commission or Commission Secretary as deemed necessary.

    (i)   COMMISSION. “Commission” means the Library-Historical Commission established and governed pursuant to the provisions of Article 8, Title 1 of this Code and Title 19 of the City of San Leandro Administrative Code.

    (j)   COMMISSION SECRETARY. “Commission secretary” means one staff member of the City Library-Services Department that serves the Library-Historical Commission. This person shall call upon City Staff as deemed necessary to serve the Library-Historical Commission.

    (k)  COUNCIL. “Council” means the San Leandro City Council.

    (l)   CULTURAL LANDSCAPE. “Cultural landscape” means a geographic area (including both cultural and natural resources) associated with a historic event, activity or person or exhibiting other cultural or aesthetic values.

    (m) DEMOLITION. “Demolition” means for the purpose of this Chapter, any act or failure to act that destroys, destructs or removes in whole or in part a historical resource such that its historic character and significance is materially altered.

    (n)  HISTORIC DISTRICT. “Historic district” means a geographically or thematically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures and/or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development and designated by the City Council, pursuant to the procedures prescribed in this Chapter.

    (o)  HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR. “Historic district contributor” means an individual building, structure, object, cultural landscape, site or archaeological site that adds to the historic architectural qualities, or pre-historic or historic associations or patterns for which a historic district is significant.

    (p)  HISTORIC RESOURCE. “Historic resource” means a designated city landmark, merit resource, historic district or historic district contributor including buildings, structures, objects, signs, features, sites, archaeological resources, cultural landscapes, places and areas within the City that reflect special elements of San Leandro’s historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic heritage as defined in this Chapter.

    (q)  INTEGRITY. “Integrity” is the ability of a historic resource to convey its significance. To retain integrity, a historic resource must retain most of the following aspects that closely relate to the historic resource’s significance including location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association.

    (r)   MAINTENANCE. “Maintenance” means the process by which a property owner maintains or improves the condition of a historic resource.

    (s)   MERIT RESOURCE. “Merit resource” means a building, structure, object, cultural landscape, site or archaeological site designated as a merit resource by the Library-Historical Commission, pursuant to the criteria and procedures set forth in this Chapter.

    (t)   OBJECT. “Object” means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, educational, architectural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, moveable yet related to a specific setting or environment.

    (u)  RELOCATION. “Relocation” means the removal and placement of a historic resource from its original site to a new site.

    (v)  SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR’S STANDARDS FOR THE TREATMENT OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES. “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties” means the standards and guidelines for the management of historic properties set forth by the National Park Service and the Secretary of the Interior for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings, that are included in the Code of Federal Regulations as Title 36, Part 67, as amended.

    (w)  SITE. “Site” means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.

    (x)  STRUCTURE. “Structure” means a work composed of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization that was constructed by man.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION
4-26-300 LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall be the governing body of this Chapter and is intended to direct the identification, designation, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historic resources within the City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-300))

 

ARTICLE 4. NOTICE
4-26-400 NOTICE.
    Items that are considered by or referred to the Library-Historical Commission for a recommendation or action under the authority prescribed in this Chapter shall be noticed to the public in the following manner.

    For any action pertaining to an existing or proposed city landmark, merit resource or historic district contributor, a notice of the Library-Historical Commission meeting shall be mailed to the subject property owner(s) and to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the subject site at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting. An additional notice shall be posted on the subject site or within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, and such notice shall be viewable from the public right-of-way.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-400))

 

ARTICLE 5. TIMELINE OF DECISION
4-26-500 TIMELINE OF DECISION.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall take final action on matters referred to the Commission pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the matter is first agendized for Commission consideration. An extension of up to ninety (90) days may occur if the Commission and applicant agree that it is necessary.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-500))

 

ARTICLE 6. RECORDING REQUIREMENTS
4-26-600 RECORDING REQUIREMENTS.
    All historic site designations in San Leandro shall be officially recorded with the property deeds at the Alameda County Recorders Office. The recorded information on the property deed shall state:

 

The property identified as (insert street name and address) and Assessors Parcel Number (insert APN) was designated as a (insert designation category — City Landmark, Merit Resource, or Historic District Contributor) by the City of San Leandro (insert designating authority — Library-Historical Commission or City Council) on (insert Month, Day, and Year). This historic resource is identified as site # (insert number i.e.; 1, 7, 15, etc.) on the City of San Leandro Historic Sites Register. As a designated historic resource in the City of San Leandro this property is subject to the rules and regulations set forth in the Historic Preservation Ordinance identified as Chapter 4-26 of the City of San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-600))

 

ARTICLE 7. CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION
4-26-705 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF A CITY LANDMARK.
    A city landmark can be a building, structure, object, cultural landscape, site or archaeological site. In order to be designated as a city landmark, a resource must retain a high level of historic and architectural integrity and meet at least one of the following criteria for designation:

    (a)   The resource exemplifies and reflects special or exemplary elements of San Leandro’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, architectural or natural history, or has important archaeological or anthropological associations;

    (b)  The resource is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, regional or national history;

    (c)   The resource embodies distinctive or exemplary characteristics of a style, type, period or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of local materials or craftsmanship;

    (d)  Represents the work of a notable builder, designer, engineer or architect recognized at the state, regional or national level; or

    (e)   The resource may yield important archaeological, ethnographic or anthropological information about the region’s past.

 

4-26-710 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF A MERIT RESOURCE.
    A merit resource can be a building, structure, object, cultural landscape, site or archaeological site. In order to be designated as a merit resource, a property must retain integrity and meet at least one of the following criteria for designation:

    (a)   The resource reflects important elements of the City’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, architectural or natural history;

    (b)  The resource is identified with persons or events significant in local history;

    (c)   The resource embodies important characteristics of a style, type, period or method of construction;

    (d)  The resource represents the work of a notable local builder, designer or architect; or

    (e)   The resource may yield important archaeological, ethnographic or anthropological information about the City’s past.

 

4-26-715 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR.
    A historic district contains multiple buildings, structures, objects, cultural landscapes, sites or archaeological sites within a clearly defined geographic or thematic boundary. In order to be designated as a historic district, the individual properties located within must retain a high degree of integrity and meet at least one of the following criteria for designation:

    (a)   The majority of the properties reflect significant geographical patterns, including those associated with different eras of settlement and growth or community planning;

    (b)  The majority of the properties convey a sense of historic or architectural cohesiveness through their design, setting, materials, workmanship or association;4-26-715

    (c)   The area is associated with a historically significant period in the development of the community or is associated with special historical events;

    (d)  The majority of the properties embody distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period or method of construction, or are a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship;

    (e)   The majority of the properties represent the work of notable builders, designers, engineers or architects; or

    (f)   The majority of archaeological sites yield or may yield important archaeological, ethnographic or anthropological information about the City’s past, and the findings of each site are clearly associated with one another through a common context.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-705—4-26-715))

 

ARTICLE 8. INITIATION OF HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION
4-26-805 INITIATION OF DESIGNATION OF A CITY LANDMARK.
    The City Council, Library-Historical Commission or any property owner as to their property may initiate the designation of a city landmark.

 

4-26-810 INITIATION OF DESIGNATION OF A MERIT RESOURCE.
    Any property owner as to their property may initiate the designation of a merit resource.

 

4-26-815 INITIATION OF DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR.
    The City Council, Library-Historical Commission or any property owner within the boundaries of a proposed historic district may initiate the designation of a historic district with a resident’s petition signed by a minimum of fifty-one percent (51%) of property owners within the boundaries of the proposed historic district.

    Any property owner as to their property may initiate the designation of a historic district contributor as part of a designated historic district.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-805—4-26-815))

 

ARTICLE 9. PROCEDURES FOR HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION
4-26-900 PROCEDURES FOR HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION.
    Individuals interested in obtaining historic site designation for a property shall submit to the Commission Secretary a completed application for property designation and a completed copy of the appropriate State of California Department of Parks and Recreation forms for the building, structure, object, landscape, site or archaeological site intended for designation. The forms will be used to document the historical, architectural or archaeological significance of said building, structure, object, landscape, site or archaeological site, such that the Commission can render an informed decision regarding the application for designation using the criteria for significance established in this Chapter.

    The Commission Secretary shall review all submitted documentation regarding a property proposed for historic resource designation and may request additional information from the applicant(s) about the subject property before presenting the information to the Library-Historical Commission.

 

4-26-905 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF A CITY LANDMARK.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the city landmark designation application and documentation forms at a regularly scheduled public meeting and provide a recommendation to the City Council regarding the designation of the property, pursuant to the criteria established in this Chapter. The City Council will act regarding the designation of a property.

    Designation of a city landmark does not require owner consent.

 

4-26-910 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF A MERIT RESOURCE.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the merit resource designation application and documentation forms at a regularly scheduled public meeting and act regarding the designation of the property, pursuant to the criteria established in this Chapter.

    Designation of a merit resource requires owner consent.

 

4-26-915 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the historic district or historic district contributor designation application at a regularly scheduled public meeting and provide a recommendation to the City Council regarding the designation of the historic district or historic district contributor, pursuant to the criteria established in this Chapter. The City Council will act regarding the designation of a historic district or historic district contributor.

    Designation of a historic district requires the consent of a minimum of fifty-one percent (51%) of all property owners located within the boundaries of the historic district. In determining the boundaries of the historic district, the City Council will exclude property owners that have expressed a preference to opt out of the historic district.

    Designation of a historic district contributor as part of a historic district requires owner consent.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-900—4-26-915))

 

ARTICLE 10. PROCEDURES TO AMEND OR RESCIND DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE
4-26-1000 PROCEDURES TO AMEND OR RESCIND DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE.
    New information regarding the significance of a designated historic resource shall be submitted to the Commission Secretary.

    Any individual may present additional information regarding a designated historic resource.

    Requests to rescind the designation of a historic resource shall be submitted to the Commission Secretary.

 

4-26-1005 AMEND DESIGNATED RESOURCE INFORMATION.
    The Commission Secretary shall make appropriate amendments to the historic record and provide a report to the Commission, with no Commission action necessary.

 

4-26-1010 RESCIND DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE.
    A property owner of a designated historic resource may request the designation be rescinded if:

    (a)   The resource has been lawfully altered or maintained in a manner such that it no longer meets the criteria of designation or retains the integrity necessary for designation;

    (b)  Substantial new evidence indicates that the resource does not meet the applicable criteria; or

    (c)   Evidence indicates that a hardship exists for the property owner due to historic resource designation.

    In addition to the criteria hereinbefore set forth, the Commission shall factor into a rescission decision whether the property owner participated in a historic preservation incentive program and/or benefited from the designation of said property.

 

4-26-1015 PROCEDURES TO RESCIND A CITY LANDMARK DESIGNATION.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request and evidence presented by the property owner, and will provide recommendations to the City Council regarding a course of action.

    The City Council may approve or deny the request to rescind a city landmark designation.

 

4-26-1020 PROCEDURES TO RESCIND A MERIT RESOURCE DESIGNATION.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request and evidence presented by the property owner, and may approve or deny the request to rescind a merit resource designation.

 

4-26-1025 PROCEDURES TO AMEND OR RESCIND A HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR DESIGNATION.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request and evidence presented by the property owner(s), and will provide recommendations to the City Council regarding a course of action.

    The City Council may approve or deny the request to amend or rescind the designation of a historic district or historic district contributor.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-1000—4-26-1025))

 

ARTICLE 11. EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS TO A DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCE
4-26-1100 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS TO A DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCE.
    No person shall alter the exterior of a designated historic resource unless a certificate of approval has been issued in accordance with this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature on any designated historic resource that does not involve a change in the character-defining features of the designated resource.

    Proposed exterior alterations to a designated historic resource that would normally require a building permit are subject to review and approval by the Library-Historical Commission based on compliance with “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,” and any applicable design guidelines, conservation plans or specific neighborhood plans that may be adopted by the City.

 

4-26-1105 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS TO A DESIGNATED CITY LANDMARK.
    Upon review of the proposed alteration by the Commission or Commission Secretary, the Library-Historical Commission shall provide recommendations to the City Council on a course of action regarding the full approval, denial or approval with specified changes to the proposed alteration.

    If, after a public hearing, the City Council finds that the project meets “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,” and any applicable design guidelines, conservation plans or specific neighborhood plans that may be adopted by the City, the Council shall issue a certificate of approval for the proposed alteration.

 

4-26-1110 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS TO A DESIGNATED MERIT RESOURCE.
    Upon review of the proposed alteration, the Commission Secretary may elect to issue a certificate of approval for said alterations without any action from the Commission, or submit said alterations for review and approval by the Library-Historical Commission.

    If, after a public hearing, the Library-Historical Commission finds that the project meets “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,” and any applicable design guidelines, conservation plans or specific neighborhood plans that may be adopted by the City, the Commission shall issue a certificate of approval for the proposed alteration.

 

4-26-1115 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS TO A DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR.
    Upon review of the proposed alteration, the Commission Secretary may elect to issue a certificate of approval for said alterations without any action from the Commission, or submit said alterations for review and approval by the Library-Historical Commission.

    If, after a public hearing, the Library-Historical Commission finds that the project meets “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,” and any applicable design guidelines, conservation plans, or specific neighborhood plans that may be adopted by the City, the Commission shall issue a certificate of approval for the proposed alteration.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-1100—4-26-1115))

 

ARTICLE 12. DEMOLITION, DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF A DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCE
4-26-1200 DEMOLITION, DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF A DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCE.
    The Library-Historical Commission may explore and recommend to the City Council alternatives to the demolition of designated historic resources, including but not limited to, consultation with civic groups, public agencies and interested citizens; appropriate acquisition of the property by public or private bodies or agencies; and relocation possibilities.

    No person shall initiate the demolition, destruction or removal of a designated historic resource without a certificate of approval issued by the City Council.

    Requests for the demolition, destruction or removal of a designated city landmark, merit resource, historic district or historic district contributor shall be submitted to the Commission Secretary.

    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request presented by the property owner at a regularly scheduled public hearing, and shall provide recommendations to the City Council regarding a course of action.

    The City Council may approve or deny any request to demolish, destruct or remove a designated historic resource.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-1200))

 

ARTICLE 13. RELOCATION OF A DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCE
4-26-1300 RELOCATION OF A DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCE.
    Relocating a designated historic resource may be an acceptable alternative to demolition if the City Council or Library-Historical Commission can find that the relocation is compatible with the original character and use of the historic resource.

    Requests for relocation of a designated historic resource shall be submitted to the Commission Secretary.

    No designated historic resource shall be relocated without a certificate of approval issued by the City Council or Library-Historical Commission.

 

4-26-1305 RELOCATION OF A DESIGNATED CITY LANDMARK.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request for relocation at a regularly scheduled public meeting, and provide recommendations to the City Council regarding a course of action.

    The City Council may approve, deny or approve the relocation request with specified changes.

 

4-26-1310 RELOCATION OF A DESIGNATED MERIT RESOURCE.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request for relocation at a regularly scheduled public meeting.

    The Commission may approve, deny or approve the relocation request with specified changes.

 

4-26-1315 RELOCATION OF A DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTRIBUTOR.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall review the request for relocation at a regularly scheduled public meeting, and provide recommendations to the City Council regarding a course of action.

    The City Council may approve, deny or approve the relocation request with specified changes.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-1300—4-26-1315))

 

ARTICLE 14. PROJECT REFERRALS TO THE LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION
4-26-1400 PROJECT REFERRALS TO THE LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall have a sixty (60) day period beginning from the date upon which the matter was first agendized for Commission consideration to review and make recommendations on any project referred to the Commission by the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, Site Development Sub-Commission, Zoning Enforcement Official or Chief Building Official.

 

4-26-1405 AUTOMATIC PROJECT REFERRAL TO THE LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
    A proposed construction project that requires discretionary review and approval by the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, Site Development Sub-Commission or Zoning Enforcement Official, as defined in the Zoning Code, shall be referred by City Staff to the Library-Historical Commission for review and comment under the following circumstances:

    (a)   The construction project is located within three hundred (300) feet of a designated city landmark or historic district and could significantly affect the historic integrity of the subject resource; or

    (b)  The construction project involves a potentially significant historic resource that would be demolished, relocated or significantly altered, and said resource potentially meets the criteria for designation in Section 4-26-600.

 

4-26-1410 POTENTIAL PROJECT REFERRAL TO THE LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
    A proposed construction project that requires discretionary review and approval by the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, Site Development Sub-Commission or Zoning Enforcement Official, as defined in the Zoning Code, may be referred by City Staff to the Library-Historical Commission for review and comment if it is located beyond three hundred (300) feet of a designated city landmark or historic district and could potentially impact the integrity of the resource.

    A proposed demolition project that requires discretionary review by the Chief Building Official as defined in the City of San Leandro Building Code may be referred to the Library-Historical Commission for review and comment.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Sections 4-26-1400—4-26-1410))

 

ARTICLE 15. DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR
4-26-1500 DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR.
    Building owners of designated historic resources shall keep in good repair all of the portions of such resources whose maintenance is necessary to prevent the deterioration and decay of the resource’s character-defining features.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-1500))

 

ARTICLE 16. CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
4-26-1600 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE.
    The California Historical Building Code (CHBC) may be applied to all qualified buildings as defined in the CHBC.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-1600))

 

 

ARTICLE 17. UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
4-26-1700 UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to regulate, restrict, limit or modify the authority of the Chief Building Official to issue permits for the demolition of a designated historic resource that has sustained damage from an earthquake, fire or other natural disaster and is structurally unsafe or determined dangerous to human life as defined in the Uniform Building Code (C.C.R. Title 24, §102).

    In the event of damage sustained from an earthquake, fire or other natural disaster, the Chief Building Official shall consult with the Community Development Director for the purpose of determining the following:

    (a)   Whether the condition of the designated historic resource is considered unsafe or dangerous within the meaning of the Uniform Building Code;

    (b)  Whether there are any feasible alternatives to demolition of the historic resource that will protect adequately the health and safety of the public including, but not limited to, abatement of the immediate threat through repair, securing the premises through security fencing or other measures, stabilization and limited demolition; and

    (c)   Whether the unsafe or dangerous conditions could be corrected through the use of the California Historical Building Code.

    If the Chief Building Official determines that the designated historic resource is unsafe or dangerous and that there are no feasible alternatives to demolition, the Community Development Director may authorize the Chief Building Official to issue a permit to demolish the designated historic resource.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-1700))

 

 

ARTICLE 18. HARDSHIP
4-26-1800 HARDSHIP.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall develop guidelines for determining what factual circumstances shall constitute a hardship for purposes of this Chapter.

    The Library-Historical Commission or City Council may, at their discretion, approve a project proposal involving a designated historic resource that does not otherwise qualify for a certificate of approval. The Library-Historical Commission or Council must find that failure to issue a certificate of approval will result in immediate and substantial hardship.

    The decision-making body that would normally review and act upon a certificate of approval request for a designated historic resource shall also review and act upon all requests for a hardship exception for that resource.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-1800))

 

ARTICLE 19. HISTORIC PRESERVATION INCENTIVES
4-26-1900 HISTORIC PRESERVATION INCENTIVES.
    The Library-Historical Commission shall develop and maintain an incentive program approved by the City Council that will be available to property owners of designated historic properties to encourage historic preservation, and investment, improvement and maintenance of historic properties.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-1900))

 

ARTICLE 20. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL
4-26-2000 EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.
    A certificate of approval is valid for one year from the date of final decision unless either of the following occurs:

    (a)   The building permit has been issued and substantial work has begun; or

    (b)  The original approving body has approved an extension.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-2000))

 

ARTICLE 21. APPEALS OF ACTIONS REGARDING HISTORIC RESOURCES
4-26-2100 APPEALS OF ACTIONS REGARDING HISTORIC RESOURCES.
    Decisions of the Library-Historical Commission Secretary may be appealed to the Library-Historical Commission. Such appeals shall be filed with the Library Services Director within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision.

    Decisions of the Library-Historical Commission may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision.

    An appeal shall be scheduled before the appellate body for a decision within forty-five (45) days of the City’s receipt of the appeal, unless both applicant and appellant consent to a later date.

    Appealed items shall be noticed in a manner required for the item being appealed as prescribed in Section 4-26-400.

    Any proposal regarding a designated historic resource, or potentially eligible historic resource that is denied by the Library-Historical Commission, the Commission Secretary or the City Council may be presented for a new decision after:

    (a)   New information is presented regarding the resource;

    (b)  The proposed project has changed significantly from that originally presented; or

    (c)   Two (2) years have passed since the original presentation date.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-014, 11/17/03 (Section 4-26-2100); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 4-26-2100))

CHAPTER 4-27 PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
ARTICLE 1. REGULATION OF CITY PROPERTY
4-27-100 REGULATIONS—ADOPTION.
    The City Council by resolution may adopt regulations necessary for the administration and protection of public buildings and property owned, occupied or administered by the City of San Leandro.

 

4-27-105 REGULATIONS—POSTING.
    The City Manager shall post in a conspicuous place upon public buildings and property signs giving notice of approved regulations applicable thereto.

 

4-27-110 REGULATIONS—VIOLATION.
    No person shall violate a regulation applicable to a public building or property when a sign giving notice of such regulation is in place upon such public building or property.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

 

ARTICLE 2. REGULATION OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY
4-27-200 NIGHTTIME ENTRY PROHIBITED.
    No unauthorized person shall enter into or upon or remain in or upon any public building or property owned, occupied or administered by any Federal, State or local governmental agency between the period of thirty (30) minutes after sunset of any day and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise of the following day when appropriate signs are in place upon such building or property giving notice that such building or property is not open to the general public during such period.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 78-054, 11/6/78; Ordinance No. 82-050, 6/21/82)

CHAPTER 4-28 LODGING REGISTRATION
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-28-100 REGISTRATION.
    All hotels, motels, lodging houses, rooming houses and other places or establishments in the City of San Leandro where living rooms or sleeping accommodations are rented shall keep a register in which shall be entered in a legible fashion, the following information: The true names and residence addresses of all persons to be accommodated, the make, type and license number of any automobile, trailer or other vehicle and the state in which such vehicle or vehicles is, or are, registered and the year of registration. The register shall show the day, month and year when such information was entered, and the room or rooms to be occupied by such persons. It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor or lessee of a hotel, motel, loading house, rooming house or other place or establishment in the City of San Leandro where living rooms or sleeping accommodations are rented, to refuse or neglect to comply with the requirements hereinbefore set forth.

 

4-28-105 REQUIRED IDENTIFICATION.
    The person providing the accommodations as specified in Section 4-28-100 shall require identification, in the form of a driver’s license, passport, government-issued identification card or other acceptable proof of identification, to be presented upon registration sufficient to confirm the identities of the person to be accommodated, and shall set forth in the register the type of identification so presented.

 

4-28-110 REGISTER—PERIOD OF RETENTION.
    Such register shall be kept for a period of not less than two (2) years by the person providing the accommodations as specified in Section 4-28-100.

 

4-28-115 REGISTER—INSPECTION.
    Such registries maintained pursuant to this Chapter shall be available for immediate review and inspection upon request by any member of the San Leandro Police Department. Should the owner, manager or other person having management or control not agree to voluntarily produce the guest registry upon receipt of such a request, he or she shall do so upon presentation of a duly executed search warrant authorizing the San Leandro Police Department’s review, inspection, reproduction and/or impoundment of the guest registry. An owner, manager or other person in management or control shall not be in violation of this Chapter for failure to voluntarily produce the guest registry but shall be in violation for failure to do so immediately upon presentation of a duly executed search warrant requiring production.

 

4-28-120 FALSE INFORMATION.
    It shall be unlawful for any guest, roomer, or lodger in any place specified in Section 4-28-100 to use or allow the use of any name other than his or her true name in so registering.

 

4-28-125 POSTING.
    A copy of Sections 4-28-100 through 4-28-120 shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each place specified in Section 4-28-100.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-006, 5/16/16 (Sections 4-28-105, 4-28-115, 4-28-120))

CHAPTER 4-29 REGULATION OF DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT READING MATERIAL
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-29-100 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the definition hereinafter set forth:

    (a)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. “Commercial establishment” shall mean any place of business in which minors are permitted in the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  HARMFUL MATTER. “Harmful matter” shall mean matter taken as a whole, the predominant appeal of which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, as to prurient interest, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks significant literacy, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors. When it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the predominant appeal of the matter shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.

    (c)   MATTER. “Matter” shall mean any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statute or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.

    (d)  PERSON. “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.

    (e)   MINOR. “Minor” shall mean any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-033, 9/30/85; Ordinance No. 97-023, 8/4/97 (Section 4-29-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL
4-29-200 DISPLAY PROHIBITED.
    No person shall display harmful matter in any commercial establishment in the City of San Leandro except as provided herein.

 

4-29-205 ESTABLISHMENT WITH “ADULT” AREAS.
    Harmful matter may be displayed in a commercial establishment in an area set aside and clearly posted for adults only. “Adults only” areas shall be visible from the cash register or sales center of the store. No items regularly and customarily purchased by persons under eighteen (18) years of age shall be located in the vicinity of the “adults only” area, and said harmful matter shall be displayed in such a manner that it is not readily visible to patrons in other areas of the establishment. Minors shall not be permitted to enter an “adults only” area.

 

4-29-210 OPAQUE DISPLAYS.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4-29-205 herein to the contrary, harmful matter may be displayed in an area open to the general public in a commercial establishment only if the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the cover of the matter is not visible. Opaque display units showing only the top two (2) inches of magazine covers shall be deemed to comply with this section.

 

4-29-211 PROHIBITION ON DISPLAY ON PUBLIC RACKS AND IN PUBLIC VENDING MACHINES.
    Harmful matter may not be displayed on racks and in vending machines located in public areas where minors are neither excluded nor prohibited.

 

4-29-215 VIOLATION AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
    Any violations of the provisions of this Chapter are expressly deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation shall be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 1-12.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-033, 9/30/85; Ordinance No. 97-023, 8/4/97 (Sections 4-29-200, 4-29-205, 4-29-210, 4-29-211); Ordinance No. 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 4-29-215))

CHAPTER 4-30 SHOPPING CART IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL
4-30-100 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Street” shall mean a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, cross walk, sidewalk, parks, parking lots, parking areas, and places used by the general public;

    (b)  “Person” shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, and other entity capable of being sued;

    (c)   “Cart” shall mean a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind.

 

4-30-105 CART IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
    Every person who, in connection pith the conduct of a business including but not limited to a food dispensing business, owns or makes any cart available to the public, shall mark or cause the same to be marked and identified conspicuously with the name, address and telephone number of the owner. Such identification shall be in the form of a metal or plastic tag or plate securely fastened to the cart or a cutting or standing on the frame of the cart.

 

4-30-110 REMOVAL FROM SHOPPING ESTABLISHMENT PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person except the owner of the cart or the owner’s agent to remove the cart from the premises of the business that owns or rightfully possesses the cart.

 

4-30-115 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or an agent thereof, to leave or permit to be left, any cart, either owned by him or her or in his or her possession, custody or control, upon any sidewalk, street or other public place, or upon any private property except that of the owner of such cart.

 

4-30-120 REMOVAL BY CITY.
    The City shall remove or cause to be removed any cart found upon any street, other public place or upon any private property except that of the owner of the cart, and shall take same to City property where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of, as hereinafter provided.

 

4-30-125 NOTICE OF REMOVAL AND REDEMPTION.
    Whenever the City shall take any cart containing identification of ownership or right to possession, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such person advising that such cart is held by the City and that the cart may be redeemed within fifteen (15) days upon payment of an impoundment fee established by resolution of the City Council.

 

4-30-130 REDEMPTION BY OWNER—PROOF OF OWNERSHIP—DEFENSE TO ADVERSE CLAIMANT.
    An impounded cart may be redeemed by the owner or the owner’s agent, at any time prior to disposal. The owner or agent of owner shall be entitled to receive the cart upon payment of the impoundment fee. No cart shall be released to a person seeking to redeem, unless proof is submitted establishing to the satisfaction of the City such person’s ownership or right to possession. Any release to a person deemed entitled thereto by the City from the proof submitted, shall be an absolute defense of the City against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto.

 

4-30-135 DISPOSAL BY THE CITY.
    Thirty (30) days after notice to the owner, any unclaimed carts may be disposed of by the City. Carts that are unidentifiable as to ownership may be disposed of by the City thirty (30) days after impounding.

 

4-30-140 LIABILITY.
    Any disposition of such cart made pursuant to this Chapter shall be without any liability of the City to the owner of such cart or other person lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest therein.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 91-025, 12/17/91 (Sections 4-30-100 — 4-30-140))

CHAPTER 4-31 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS AT SKATEBOARD AREA OF THRASHER PARK
4-31-100 SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
    Any person riding a skateboard or in-line skates at the Thrasher Park designated skateboard area shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.

 

4-31-200 VIOLATIONS AN INFRACTION.
    Any person violating the provisions of Section 4-31-100 shall be guilty of an infraction.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 95-016, 9/5/95 (Sections 4-31-100—4-31-200))

CHAPTER 4-32 RENT REVIEW
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
4-32-100 SHORT TITLE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “Rent Review Ordinance.”

 

4-32-105 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   BASE RENT means the rental amount, including any amount paid to the landlord for parking, storage, utilities, water, garbage or any other fee or charge associated with a residential property required to be paid by the tenant to the landlord in the month immediately preceding the effective date of the rent increase.

    (b)  BOARD means the Rent Review Board, as defined in this section.

    (c)   CITY means the City of San Leandro.

    (d)  CITY MANAGER means the City Manager of the City of San Leandro, or designated representative.

    (e)   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR means the Director of the Community Development Department of the City of San Leandro, or designated representative.

    (f)   COUNCIL means the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

    (g)  LANDLORD means any person, partnership, corporation, or other business entity offering for rent or lease any residential property in the City. “Landlord” shall include the agent or representative of the landlord, provided that such agent or representative shall have full authority to answer for the landlord and enter into binding agreements on the landlord’s behalf.

    (h)  PARTY means a person who participates in the rent review program of this Chapter or his or her agent or representative.

    (i)   RATIO UTILITY BILLING SYSTEM means a billing system paid to a third party that allocates the property’s actual utility bill to the tenant based on an occupant factor, square footage factor, or any other similar factors.

 

    (j)   RENT means a fixed periodic compensation paid by a tenant at fixed intervals to a landlord for the possession and use of residential property, including any amount paid to the landlord for parking, storage, utilities, water, garbage, or any other fee or charge associated with the tenancy. Additionally, rent includes costs associated with the initial conversion to a ratio utility billing system.

    (k)  RENT INCREASE means any upward adjustment of the rent from the base rent amount. Rent increase includes costs associated with the initial conversion to a ratio utility billing system.

    (l)   RENT REVIEW BOARD means the board established under Article 4 of Chapter 1-3 of this Code.

    (m) RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means any housing unit offered for rent or lease in the City, provided that such housing unit is in a parcel that contains two (2) or more tenant-occupied housing units, and mobile homes. Mobile homes are subject to this Chapter only if a tenant rents the mobile housing unit itself.

    (n)  TENANT means any person having the legal responsibility for the payment of rent for residential property in the City. “Tenant” shall include the agent or representative of the tenant, provided that such agent or representative shall have full authority to answer for the tenant and enter into binding agreements on the tenant’s behalf.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-08, 4/2/01 (Sections 4-32-100, 4-32-105); Ordinance No. 2002-026, 10/7/02 (Section 4-32-105); Ordinance No. 2016-002, 2/16/16 (Section 4-32-105))

 

ARTICLE 2. NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY OF RENT REVIEW
4-32-200 NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY OF RENT REVIEW REQUIRED.
    In addition to the notice of a rent increase required by Civil Code Section 827(b), and at the time when a landlord provides notice of any rent increase, the landlord shall also provide notice of the availability of the rent review procedure established by this Chapter. The notice of availability of rent review required by Section 4-32-210 shall be provided by the landlord at the time when a landlord provides notice of any rent increase in the three (3) predominant languages spoken in the City. The City Manager or designee shall determine the predominant languages spoken in the City and shall ensure that copies of the notice of availability of rent review required by Section 4-32-210 are made available to landlords by the City in those three (3) languages. Any rent increase accomplished in violation of this Chapter shall be void, and no landlord may take any action to enforce such an invalid rent increase. Any rent increase in violation of this Chapter shall operate as a complete defense to an unlawful detainer action based on failure to pay any illegal rent increase. Any tenant required to pay an illegal rent increase may recover all illegal rent increase amounts actually paid by the tenant.

    If a landlord fails to properly notice a tenant pursuant to this Chapter, the landlord must re-notice the tenant in accordance with this section prior to demanding or accepting any increase in rent.

 

4-32-205 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
    All notices of the availability of rent review shall be in writing, shall provide the name, address and phone number of the landlord and shall be personally delivered to the tenant or posted and mailed to the tenant at the address of the tenant’s residential property by first class mail, postage pre-paid. Service by mail shall be presumed complete within five (5) days of mailing. This presumption may be rebutted by the tenant.

 

4-32-210 TEXT OF NOTICE.
    In addition to all other information provided in the notice of the availability of rent review required by this Chapter, each such notice shall state:

 

    NOTICE: Under Civil Code Section 827(b) a landlord must provide a tenant with thirty (30) days notice prior to a rent increase of ten percent (10%) or less and sixty (60) days notice of a rent increase of greater than ten percent (10%). Under

Title 4, Chapter 32 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, a landlord must at the same time as a notice under Civil Code Section 827(b) and other qualifying rent increases under the Municipal Code, provide this notice of the City’s rent review procedure before demanding or accepting any increase in rent. You are encouraged to contact the owner or manager of your rental unit to discuss the rent increase and any maintenance or repair work that needs to be done in your rental unit. However, if you have received notice of a rent increase that will increase your rent more than seven percent (7%) above the base rent you paid last month or follows one or more prior rent increases within the past twelve (12) months, you may request that the San Leandro Rent Review Board review the increase. Such a request must be submitted in writing within twenty-one (21) calendar days of your receiving notice of the rent increase (or post marked within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt if mailed). You must submit a copy of the Notice of Increase at the same time you submit the Hearing Request. If you request review of the rent increase, you and your landlord will be required to appear before the Board for a hearing on your rent dispute. After hearing from you and your landlord the Board will make a non-binding recommendation for resolution of the rent dispute. To request review of your rent increase, please contact the Board through the Community Development Department of the City of San Leandro, 835 East 14th Street, San Leandro, CA 94577. Under Civil Code Section 1942.5, it is illegal for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant for lawfully and peaceably exercising his or her legal rights.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-08, 4/2/01 (Sections 4-32-200—4-32-210); Ordinance No. 2002-026, 10/7/02 (Section 4-32-210); Ordinance No. 2016-002, 2/16/16 (Sections 4-32-200—4-32-210))

 

 

ARTICLE 3. RENT REVIEW
4-32-300 REQUEST FOR RENT REVIEW.
    A tenant may seek to have a rent dispute heard before the Board when the proposed rent increase raises the rent to an amount more than seven percent (7%) greater than the base rent or follows a prior rent increase imposed within the previous twelve (12) month period. The tenant seeking a rent review must submit the hearing request in writing to the Community Development Director within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the tenant’s receipt of a notice of rent increase. The hearing request must be received by the Community Development Director, or post marked (if submitted by mail) within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt of the notice of rent increase. The request must be accompanied by a copy of the Landlord’s Notice of Increase.

    The Community Development Director shall provide the landlord with a copy of the tenant’s rent review hearing request form, which shall be accompanied by a hearing response form. A landlord must submit a completed hearing response form to the Community Development Director within ten (10) calendar days of the landlord’s receipt of a tenant’s rent review hearing request form. A rent increase shall be void, and the landlord shall be required to properly re-notice the tenant in accordance with Section 4-32-200 of this Code if the landlord does not submit a hearing response form pursuant to this section. The Community Development Director shall provide notice of the requirements of this section in a conspicuous location on the hearing response form.

    The hearing shall be scheduled before the Board within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the hearing request, or as soon thereafter as the hearing may be scheduled.

    A request for rent review shall not delay the effective date of a rent increase. If appropriate, the parties may enter into a mutual private agreement to delay the effective date of a rent increase or reach any other agreement to effectively reimburse rent increases paid by the tenant.

 

4-32-305 NOTICE TO PARTIES.
    After determining that a proposed rent increase meets the criteria for initiation of rent review set forth in Section 4-32-300, the Community Development Director shall schedule a rent review hearing of the rent dispute before the Board. The Community Development Director shall provide the landlord and the tenant notice of the hearing date and location at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The notice to the landlord shall encourage him or her to contact the tenant directly to seek a mutually satisfactory resolution of the rent dispute prior to the Board hearing.

 

4-32-310 HEARING AND DETERMINATION.
    At a hearing of a rent dispute, the Board will afford the landlord and the tenant an opportunity to explain their respective positions. After hearing from both parties, and taking into consideration such factors as the hardship to the tenant, the frequency and amount of prior rent increases, the landlord’s mortgage payments and other costs associated with owning and maintaining the property, the landlord’s interest in earning a reasonable rate of return, and any other factors that may assist the Board in determining a fair resolution to the dispute, the Board will make a recommendation to the parties for the resolution of their dispute. If the parties agree to a resolution proposed by the Board, they may formalize the agreement in a standard form signed by both parties. Neither the City nor the Board shall be a party to such an agreement, nor shall the City or the Board assume any responsibility for enforcement of its terms.

 

4-32-315 CONTINUANCE.
    If the landlord and tenant are unable to reach a resolution of their dispute during a hearing before the Board, the Board may in its discretion continue the hearing to the next scheduled regular meeting or special meeting of the Board and require the parties to return for a second and final Board hearing of their dispute. Whenever the Board continues a hearing of a rent dispute, the Board will provide notice of the continuance to a mailing list of interested organizations that annually submit to the City Clerk a request to be included on such mailing list.

 

4-32-320 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
    If the tenant requesting a rent review hearing appears at a noticed Board hearing, but the landlord who has been given notice of the Board hearing as required by Section 4-32-305 fails to appear before the Board without good cause, the rent increase shall be void, and the landlord may not take any action to enforce such an invalid rent increase. If a tenant who has been given proper notice of a Board hearing as required by Section 4-32-305 of this Code fails to appear before the Board without good cause, or if both the tenant and landlord fail to appear without good cause, the Board shall dismiss the case and the tenant will be barred from subsequently challenging such increase before the Board.

 

4-32-325 RETALIATORY EVICTION.
    Commencement of eviction proceedings against a tenant for exercising his or her rights under this Chapter shall be considered a retaliatory eviction. Under Civil Code Section 1942.5, it is illegal for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant for lawfully and peaceably exercising his or her legal rights.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-08, 4/2/01 (Sections 4-32-300—4-32-320); Ordinance No. 2002-026, 10/7/02 (Sections 4-32-300, 4-32-305, 4-32-320); Ordinance No. 2016-002, 2/16/16 (Sections 4-32-300—4-32-325))

 

ARTICLE 4. CITY MANAGER REVIEW
4-32-400 REFERRAL TO CITY MANAGER.
    If the parties to a rent dispute are unable to mutually agree to a resolution of the dispute before the Board after a first hearing and a second and final continuance hearing, the Board may, in its discretion, refer the rent dispute to the City Manager for review. Whenever the Board recommends that the City Manager review a rent dispute, the Board will provide notice of its action to a mailing list of interested organizations that annually submit to the City Clerk a request to be included on such mailing list. In the event that a landlord and tenant mutually agree to a resolution of their rent dispute prior to review by the City Manager, the rent dispute will no longer be forwarded to the City Manager for review.

 

4-32-405 CONSIDERATION BY CITY MANAGER.
    Upon referral from the Board, the City Manager may request a meeting with the tenant and landlord in an effort to resolve the rent dispute. However, the City Manager shall have no authority to require the tenant and landlord to meet or take any further actions pursuant to this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-08, 4/2/01 (Section 4-32-400); Ordinance No. 2016-002, 2/16/16 (Sections 4-32-400—4-32-405))

 

ARTICLE 5. MISCELLANEOUS
4-32-500 ANNUAL REVIEW.
    The Board shall annually prepare a report to the Council assessing the effectiveness of the rent review program established under this Chapter and recommending changes as may be appropriate.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2001-08, 4/2/01 (Section 4-32-500))

CHAPTER 4-33 CANNABIS DISPENSARY PERMITS
4-33-100 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words or phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall be given the following definitions:

    (a)   “Attorney General Guidelines” shall mean the California Attorney General Guidelines for the Security and Non-diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, issued by the Attorney General’s Office in August 2008, as amended from time to time, which sets regulations intended to ensure the security and non-diversion of marijuana grown for medical use by qualified patients or primary caregivers.

    (b)  “Authorized Invitee” shall mean any individual who is not a member of the dispensary who has been invited to the dispensary by the General Manager or their designee for official business purposes.

    (c)   “Cannabis” or “Marijuana” shall have the same definition as Health and Safety Code Section 11018, as amended from time to time, which defines “cannabis” as all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seeds of the plant incapable of germination.

    (d)  “Cannabis Dispensary” or “Dispensary” shall mean a business or other entity that sells, distributes, dispenses, stores, exchanges, processes, delivers, makes available, transmits and/or gives away cannabis or cannabis-infused products in the City. This includes an establishment that delivers cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale.

    (e)   “City” means the City of San Leandro, and any legislative body granted regulatory authority over dispensary operations by this chapter.

    (f)   “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of San Leandro or designee.

    (g)  “Collective” means any association, affiliation, or establishment jointly owned and operated by its members that facilitates the collaborative efforts of qualified patients and primary caregivers under State law.

    (h)  “Cooperative” means a business organization recognized by the State of California through properly registered articles of incorporation under the Corporations or Food and Agricultural Code that conducts its business for the mutual benefit of its members, as described in the Attorney General Guidelines.

    (i)   “Medical Marijuana” means marijuana authorized in strict compliance with Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5, 11362.7 et seq., as such sections may be amended from time to time. Any references to “medical marijuana” shall also be applicable to cannabis for use by adults, regardless of whether the cannabis is or is not for medicinal purposes.

    (j)   “Parcel of Land” means one piece of real property as identified by the county assessor’s parcel number (APN) that is one contiguous parcel of real property, which is used to identify real property, its boundaries, and all the rights contained therein.

    (k)  “Primary Caregiver” shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, and as may be amended from time to time by the State.

    (l)   “Qualified Patient” shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., and as may be amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. For purposes of this chapter, qualified patient shall include a person with an identification card, as that term is defined by California Health and Safety Code Section et seq.

    (m) “Serious Medical Condition” shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., and as may be amended.

    (n)  “Written Documentation” shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., and as may be amended, and which defines “written documentation” as accurate reproductions of those portions of a patient’s medical records that have been created by the attending physician, that contain the information required by paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.715, and that the patient may submit to a County Health Department or the County’s designee as part of an application for an identification card.

 

4-33-200 DISPENSARY PERMIT REQUIRED AND APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    (a)   Except for hospitals, it is unlawful for any person, corporation, company, entity, owner, operator, collective, cooperative, or association to own, conduct, operate or maintain, or to participate therein, or to cause or to allow to be conducted, operated, or maintained, any dispensary in the City of San Leandro unless there exists a valid dispensary permit in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  The individual possession or cultivation of cannabis for personal use, as well as the usage, distribution, cultivation or processing of cannabis by qualified patients or primary caregivers for medical purposes, including when such group is of three (3) or less individuals, and distributing, cultivating or processing the cannabis from a residential unit or a single non-residential parcel of land must comply with all applicable State laws and City ordinances, including, but not limited to, the Zoning Code, the Building Code, and the Municipal Code.

    (c)   The City shall issue no more than three (3) valid permits for the operation of dispensaries in the City. A dispensary that has been issued a valid City permit prior to January 1, 2019 must be in operation on or before December 31, 2019. Any dispensary in possession of a valid permit that is not in operation on January 1, 2020 shall be automatically and unconditionally revoked without prejudice or recourse.

    (d)  In addition to the requirements specified in Chapter 2-2 related to business licenses, the permit application for a dispensary shall set forth the following information:

    (1)  Unless it is determined by the City that the location will not impact the peace, order and welfare of the public, evidence that the proposed location of such dispensary is not within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school, public library, youth center (serving youth ages eighteen (18) and under), parks and recreation facilities, facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education and another dispensary and five hundred (500) feet from a residential zone. The proposed dispensaries must be located in a commercial or industrial zone, or its equivalent as may be amended, of the City.

    (2)  A complete description of the type, nature and extent of the enterprise to be conducted.

    (3)  A plan of operations that will describe how the dispensary will operate consistent with State law, the provisions of this Chapter, the City’s Municipal and Zoning Codes, and conditions of approval including, but not limited to:

    (i)   Controls to verify cannabis will be dispensed only to qualified patients, primary caregivers, or adults twenty-one (21) years of age or older; and

    (ii)  Controls to acquire, possess, transport and distribute cannabis to and from customers, and plans to ensure cannabis is acquired in compliance with relevant laws and regulations.

    (iii) A security plan, as a separate document, outlining the proposed security arrangements for ensuring the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft and burglary, and employees and customers from robbery. The security plan shall be reviewed by the Police Department and shall be a public record exempt from disclosure pursuant to California Government Code Section 6255(a).

    (iv) Such other information deemed necessary to conduct any investigation or background check of the applicant, and for the City to determine compliance with this Chapter, the City’s Municipal Code and Zoning Code.

    (e)   The City Manager shall designate the investigating official to whom an application shall be referred. In recommending the granting or denying of such permit and in granting or denying the same, such designee shall give particular consideration to the capacity, capitalization, and history of the applicant and any other factors that in the City’s discretion it deems necessary to maintain the peace, order and welfare of the public. The City Manager on his or her own power and in addition to any other conditions of approval imposed by any other City departments, boards, commissions or legislative bodies, may impose any conditions on a dispensary permit he or she deems necessary to maintain the peace, order, and welfare of the public.

    (f)   At the time of submission of a dispensary permit application, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable dispensary permit application fee. The fee amount shall be set by the City Council.

    (g)  The issuance of a dispensary permit shall not be effective until the permit applicant has paid all fees, and received all other permits and approvals required by the City’s ordinances, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, any conditional use permit and building permit.

 

4-33-300 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW AND MUNICIPAL CODE.
    (a)   A dispensary must comply with all applicable State and local laws, policies, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the California Health and Safety Code, the City adopted Building Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Fire Code, the San Leandro Municipal Code, the San Leandro Zoning Code, the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”), and the San Leandro Administrative Code including any and all rules and regulations related to the land use entitlement process, dispensary operations, annual dispensary permit fee, annual business license fee, and the Americans with Disabilities Act in order to be in compliance with the dispensary permit.

    The dispensary must comply with any and all Conditions of Approval imposed upon it pursuant to any land use permit or entitlement granted.

    Failure to comply with the conditions of approval or any conditions imposed upon a dispensary permit by the City Manager, and all applicable local and State laws or regulations, and failure to pay when due all fees may result in the imposition of fines, and suspension or revocation of the dispensary permit after an administrative hearing. The dispensary may also be subject to enforcement through the City’s nuisance abatement process and other administrative enforcement mechanisms, civil action, and criminal prosecution as defined in San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 1-12.

 

4-33-400 RENEWAL OF PERMITS.
    (a)   Dispensary permits must be renewed annually. Permit holders shall contact the City in writing no later than forty-five (45) days before the expiration of the current permit to begin the renewal process. At that time, the dispensary shall submit verification of a current business license, audited financial statements for the previous permit term, and any other requested financial documents or information as required by the San Leandro Municipal Code or the dispensary’s permit.

    As part of the annual renewal process the dispensary shall be inspected by the Building Inspector and Fire Marshal or their designees. Violations of the San Leandro Municipal Code shall be corrected within a reasonable time, as determined by the Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or designee. The dispensary shall provide proof to the City that there are no outstanding violations of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    (b)  A dispensary permit will not be renewed without payment of the annual renewal fee, or any other fees on such operations established by the City Council.

 

4-33-500 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
    (a)   Operations. A dispensary shall operate in conformance with the following minimum standards, and such standards shall be deemed to be part of the conditions of approval on the dispensary’s permit to ensure that its operation is in compliance with California law and this Municipal Code, and to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the dispensary on the public health, safety, and welfare.

    (1)  A dispensary shall provide the City, the Chief of Police, and all neighbors located within fifty (50) feet of the premises with the name, phone number, facsimile number and email address of an on-site community relations staff person that can be contacted related to dispensary issues, twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.

    (2)  Cannabis shall only be distributed by a dispensary at the property identified and approved as the location for the dispensary on the dispensary’s conditional use permit.

    (3)  A dispensary shall only provide, distribute, dispense, or give cannabis to qualified patients, primary caregivers, or adults who are twenty-one (21) years of age or older. It is within the City’s discretion to limit the number of members allowed per dispensary.

    (4)  Only qualified patients, caregivers, adult members who are twenty-one (21) years of age or older, or authorized invitees shall be allowed inside of a dispensary. The dispensary shall comply with all occupancy rules imposed by State law or the Fire Marshal. While inside of the dispensary authorized invitees shall wear a badge clearly indicating that they are a guest, and not a member of the dispensary. The dispensary shall not dispense cannabis to an authorized invitee. The dispensary shall keep a record of the name and identification number of all authorized invitees who have visited the dispensary, a log of which shall be shared with the City every three (3) months and/or made immediately available to the City Manager or designee upon request.

    (5)  Retail sales of medical marijuana or cannabis for adult use that violate California law or this Chapter are expressly prohibited.

    (6)  A dispensary may only dispense, store, or transport cannabis in aggregate amounts tied to its membership. A dispensary may possess no more than eight (8) ounces of dried cannabis per qualified patient or caregiver, and maintain no more than six (6) mature and twelve (12) immature cannabis plants per qualified patient. However, if a qualified patient or primary caregiver has a doctor’s recommendation that the above quantity does not meet the qualified patient’s needs, the qualified patient or primary caregiver may possess an amount of cannabis consistent with the patient’s needs. For purposes of determining the quantity of marijuana, only the dried mature processed flowers of female cannabis plants or the plants’ conversion shall be considered.

    (7)  A dispensary may operate no later than 8:00 p.m. daily unless it is determined by the City that a later hour will not affect public health, safety, or welfare. A dispensary is prohibited from operating between the hours that the City determines the dispensary should close and 9:00 a.m. the next ensuing day, unless modified by the City.

    (8)  Dispensaries shall disclose the percentage level of delta-9 (trans) tetrahydracannabinol, cannabidiol, and cannabinol in cannabis or products containing cannabis to qualified patients or twenty-one (21) years of age or older adult customers before providing cannabis.

    (9)  Dispensaries shall follow the requirements of State law and/or the directions of the City Manager or designee regarding any cannabis found to be non-compliant with testing standards. These instructions extend to any cannabis found to be unsafe on the basis of such testing results, or to the dispensary’s operations and practices generally.

    (10) Representative samples of cannabis distributed by a collective or cooperative shall be analyzed by an independent laboratory, if and when such is available, to ensure it is free of harmful pesticides and other contaminants regulated by local,  State or Federal regulatory statutory standards. Any cannabis from which the representative sample tested positive for a harmful pesticide or other contaminant at a level that exceeds the local,  State or Federal regulatory or statutory standards shall be destroyed forthwith. A dispensary shall keep and maintain current records of samples tested.

    (11)   Any cannabis provided to members, patients, or customers shall be properly labeled in strict compliance with State and local laws, regulations and policies.

    (12)   Dispensaries shall not allow cannabis to be smoked, ingested or otherwise consumed on the premises, unless explicitly authorized by the City. The term premises includes the actual building, as well as any accessory structures, parking areas, or other immediately surrounding areas.

    (13)   Dispensaries shall not hold or maintain a license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell alcoholic beverages, or operate a business that sells alcoholic beverages. Restaurants, cafes or lounges shall not be operated on the same premises as the dispensary unless explicitly authorized by the City of San Leandro.

    (14)   A dispensary shall post a copy of the business license certificate issued by the City’s Finance Department and a copy of the cannabis dispensary permit issued by the City in a conspicuous place on the premises.

    (15)   The regulation of edible cannabis products shall be as follows:

    If the dispensary chooses to manufacture edibles, it shall do so according to the rules promulgated by the Medicinal and Adult-Use Regulation and Safety Act or other relevant State laws, as periodically amended by the State Legislature and interpreted by the Courts and/or relevant regulatory agencies. Any edibles sold at the dispensary shall be manufactured and labeled according to the safety, labelling, and manufacturing guidelines established by the State as periodically amended by the Legislature and/or interpreted by the Courts and associated regulatory agencies. In addition, the following local regulations governing edible cannabis products shall apply until such time as relevant State regulations are adopted and in effect:

    (i)   No edible cannabis products requiring refrigeration or hot-holding shall be manufactured for sale or distribution at a dispensary, due to the potential for foodborne illness. Exemptions may be granted by the City, in consultation with the Alameda County Department of Public Health (DPH) on a case-by-case basis. For such exempted edible cannabis products, DPH may require a HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points) plan before approving the distribution of such cannabis products at a dispensary. Such products requiring a HACCP plan may include ice cream and other dairy products.

    (ii)  Baked medicinal products (i.e. brownies, bars, cookies, cakes), tinctures and other non-refrigerated type items are acceptable for manufacture and sale at a dispensary.

    (iii) All items shall be individually wrapped at the original point of preparation. Labeling must include a warning if nuts or other known allergens are used, and must include the total weight (in ounces or grams) of cannabis in the package. A warning that the item is a medication and not a food must be distinctly and clearly legible on the front of the package. The package label must have a warning clearly legible emphasizing that the product is to be kept away from children. The label must also state that the product contains cannabis, and must specify the date of manufacture.

    (iv) Packaging that makes the product attractive to children or imitates candy is not allowed. Any edible cannabis product that is made to resemble a typical food product (i.e. brownie, cake) must be in a properly labeled opaque (non see-through) package before it leaves the dispensary. Deliveries must be in properly labeled opaque packages when delivered to a patient.

    (v)  Individuals conducting the manufacturing or sale of products shall thoroughly wash their hands before commencing production and before handling the finished product. Gloves must be worn when packaging edible cannabis products.

    (vi) In order to reduce the likelihood of foodborne disease transmission, individuals who are suffering from symptoms associated with acute gastrointestinal illness or are known to be infected with a communicable disease that is transmissible through foodstuffs are prohibited from preparing edible cannabis products until they are free of that illness or disease, or are incapable of transmitting the illness or disease through foodstuffs. Anyone who has sores or cuts on their hands must use gloves when preparing and handling edible cannabis products.

    (vii) Edible cannabis products for sale or distribution at a dispensary must have been prepared by a member of that dispensary. No non-member edible cannabis products are allowed for sale or distribution at a dispensary.

    (viii)  A patient or primary caregiver who produces edible cannabis products that are sold at more than one dispensary in the City or Alameda County must become a State certified food handler. If more than one person is involved in producing edible cannabis products at one facility, only one person needs to be certified. The valid certificate number of the member who has prepared the edible cannabis product must be on record at the dispensary where the product is sold or distributed, and a copy of the certificate kept either on-site, or made available during inspections if kept off-site. The State certification number of the owner or operator of the dispensary, upon issuance by the State, shall be kept on record at the dispensary and made available for inspection upon request.

    (16) Prior to employment, the employee members must be fingerprinted (through a LiveScan) for the purpose of conducting a background check. The purpose is to determine whether the employee has been convicted or plead guilty, plead for or was granted entry into a diversion program in lieu of conviction for, or plead nolo contendre to the following criminal offenses, or their equivalent if arising out of State:

    (i)   Health and Safety Code Sections 11350 et al (pertaining to controlled substances, with the exception of marijuana related offenses)

    (ii)  Penal Code Section 187 (homicide)

    (iii) Penal Code Section 207 (kidnapping)

    (iv) Penal Code Section 211 (robbery)

    (v)  Penal Code Sections 240-248 (assault & battery)

    (vi) Penal Code Section 261 (rape)

    (vii) Penal Code Section 314 (indecent exposure)

    (viii)  Penal Code Section 450 (arson)

    (ix) Penal Code Sections 458-464 (burglary)

    (x)  Penal Code Sections 470-483.5 (forgery)

    (xi) Penal Code Sections 484-502.9 (larceny)

    (xii) Penal Code Sections 503-515 (embezzlement)

    The employee applicant must contact the Chief of Police for information related to the processing and cost of the fingerprinting, and any costs must be paid for in advance by the employee applicant. The background check shall review the last five (5) years of the employee applicant’s criminal history. If the background investigation determines the employee has been convicted of one of the above offenses, the dispensary shall no longer employ the member as an employee.

    (b)  Recordkeeping. The dispensary shall maintain records of its members using the State of California Medical Marijuana Identification Card number issued by the County or the County’s designee, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., or a copy of a written doctor’s prescription or recommendation, or other government-issued identification as a protection for the confidentiality of the cardholders. The dispensary shall track when members’ medical marijuana recommendations and/or identification cards expire and enforce conditions of membership. The dispensary shall maintain member records in a manner to protect confidential information in the records if the records contain information protected by applicable law, including, but not limited to, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and Public Law 104-191. A dispensary shall exclude members or customers who are caught diverting cannabis out of the licensed process. All membership records shall be maintained on site.

    (1)  A dispensary shall, by using the patient or caregiver’s identification number, or by other means or methods approved by the City, keep an accurate account of the number of customers to the dispensary each month, and also for the entire permit year.

    (2)  Within thirty (30) days of the end of a calendar quarter, the dispensary shall provide the City a count of the total number of customers the dispensary or customers and the number of dispensary visits by members or customers during the previous calendar quarter.

    (3)  Within thirty (30) days of the end of the calendar quarter, the dispensary shall provide the City, upon request, a listing of the cannabis products for sale during the previous calendar quarter, the prices of such products, and the end of quarter quantity on hand, listed in the applicable units, for each product.

    (4)  The dispensary shall keep accurate records, follow accepted cash handling practices and maintain a general ledger of cash transactions. The dispensary shall maintain records of all members’ contribution of labor, resources or money to the dispensary.

    (5)  The dispensary shall allow the City or the City’s designated agent to access the books, records, accounts and all data relevant to its operations for purposes of conducting an audit or examination to determine compliance with the Municipal Code, Administrative Regulations, conditions of approval, and applicable laws. Books, records, accounts and all relevant data shall be produced no later than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the City’s request.

    (6)  The dispensary shall maintain a log of all customer complaints and shall make the log available to the City upon request. The log shall contain at a minimum the date of the complaint, in the case of a member or customer the complainant’s identification number or reference to his or her written recommendation, the nature of the complaint, and the action taken by the dispensary to address the complaint.

    (c)   Facilities.

    (1)  A dispensary must be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from a public or private school, public library, youth center (serving youth ages eighteen (18) and under), parks and recreation facilities, facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education, and five hundred (500) feet from a residential zone.

    (2)  The dispensary shall not permit any breach of peace inside of the dispensary or any disturbance of public order or decorum by any tumultuous, riotous or disorderly conduct.

    (3)  The City may impose dispensary facility size and height conditions to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of surrounding properties.

    (4)  The dispensary shall be designed with sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that the noise generated inside the dispensary is not audible on the premises, beyond that of normal commercial offices, or public rights-of-way, or any other building or other separate unit within the same building as the dispensary.

    (5)  The dispensary shall be designed to provide sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that any odor generated inside the dispensary is not detected outside the building, on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the dispensary, if the use only occupies a portion of a building.

    (6)  The dispensary shall provide litter removal services twice each operating day on and in front of the premises and on public sidewalks within one hundred (100) feet of the dispensary.

    (d)  Security.

    (1)  High definition security cameras or other technology that produces high resolution video and recording capabilities shall be installed and maintained in good condition, and the camera and recording system must be of adequate quality, color rendition and resolution to allow the identification of an individual. The cameras shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days per week, and shall cover the marijuana dispensing areas, storage areas, all doors and windows to the dispensary, parking areas and other areas as determined by the Chief of Police. The recordings shall be maintained at the dispensary property for a period of fifteen (15) days. An additional forty-five (45) days of records shall either be maintained physically on site or may instead be stored offsite so long as such records are made available electronically within two (2) hours upon request by the City for purposes of criminal investigation.

    (2)  The dispensary shall be alarmed with a centrally-monitored fire and burglar alarm system, and monitored by an alarm company properly licensed by the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs Bureau of Security and Investigative Services in accordance with California Business and Professions Code Section 7590 et seq., and whose agents are properly licensed and registered under applicable law.

    (3)  During business hours, the dispensary shall provide a minimum of two (2) security guards duly licensed by the State of California, Department of Consumer Affairs, subject to modification as may be authorized by the San Leandro Police Department. Each security guard shall possess a “security guard card” at all times, and shall not possess firearms or tasers.

    (4)  Security guard duties shall include, but are not limited to, ensuring no person smokes any substance within twenty-five (25) feet of any building entrance, exit, window and air intake vent.

    (5)  The dispensary shall direct its security guards to monitor the outside of the premises for loitering and unlawful sale of cannabis by members. Security guards shall be directed to report to the dispensary all unlawful sales of cannabis by members. The dispensary shall immediately cease providing cannabis to the customer, and make a report within twenty-four (24) hours to the Police Department. The dispensary shall keep a record of all incidents where members unlawfully sold or provided marijuana. The dispensary shall inform patients, primary caregivers and customers about this provision and remind them that it is unlawful for them to sell cannabis in violation of State law.

    (6)  If required by building code or for security as determined by the Police Department, windows and roof hatches at the property shall be secured so as to prevent unauthorized entry or equipped with latches that may be released quickly from the inside to allow exit in the event of an emergency, where required by fire prevention or building code regulations.

    (7)  The dispensary shall maintain adequate exterior lighting in parking areas.

    (e)   Signage.

    (1)  Exterior signage for a dispensary shall be limited to the provisions applicable to commercial properties as outlined in the San Leandro Zoning Code, Article 18, Section 4-1806: “Regulations for On-Premises Signs.”

    (2)  The dispensary shall, prior to issuance of any occupancy permit, post and thereafter maintain signs inside the dispensary where they may be easily read by members. Each sign shall be white with black lettering, and shall comply with the following regulations regarding text, size and content:

 

Sign 1: Font size at least one inch; Overall size at least eighteen (18) inches by thirty-three (33) inches.

 

NOTICE

YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO HAVE YOUR PRODUCT REWEIGHED AND SUPPLEMENTED IF IT IS UNDER THE STATED WEIGHT AT THE TIME OF PURCHASE.

 

IF YOU DO NOT HAVE A VALID STATE OF CALIFORNIA IDENTIFICATION CARD ISSUED BY ALAMEDA COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT, THIS DISPENSARY MUST CONFIRM YOUR MEDICAL NEED FOR CANNABIS, OR SHALL CONFIRM THAT YOU ARE AN ADULT 21 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER. IF YOU HAVE A VALID IDENTIFICATION CARD, YOU SHOULD NOT BE ASKED FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, UNLESS OTHER HEALTHCARE SERVICES ARE BEING PROVIDED.

 

Sign 2: Font size at least one inch; Overall size at least eighteen (18) inches by thirty-three (33) inches.

 

TO REGISTER COMPLAINTS ABOUT THIS DISPENSARY PLEASE CONTACT ________ ______________________.

Sign 3: Font size at least one inch; Overall size at least twenty-three (23) inches by thirty-two (32) inches.

 

THE DIVERSION OF CANNABIS OUTSIDE OF PERMITTED PURPOSES IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW.

 

Sign 4: Font size at least one inch.

 

THE USE OF MARIJUANA MAY IMPAIR A PERSON’S ABILITY TO DRIVE A MOTOR VEHICLE, OPERATE HEAVY MACHINERY, OR RIDE A BICYCLE.

 

Sign 5: Font size at least one inch.

 

LOITERING AT THE LOCATION OF A CANNABIS DISPENSARY FOR AN ILLEGAL PURPOSE IS PROHIBITED BY CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE SECTION 647(h).

 

Sign 6: Font size at least one inch.

 

THIS CANNABIS DISPENSARY HAS RECEIVED A PERMIT TO OPERATE FROM THE CITY OF SAN LEANDRO, A COPY OF WHICH SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION UPON REQUEST

 

Sign 7. Font size at least one inch.

 

PATIENTS ARE PROHIBITED FROM ENTERING EMPLOYEE-ONLY AREAS

 

4-33-600 SELLER’S PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
    The State of California has determined that marijuana transactions are subject to sales tax, subject to certain specific exemptions, and those engaging in transactions involving cannabis must obtain permit(s) from the State. Such permit(s) shall be conspicuously displayed at the dispensary. Failure to maintain any required State permits is grounds for revocation of the dispensary permit.

4-33-700 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND APPEALS.
    For suspensions or revocations of dispensary permits, the City shall follow the procedures set forth in San Leandro Zoning Code Section 5-2906, unless the suspension shall be effective immediately by order of the City Manager or designee pursuant to Section 4-33-900 of the Municipal Code.

 

4-33-800 PROHIBITED OPERATIONS—NONCONFORMING USE AND IMMEDIATE SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
    All dispensaries in violation of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq. and 11362.5 et seq., this Chapter, or any other applicable State law are expressly prohibited. It is unlawful for any dispensary in the City, or any agent, employee or representative of such dispensary to permit any breach of peace therein or any disturbance of public order or decorum by any tumultuous, riotous or disorderly conduct on the premises of the dispensary, or to violate The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act or any other relevant State law, or this Chapter. Any person arrested for violation of law, or acts expressly prohibited herein while upon, inside, or within ten (10) feet of the premises shall be just cause for immediate suspension of the dispensary permit by the City Manager until such time that a hearing in accordance with San Leandro Zoning Code Section 5-2906 is held, and a final decision made.

    No use which purports to have distributed cannabis prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of the San Leandro Zoning Code, the San Leandro Municipal Code, or any other local ordinance, rule or regulation, and such use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status.

 

4-33-900 LIABILITY.
    To the fullest extent permitted by law, any actions taken by a public officer or employee under the provisions of this Chapter shall not become a personal liability of any public officer or employee of the City of San Leandro.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2013-020, 12/2/13 (Sections 4-33-100—4-33-900); Ordinance No. 2016-007, 6/20/16 (Sections 4-33-100—4-33-900); Ordinance No. 2016-013, 10/3/16 (Sections 4-33-100—4-33-900); Ordinance No. 2019-004, 4/1/19 (Sections 4-33-100—4-33-900))

CHAPTER 4-34 MOBILE FOOD VENDING
4-34-100 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Mobile food vendor” shall mean a person who sells, serves or offers for sale cooked or cold, prepackaged or prepared food for human consumption from a mobile food vending unit(s) parked or located on private property, public property or within the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, streets and roads. A mobile food vendor may own and operate more than one mobile food vending unit. Mobile ice cream vendors shall be considered mobile food vendors except where otherwise stated and shall have additional requirements as specified pursuant to Section 4-34-500 of this Chapter.

    (b)  “Mobile food vending unit” or “food truck” shall mean any motorized vehicle, trailer vehicle, or piece of vending equipment moved, propelled, or operated by a bicycle, designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which only food and beverages are sold, served free or sampled, displayed or offered for sale. Ice cream trucks shall be considered mobile food vending units except where otherwise stated and shall have additional requirements as specified pursuant to Section 4-34-500 of this Chapter.

    (c)   “Mobile ice cream vendor” shall mean any person engaged in the mobile food vending of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections or novelties commonly known as ice cream, prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods or soft drinks.

    (d)  “Ice cream truck” shall mean any motor vehicle, or trailer attached to a motorized vehicle engaged in the curbside vending or sale of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections, or novelties commonly known as ice cream, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods, or soft drinks.

    (e)   “Pushcart” shall mean a piece of vending equipment which is intended to store all materials and merchandise related to vending activity, and is easily moved by a person. It shall not mean a piece of vending equipment moved, propelled, or operated by a bicycle.

    (f)   “Trailer” shall mean any non-motorized vehicle which is attached to a motorized vehicle.

    (g)  “Handcart” shall mean a cart drawn or pushed by hand.

    (h)  “Dolly” shall mean a platform on a roller or on wheels or coasters used to move objects.

 

4-34-150 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   Deliveries. This Chapter does not apply to any person engaged in delivering previously ordered food from or to any store including grocery stores, fixed place of business or residence.

    (b)  Community Events and Other Entitlements. Any mobile food vendor included in an event that is sponsored by the City or which has been authorized by the City through a special event, temporary use or outdoor facilities permit pursuant to the San Leandro Zoning Code, lease, agreement, or other entitlements issued by the City, may be subject to additional requirements pursuant to the terms or conditions of such authorization. A business license, current and valid general commercial and automobile liability insurance coverage, and an Alameda County Environmental Health Department Permit are required for each mobile food vending unit.

    (c)   Public, Private Property and Right-of-Way. This Chapter shall apply to mobile food vendors and mobile food vending units operating on public property, private property and in the public right-of-way unless otherwise permitted in subsection (b) of this section.

 

4-34-200 PROHIBITIONS.
    (a)   No person shall vend food from or locate a pushcart, handcart or dolly within the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  No person shall sell, serve, or offer for sale cooked or cold, prepackaged or prepared food for human consumption from motorized or non-motorized vehicles other than those permitted by the Alameda County Environmental Health Department, California Health and Safety Code Section 114381 and in compliance with this Chapter.

    (c)   Mobile food vendors shall not conduct business operations on privately owned property within single-family zoning districts or developments unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this Chapter.

    (d)  No permit issued by the City for the purpose of mobile food vending may be transferred or assigned to another mobile food vendor or mobile vending unit.

 

4-34-250 MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT REQUIRED—APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of mobile food vending within the City of San Leandro without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided herein.

    (b)  All new and existing mobile food vendors shall obtain a mobile food vending permit for operation at any location within the City of San Leandro. A mobile food vending permit is required for each mobile food vending unit. All applicants must execute an application in writing on a form furnished by the Director of Finance. In order to obtain a mobile food vending permit, mobile food vendors must provide the following:

    (1)  Proof of a valid Alameda County Environmental Health Department Permit.

    (2)  A route map or written description showing the proposed route(s) and location(s) for each mobile food vending unit, which shall be updated annually at the time of business license renewal. Route and location changes before the annual business license renewal must be submitted by a mobile food vendor, which shall become an addendum to the original permit.

    (3)  A copy of the mobile food vendor’s valid California driver’s license as well as a valid California driver’s license for any person that will operate the mobile food vending unit.

    (4)  Where applicable, a valid California Department of Motor Vehicles registration certificate.

    (5)  Proof of the following insurance requirements maintained during the term of the permit.

    (i)   General Liability Insurance. One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage.

    (ii)  Automobile Liability. One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident. Mobile food vending units moved, propelled, or operated by bicycle are exempt from the automobile liability coverage requirement.

    (iii) Indemnification and Hold Harmless. Mobile food vendors shall be responsible for all liability for personal injury or property damage which may result from their activities under the permit, or proximately caused by failure on their part to perform obligations under said permit. If any claim or such liability is made against the City, its officers, or employees, the mobile food vendor shall indemnify, defend and hold them and each of them harmless from any loss, liability, damage, claims, expenses or cost sustained by any person or property including any claim based on the active or passive negligence of the City, its officers, volunteers or employees, insofar as permitted by law.

    (iv) The certificates of insurance, the endorsement naming the City as an additional insured, and the coverage amounts must be verified by the Finance Department before the issuance of a mobile food vending permit.

    (6)  Any supplementary information requested by the City Manager or designee as reasonably necessary to determine whether to approve or deny the mobile food vending permit application.

    (7)  Mobile food vendors and mobile ice cream vendors shall pay the prescribed mobile food vending permit fee approved by the City Council.

 

4-34-300 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR PRIVATE, PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY.
    (a)   Each mobile food vending unit shall display a current business license and Alameda County Health Department permit in plain view of customers and any licensing agencies.

    (b)  Each mobile food vending unit shall maintain a valid Alameda County Health Department permit at all times. If the health permit expires, or is suspended or revoked, then all food sales shall cease until the health permit is reinstated.

    (c)   Mobile food vending units shall meet all state and federal requirements, including any related to licensing and registration.

    (d)  Mobile food vending units shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, electricity, water, and telecommunications, unless exceptions are granted pursuant to appropriate permits approved by City departments, including, but not limited to, the Building and Safety Services Division and the Fire Department.

    (e)   Mobile food vending units shall be maintained in movable condition at all times.

    (f)   Mobile food vendors shall comply with the following:

    (1)  Have at least one clearly designated waste container within two (2) feet of the mobile vending unit while also maintaining a minimum four (4) foot clearance on sidewalks for pedestrian accessibility.

    (2)  No mobile food vendor shall throw, deposit, discharge, leave or permit to be thrown, deposited, discharged, or left, any fat, oil, grease, refuse, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structure, or upon any public or private lot or land in the City. Mobile food vendors shall not dispose or allow the disposal of any generated waste, without written approval, in any public or private waste container other than the waste container under the control of the mobile food vendor.

    (g)  No part of the vehicle, furniture, or other equipment related to the vending operation may encroach onto the public sidewalk. Mobile food vendors are responsible for managing customer queuing, and ensuring pedestrian accessibility is maintained.

    (h)  Mobile food vendors shall not engage in alcohol sales or service unless permitted by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

    (i)   All mobile food vendors, mobile food vending units and anyone acting or working on his or her behalf shall comply with Section 4-1-1100 Noise Ordinance of this Code. Any exception shall be provided in accordance with Section 4-1-1120 Noise Ordinance Exemptions of this Code.

 

4-34-350 ADDITIONAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
    (a)   Property Owner Written Permission Required. Mobile food vendors shall have in their possession at all times the property owner’s written permission to operate on the property. The written authorization shall describe the approved location and operation schedule.

    (b)  Access. Vendors shall not occupy any paved area required for loading, circulation or fire access.

    (c)   Furniture. Tables, chairs and shade structures may be allowed in conjunction with mobile food vending units if they occupy excess parking spaces or areas not required for loading, circulation or fire access, and are removed daily after use. Tables and chairs may be on turf or mulched areas provided that precautions are taken or improvements are installed to protect and maintain landscaped areas.

    (d)  Capacity. Up to three mobile food vending units may be on one parcel of property at a time as long as each individual mobile food vending unit is in compliance with the requirements of this Code. Additional mobile food vending units may be permitted through a City approved or sponsored special event, temporary use or outdoor facilities permit issued pursuant to the San Leandro Zoning Code provided that each individual mobile food vending unit complies with the requirements of this Code.

 

4-34-400 HOURS OF OPERATION.
    Mobile food vending on private property, City-owned property or rights-of-way shall not be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise permitted by a temporary use permit, outdoor facilities permit, or special event permit approved by the City, or other zoning entitlement or right.

 

4-34-450 PERMITTED LOCATIONS AND SEPARATIONS.
    Mobile food vending units shall operate in the zoning districts that permit such business activity pursuant to Part II of the Zoning Code and shall comply with the following restrictions:

    (a)   Mobile food vendors do not have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall they be permitted a stationary location, unless otherwise provided, or be permitted to operate in any congested area where their operations might impede or inconvenience the public.

    (b)  Mobile food vending units shall not be located within any required vision triangles or within fifteen (15) feet of any curb return or driveway.

    (c)   In the right-of-way, mobile food vending units shall not park for more than five (5) hours in any particular location, nor shall any mobile food vending unit park in violation of any section of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    (d)  Regardless of the length of time parked in the right-of-way, no mobile food vending unit shall park within five hundred (500) feet, as measured in any direction, of any area where it was previously parked at the beginning of the five (5) hour period, within any eighteen (18) hour period.

    (e)   Mobile food vending units shall be separated from the following land uses or activities:

    (1)  Three hundred (300) feet from the property line of any active full service restaurant, café, delicatessen or fast food (large and small) establishment.

    (2)  Three hundred (300) feet from any community event or other entitlement, authorized pursuant to Section 4-34-150(b), during the hours of the community event or other entitlement operation.

    (3)  Five hundred (500) feet from the property line of a primary or secondary school during school hours, and one-half hour prior to the start of the school day and one-half hour after the end of the school day.

    (4)  Notwithstanding the separations above, a mobile food vending unit may operate closer to the land uses or business activities specified in this subsection if the mobile food vendor obtains written consent from each applicable restaurant owner, public or private school, community event or entitlement holder indicating that he or she has no objections to the proposed mobile food vending unit operating within the minimum separation. The City may overrule such written consents if the City finds in writing that the close proximity of the mobile food vending unit(s) creates overriding adverse impacts on parking and traffic circulation within the applicable minimum distance separations.

    (f)   The separation shall be measured from the nearest point of the mobile food vending unit to the nearest point of the subject land use.

 

4-34-500 MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDOR SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.
    (a)   Mobile ice cream vendors shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter and the following supplemental requirements. If there is a conflict between any other regulations applying to a mobile food vending unit, the requirements in this Chapter shall take precedence to the requirements applicable to mobile ice cream vendors or trucks:

    (1)  The fingerprints of the mobile ice cream vendor and any employees shall be provided in the initial application for a mobile food vending permit, for renewals, and every even numbered year thereafter;

    (2)  A statement shall be provided in the initial application for a mobile food vending permit, for renewals, and every even numbered year thereafter, as to whether or not the mobile ice cream vendor or any employees have been convicted of any crime, including a violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed; and

    (3)  No mobile ice cream vendor shall dispense any item from an ice cream truck parked or stopped within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of a primary or secondary school anytime during school hours, one-half hour prior to the start of the school day and one-half hour after the end of the school day.

    (4)  A mobile food vending permit may be denied or revoked if the mobile ice cream vendor or any employees have been convicted of any offense involving conduct which requires registration pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code (the California Sex Offender Registration Act) or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have required registration pursuant to the California Sex Offender Registration Act if committed within the State of California.

 

4-34-550 INSPECTIONS.
    Mobile food vendors and their respective employees shall provide licensing and inspection agencies with a copy of a valid San Leandro mobile food vending permit/business license and Alameda County Environmental Health Department permit upon request. Mobile food vendors shall allow representatives of the City to enter and inspect their mobile food vending units any time the mobile food vending unit is operating within the City for the purpose of verifying compliance with this Code.

 

4-34-600 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, APPEALS AND PROCEDURE.
    (a)   Any mobile food vending permit may be suspended by the City Manager, or designee, for any of the following reasons:

    (1)  False or misleading information supplied by the mobile food vendor upon which the mobile food vending permit was issued.

    (2)  A finding that the issuance of the mobile food vending permit or continued operation under the mobile food vending permit presents a threat to public health or safety.

    (b)  The process and procedures for revocation of mobile food vending permits issued pursuant to this Chapter, and appeals of mobile food vending permits that are revoked, shall follow the same procedures as set forth in Article 4 of Chapter 2-2 of this Code.

 

4-34-650 VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Removal and Relocation. The City Manager, or designee, may order the removal or relocation of a mobile food vending unit on public property, private property or rights-of-way whenever it appears that the activities are having an adverse impact on the use of the property, neighboring properties or roadways, including blocking the view of a business frontage or main entrance to the business from a roadway, traffic, circulation, parking availability, noise, trash, or other reasons related to public health or safety.

    (b)  Violations. Any mobile food vending unit that is located, operated, or maintained in a manner that impedes vehicular and pedestrian circulation or that creates a hazard to life or property, or any condition or act in violation of this Chapter or any provision of applicable State or Federal law, is expressly deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, and such violation may be abated by any duly authorized police officer of the City of San Leandro in any of the following manners:

    (1)  Citations—Violations. Pursuant to Chapter 1-12 of this Code.

    (2)  Authority to Tow. Removing or causing removal of any mobile food vending unit from any street within the City of San Leandro when such mobile food vending unit is operating in violation of this Chapter. The vehicle shall be removed to a tow yard.

    (i)   Payment of Charges. The owner or person having the right to possession of any mobile food vending unit removed pursuant to this Chapter shall pay all such removal, towing and storage charges before he or she shall be entitled to regain possession of such vehicle.

    (ii)  Food Spoilage and Property Loss. The City shall not be responsible for food spoilage or property loss that results from the removal, towing and storage of a mobile food vending unit pursuant to this Chapter.

    (3)  Suspension. Any mobile food vending permit issued under this Chapter may be suspended pending hearing and for a period not exceeding ten (10) days whenever any duly authorized police officer of the City of San Leandro has issued a notice of hearing for revocation of permit. Any such suspension shall terminate upon its expiration date or upon the rendering of a decision on the question of revocation, whichever shall occur first. No mobile food vending unit shall operate in the City of San Leandro under a mobile food vending permit during the time the permit is suspended pending the hearing.

    (4)  Violations may also result in revocation of applicant’s business license pursuant to Section 2-2-440 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-008, 6/16/14 (Sections 4-34-100—4-34-650); Ordinance No. 2015-009, 7/20/15 (Sections 4-34-100, 4-34-250))

CHAPTER 4-35 MINIMUM WAGE
4-35-100 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “Minimum Wage Ordinance.”

    The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare. It does this by requiring that employees are compensated by their employers or respective subcontractors in such a manner as to enable and facilitate their individual self-reliance within the City of San Leandro.

 

4-35-200 AUTHORITY.
    This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers vested in the City of San Leandro under the laws and Constitution of the State of California including, but not limited to, the police powers vested in the City pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and Section 1205(b) of the California Labor Law.

 

4-35-300 DEFINITIONS.
    The following terms shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   “City” shall mean the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  “Department” shall mean the Department of Finance or other City department or agency as the City Manager may designate.

    (c)   “Employee” shall mean any person who:

    (1)  In a calendar week performs at least two (2) hours of work for an employer within the geographic boundaries of the City; and

    (2)  Qualifies as an employee entitled to payment of a minimum wage from any employer under the California minimum wage law, as provided under Section 1197 of the California Labor Code and wage orders published by the California Industrial Welfare Commission, or is a participant in a Welfare-to-Work Program.

    (d)  “Employer” shall mean any person receiving or holding a business license under Chapter 2-2 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, or any person, including corporate officers or executives, as defined in Section 18 of the California Labor Code, who directly or indirectly through any other person, including through the services of a temporary employment agency, staffing agency, subcontractor or similar entity, employs or exercises control over the wages, hours or working conditions of any employee.

    (e)   “Minimum Wage” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 4-35-400 of this Chapter.

    (f)   “Nonprofit Corporation” shall mean a nonprofit corporation, duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the laws of the jurisdiction of its incorporation and (if a foreign corporation) in good standing under the laws of the State of California, which corporation has established and maintains valid nonprofit status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and all rules and regulations promulgated under such Section, or any non-profit educational organization qualified under Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (g)  “Welfare-to-Work Program” shall mean the CalWORKS Program, County Adult Assistance Program (CAAP) that includes the Personal Assisted Employment Services (PAES) Program, and General Assistance Program, and any successor programs that are substantially similar to them.

 

4-35-400 MINIMUM WAGE.
    (a)   Employers shall pay employees no less than the minimum wage set forth in this section for each hour worked within the geographic boundaries of the City.

    (b)  Beginning July 1, 2017, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of Twelve Dollars ($12.00). On July 1, 2018, the minimum wage shall increase to an hourly rate of Thirteen Dollars ($13.00). On July 1, 2019, the minimum wage shall increase to an hourly rate of Fourteen Dollars ($14.00). On July 1, 2020, the minimum wage shall increase to an hourly rate of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00).

    (c)   A violation for unlawfully failing to pay the minimum wage shall be deemed to continue from the date immediately following the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date immediately preceding the date the wages are paid in full.

 

4-35-450 EFFECTIVENESS OF ORDINANCE IF STATE MINIMUM WAGE BECOMES GREATER THAN CITY’S.
    All requirements and provisions of this Chapter shall be preempted and ineffective if the State minimum wage is or becomes greater than the minimum wage established by this Chapter.

 

4-35-500 WAIVER THROUGH COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.
    To the extent required by Federal law, all or any portion of the applicable requirements of this Chapter may be waived in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement, provided that such waiver is explicitly set forth in such agreement in clear and unambiguous terms.

 

4-35-600 NOTICE, POSTING AND PAYROLL RECORDS.
    (a)   Except for the first increase to take effect on July 1, 2017 per Section 4-35-400, on or by January 1 of each year, the Department shall publish and make available to employers a bulletin announcing the adjusted minimum wage rate, which shall take effect on July 1 of the following year. In conjunction with this bulletin, the Department shall by July 1 of each year publish and make available to employers, in the top five (5) languages spoken by residents of the City as determined by the City Manager or designee after reviewing the most recent United States Census Data, a notice suitable for posting by employers in the workplace informing employees of the current minimum wage rate and of their rights under this Chapter.

    (b)  Every employer shall post in a conspicuous place at any workplace or job site in the City where any employee works the notice published each year by the Department informing employees of the current minimum wage rate and of their rights under this Chapter. Every employer shall post such notices in the top five (5) languages spoken by residents of the City as determined by the City Manager or designee after reviewing the most recent United States Census Data. Every employer shall also provide each employee at the time of hire with the employer’s name, address, and telephone number in writing. Failure to post such notice shall render the employer subject to administrative citation, pursuant to Section 4-35-900(a) of this Chapter.

    (c)   Employers shall retain payroll records pertaining to employees for a period of four (4) years, and shall allow the City access to such records, with appropriate notice and at a mutually agreeable time, to monitor compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Where an employer does not maintain or retain adequate records documenting wages paid or does not allow the City reasonable access to such records, the employee’s account of how much he or she was paid shall be presumed to be accurate, absent clear and convincing evidence otherwise. Failure to maintain such records or to allow the City reasonable access shall render the employer subject to administrative citation, pursuant to Section 4-35-900(a) of this Chapter.

    (d)  If a violation of this Chapter has been finally determined, the City shall require the employer to post public notice of the employer’s failure to comply in a form determined by the City. Failure to post such notice shall render the employer subject to administrative citation, pursuant to Section 4-35-900(a) of this Chapter.

 

4-35-700 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
    It is unlawful for an employer or any other party to discriminate in any manner or take any adverse action (including action relating to any term, condition or privilege of employment) against any person in retaliation for exercising rights protected under this Chapter. Rights protected under this Chapter include, but are not limited to: the right to file a complaint or inform any person about any party’s alleged noncompliance with this Chapter; and the right to inform any person of his or her potential rights under this Chapter or otherwise educate any person about this Chapter or to assist him or her in asserting such rights. Protections of this Chapter shall apply to any person who mistakenly, but in good faith, alleges noncompliance with this Chapter. Taking adverse action against a person within ninety (90) days of the person’s exercise of rights protected under this Chapter shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of such rights. Failure to comply with this provision shall render the employer subject to administrative citation, pursuant to Section 4-35-900(a) of this Chapter.

 

4-35-800 IMPLEMENTATION.
    (a)   Administrative Procedures. The Department is authorized to coordinate implementation and enforcement of this Chapter and may promulgate appropriate administrative procedures for such purposes. Any administrative procedures promulgated by the Department shall have the force and effect of law and may be relied on by employers, employees and other parties to determine their rights and responsibilities under this Chapter. Any administrative procedures may establish procedures for ensuring fair, efficient and cost-effective implementation of this Chapter, including supplementary procedures for helping to inform employees of their rights under this Chapter, for monitoring employer compliance with this Chapter, and for providing administrative hearings to determine whether an employer or other person has violated the requirements of this Chapter.

    (b)  Reporting Violations. An employee or any other person may report to the Department in writing any suspected violation of this Chapter. The Department shall encourage reporting pursuant to this subsection by keeping confidential, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws, the name and other identifying information of the employee or person reporting the violation. Provided, however, that with the authorization of such person, the Department may disclose his or her name and identifying information as necessary to enforce this Chapter or other employee protection laws. In order to further encourage reporting by employees, if the Department notifies an employer that the Department is investigating a complaint, the Department shall require the employer to post or otherwise notify its employees that the Department is conducting an investigation, using a form provided by the Department. Failure to post such notice shall render the employer subject to administrative citation, pursuant to Section 4-35-900(a) of this Chapter.

    (c)   Investigation. The Department shall be responsible for investigating any possible violations of this Chapter by an employer or other person. The Department shall have the authority to inspect workplaces, interview persons and request the City Attorney to subpoena books, papers, records, or other items relevant to the enforcement of this Chapter.

    (d)  Informal Resolution. The Department shall make every effort to resolve complaints informally, in a timely manner.

 

4-35-900 ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Where prompt compliance is not forthcoming, the City and the Department shall take any appropriate enforcement action to secure compliance, including, but not limited to, the following:

    (1)  The City may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. The amount of this fine shall vary based on the provision of this Chapter being violated, as specified below:

    (i)   A fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be assessed for retaliation by an employer against an employee for exercising rights protected under this Chapter for each employee retaliated against.

    (ii)  A fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) may be assessed for any of the following violations of this Chapter:

    (A)  Failure to post notice of the minimum wage rate;

    (B)  Failure to provide notice of investigation to employee;

    (C)  Failure to maintain payroll records for four (4) years;

    (D)  Failure to allow the City access to payroll records.

    (iii) A fine equal to the total amount of appropriate remedies, pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. Any and all money collected in this way that is the rightful property of an employee, such as back wages, interest, and civil penalty payments, shall be disbursed by the City in a prompt manner.

    (2)  Alternatively, the City may pursue administrative remedies in accordance with the following procedures:

    (i)   Whenever the City determines that a violation of any provision of this Chapter is occurring or has occurred, the City may issue a written compliance order to the employer responsible for the violation.

    (ii)  A compliance order issued pursuant to this Chapter shall contain the following information:

    (A)  The date and location of the violation;

    (B)  A description of the violation;

    (C)  The actions required to correct the violation;

    (D)  The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved;

    (E)  Either a copy of this Chapter or an explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with this Chapter and a description of the hearing procedure and appeal process;

    (F)  A warning that the compliance order shall become final unless a written request for hearing before the City is received within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the compliance order.

    (iii) Following receipt of a timely request for a hearing, the City shall provide the employer responsible for the violation with a hearing. During the pendency of the hearing and any subsequent appellate process, the City will not enforce any aspect of the compliance order.

    (3)  The City may initiate a civil action for injunctive relief and damages and civil penalties in a court of competent jurisdiction.

    (b)  Any person aggrieved by a violation of this Chapter may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction against the employer or other person violating this Chapter and, upon prevailing, shall be awarded reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs and shall be entitled to such legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate to remedy the violation including, without limitation, the payment of any back wages unlawfully withheld, the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) to each employee or person whose rights under this Chapter were violated for each day that the violation occurred or continued, reinstatement in employment and/or injunctive relief. Provided, however, that any person or entity enforcing this Chapter on behalf of the public as provided for under applicable State law shall, upon prevailing, be entitled only to equitable, injunctive or restitutionary relief to employees, and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.

    (c)   This section shall not be construed to limit an employee’s right to bring legal action for a violation of any other laws concerning wages, hours, or other standards or rights nor shall exhaustion of remedies under this Chapter be a prerequisite to the assertion of any right.

    (d)  Except where prohibited by State or Federal law, City agencies or departments may revoke or suspend any registration certificates, permits or licenses held or requested by the employer until such time as the violation is remedied. The City shall not renew any such license of an employer with outstanding violations, as finally determined under this Chapter, until such time as the violation is remedied.

    (e)   The remedies for violation of this Chapter include, but are not limited to:

    (1)  Reinstatement, the payment of back wages unlawfully withheld, and the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) to each employee or person whose rights under this Chapter were violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued, and fines imposed pursuant to other provisions of this Code or State law.

    (2)  Interest on all due and unpaid wages at the rate of interest specified in subdivision (b) of Section 3289 of the California Civil Code, which shall accrue from the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date the wages are paid in full.

    (3)  Reimbursement of the City’s administrative costs of enforcement and attorney’s fees and costs.

    (4)  If a repeated violation of this Chapter has been finally determined, the City may require the employer to pay an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to the City for each employee or person whose rights under this Chapter were violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued, and fines imposed pursuant to other provisions of this Code or State law.

    (f)   The remedies, penalties and procedures provided under this Chapter are cumulative and are not intended to be exclusive of any other available remedies, penalties and procedures established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this Chapter. Actions taken pursuant to this Chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other action, civil or criminal, that may be brought to abate a violation or to seek compensation for damages suffered.

 

4-35-1000 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
    This Chapter provides for payment of a local minimum wage and shall not be construed to preempt or otherwise limit or affect the applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy or standard that provides for payment of higher or supplemental wages or benefits, or that extends other protections.

 

4-35-1100 APPLICATION OF MINIMUM WAGE TO WELFARE-TO-WORK PROGRAMS.
    The minimum wage established under this Chapter shall apply to the Welfare-to-Work Programs under which persons must perform work in exchange for receipt of benefits. Participants in Welfare-to-Work Programs within the City of San Leandro shall not, during a given benefits period, be required to work more than a number of hours equal to the value of all cash benefits received during that period, divided by the minimum wage.

 

4-35-1200 FEES.
    Nothing herein shall preclude the City Council from imposing a cost recovery fee on all employers to pay the cost of administering this Chapter.

 

4-35-1300 EMPLOYEE EXEMPTIONS.
    The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following employees:

    (a)   Employees up to twenty-five (25) years of age who are employed by a non-profit or governmental entity for after school or summer employment, or as a student intern, or as a volunteer, or as a trainee for a period not longer than one hundred twenty (120) days.

    (b)  Employees who are standing by or on-call according to the criteria established by the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. Section 201. This exemption shall apply only during the time when the employee is actually standing by or on-call.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-010, 9/19/16)

CHAPTER 4-36 TOBACCO RETAILERS
4-36-100 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

    “Administrator” means the Chief of Police or designee for the City of San Leandro.

    “Arm’s length transaction” means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two (2) informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this Chapter is not an arm’s length transaction.

    “Characterizing flavor” means a distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted by a tobacco product or any byproduct produced by the tobacco product, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, menthol, mint, wintergreen, herb, or spice.

    “Coupon” means anything that can be exchanged for or used to acquire an electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, electronic cigarette or tobacco product, such as a printed piece of paper, voucher, ticket, rebate, rebate offer, check, credit, token, code, password, or anything labeled “coupon” or “coupon offer.”

    “Department” means the City of San Leandro Finance Department.

    “Distinguishable” means perceivable by an ordinary consumer by either the sense of smell or taste.

    “Drug paraphernalia” shall have the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11014.5, as that section may be amended from time to time.

    “Electronic cigarette” means “a device that can provide an inhalable dose of nicotine by delivering a vaporized solution” as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 119405(b), as that section may be amended from time to time, or any device designed to vaporize a liquid solution that releases flavored vapor.

    “Electronic cigarette paraphernalia” means any device designed to provide an inhalable dose of nicotine or a flavored liquid solution through vaporization, nicotine-based or flavored solution-based cartridges for use with electronic cigarettes, and any other item designed for the vaporization, preparation, storing, or consumption of electronic cigarette products.

    “Electronic cigarette product” means any substance containing nicotine or a flavored liquid solution for vaporization, including any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

    “Flavored tobacco product” means any tobacco product (other than cigarettes as defined by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration) that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor. This includes cigars, little cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, blunts, and electronic cigarettes or electronic smoking devices.

    (a)   For purposes of this definition, “constituent” means any ingredient, substance, chemical, or compound, other than tobacco, water, or reconstituted tobacco sheet, which is added by the manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacture, or packing of the tobacco product.

    (b)  Further, a tobacco product is presumed to be a flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or any of the manufacturer’s agents or employees has:

    (1)  Made a public statement or claim that the tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor, including, but not limited to, text and/or images on the product’s labeling or packaging that are used explicitly or implicitly to communicate information about the flavor, taste, or aroma of a tobacco product; or

    (2)  Taken actions directed to consumers that would be reasonably expected to result in consumers believing that the tobacco product imparts a characterizing flavor.

    “License” means a tobacco retailer’s license as defined below.

    “Licensee” means a tobacco retailer with a tobacco retailer’s license.

    “Nominal cost” means the cost of any item that is transferred from one person to another for less than the total of: (1) twenty-five percent (25%) of the full retail value of the item exclusive of taxes and fees; plus (2) all taxes and fees previously paid and all taxes and fees still due on the item at the time of transfer.

    “Nonsale distribution” means to give, within the jurisdictional limits of the City, a tobacco product or coupon at no cost or at nominal cost to a person who is not a tobacco seller.

    “Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

    “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

    “Public place” means any place within the City, public or private, that is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, for example, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis, and buses.

    “Retailer” means tobacco retailer as defined herein.

    “Self-service display” means the open display or storage of electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

    “Tobacco” means leaves of the tobacco plant dried and prepared for smoking or ingestion.

    “Tobacco paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products.

    “Tobacco product” means tobacco and any substance containing tobacco, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; any electronic cigarette product; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

    “Tobacco retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. “Tobacco retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.

    “Tobacco retailer’s license” means the license issued pursuant to Section 4-36-300 that authorizes electronic-cigarette or tobacco retailing at a certain location and by a certain tobacco retailer.

 

4-36-150 REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
    (a)   Tobacco Retailer’s License Required. It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the City without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer’s license pursuant to this Chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer’s license is a nuisance as a matter of law.

    (b)  Lawful Business Operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a license is issued, it shall be a violation of this Chapter for a licensee, or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, to violate any local, State, or Federal law applicable to electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing.

    (c)   Display of License. Each tobacco retailer’s license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location.

    (d)  Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer an electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette product, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven (27) years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under State law to purchase and possess the electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette product, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia.

    (e)   Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age shall engage in tobacco retailing.

    (f)   Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited.

    (g)  False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer’s license, including, for example, a person whose license has been revoked:

    (1)  Shall keep all electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a license; and

    (2)  Shall not display any advertisement relating to electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer’s location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location.

    (h)  Signage Violations. It is a violation of this Chapter for any licensee to violate any local, State, or Federal law regulating exterior, storefront, window, or door signage.

    (i)   Drug Paraphernalia. It is a violation of this Chapter for any licensee or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, to violate any local, State, or Federal law regulating controlled substances or drug paraphernalia.

    (j)   Nonsale Distribution of Tobacco Products Prohibited.

    (1)  No tobacco retailer nor any agent or employee of a tobacco retailer shall engage in the nonsale distribution of any electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, electronic cigarette product, tobacco product or coupon in any public place.

    (2)  No person, motivated by an economic or a business purpose, shall knowingly permit the nonsale distribution of any electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, electronic cigarette product, tobacco product or coupon: (i) anywhere in any public place under the legal or de facto control of the person; or (ii) through any agent or employee of the person. This provision shall not apply to coupons incidentally distributed in connection with a printed or electronic publication, such as, for example, magazines, newspapers, and websites, so long as that person’s distribution of a publication containing coupons is not primarily motivated by an economic or a business purpose to distribute coupons.

    (k)  Minimum Pack Size for Cigars.

    (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no tobacco retailer shall sell, offer for sale, or exchange for any form of consideration:

    (i)   Any single cigar, whether or not packaged for individual sale;

    (ii)  Any number of cigars fewer than the number contained in the manufacturer’s original consumer packaging designed for retail sale to a consumer; or

    (iii) Any package of cigars at a price that is less than Seven Dollars ($7.00) per five (5) cigars, including all applicable taxes and fees.

    (2)  This subsection does not apply to the sale or offer for sale of a single cigar for which the retail price exceeds either Five Dollars ($5.00) or the dollar amount adopted by resolution of the City Council and adjusted from time to time, whichever is higher. The public shall be given notice of any such resolution in the manner notice is given of ordinances of the City.

    (3)  This subsection shall apply to cigars, cigarillos and any other cigar product regardless of the terminology used for the product.

    (l)   Flavored Tobacco Products Prohibited. No tobacco retailer, nor any of the retailer’s agents or employees, shall sell or offer for sale, or possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, any flavored tobacco product.

 

4-36-200 LIMITS ON ELIGIBILITY FOR A TOBACCO RETAILER’S LICENSE.
    (a)   No license shall be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location.

    (b)  No license shall be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at a location where electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, electronic cigarette products or tobacco products are prohibited from being distributed pursuant to the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   No license shall be issued to a location or a tobacco retailer where prohibited pursuant to Section 4-36-600.

 

4-36-250 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
    (a)   Application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct tobacco retailing and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer’s license. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the City that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued contrary to this Chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 4-36-600(d) of this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law.

    All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Department and shall contain the following information:

    (1)  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a license;

    (2)  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought;

    (3)  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the “authorized address”) required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this Chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (a)(2) of this section;

    (4)  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer’s license by the California Board of Equalization;

    (5)  Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this Chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five (5) years;

    (6)  A statement signed by each proprietor that no drug paraphernalia is or will be sold at the location for which the license is sought;

    (7)  Such other information as the Department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this Chapter as specified on the application form required by this section.

    (b)  A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the Department in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer’s license within ten (10) business days of a change.

    (c)   All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the laws’ exemptions.

 

4-36-300 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
    Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer’s license and the license fee required by this Chapter, the Administrator shall issue a license unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists:

    (a)   The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this Chapter;

    (b)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this Chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer’s licenses. However, this subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the City with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm’s length transaction;

    (c)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor or location for which this Chapter prohibits a license to be issued, including the provisions of Section 4-36-600;

    (d)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this Chapter (e.g., mobile vending), that is unlawful pursuant to this Code or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law;

    (e)   The location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought lacks a valid State tobacco retailer’s license by the California Board of Equalization.

 

4-36-350 LICENSE RENEWAL AND EXPIRATION.
    (a)   Term and Renewal of License. A tobacco retailer’s license is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer’s license is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer’s license and submit the license fee no later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the term.

    (b)  Expiration of License. A tobacco retailer’s license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the proprietor must:

    (1)  Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and

    (2)  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor:

    (i)   Has not sold and will not sell any electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette product, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed, or

    (ii)  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a license, as set forth in Section 4-36-600(a) of this Chapter, before seeking renewal of the license.

 

4-36-400 LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE.
    (a)   A tobacco retailer’s license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer’s license is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietor(s).

    (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:

    (1)  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and

    (2)  The new proprietor provides the City with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor has acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm’s length transaction.

 

4-36-450 LICENSE CONVEYS A LIMITED, CONDITIONAL PRIVILEGE.
    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the City identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including, but not limited to, any provision of this Code, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer’s license does not make the retailer a “retail or wholesale tobacco shop” for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5.

 

4-36-500 FEE FOR LICENSE.
    The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer’s license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council and shall be included within the City’s Master Fee Schedule. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this Chapter, including, for example, issuing a license, administering this Chapter, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this Chapter. All fees and interest upon proceeds of fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law.

 

4-36-550 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
    (a)   Compliance with this Chapter shall be monitored by the Police Department. The City may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this Chapter.

    (b)  Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the Police Department to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, electronic cigarette products or tobacco products. When the Police Department deems appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing.

    (c)   The City shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, electronic cigarette product or tobacco product purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person’s age (hereinafter “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when:

    (1)  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the City;

    (2)  The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the City to monitor compliance with this Chapter; or

    (3)  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the Alameda County Public Health Department or the California Department of Health Services.

 

4-36-600 VIOLATIONS AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
    (a)   Violations. If the Administrator has reasonable cause to believe a violation of this Chapter exists, or if any court of competent jurisdiction determines the same, the Administrator may issue a notice of violation and begin the revocation process as follows:

    (1)  First Violation. After a first violation of this Chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, the Administrator shall:

    (i)   Issue a written warning to the licensee, which includes: the facts supporting the finding of a violation, the penalties for further violations of this Chapter, and provides thirty (30) days within which the licensee may cure the violation and advise employees of applicable regulations or contact the Administrator to challenge the finding of a violation.

    (ii)  If the licensee contacts the Administrator to challenge the finding of a violation, the Administrator shall provide written notice of a hearing, not less than five (5) business days after the notice, at which the tobacco retailer may show cause, at a time and place specified in the notice, why a violation does not exist. Should the tobacco retailer fail to present evidence at such hearing establishing, in the reasonable determination of the Administrator, that a violation does not exist, the Administrator shall provide written notice to the tobacco retailer that the notice of violation is upheld.

    (2)  Second Violation. After a second violation of this Chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, the licensee shall be fined Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00).

    (3)  Third Violation. After a third violation of this Chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, the license shall be suspended for twenty (20) days.

    (4)  Fourth Violation and Additional Violations. After four (4) or more violations of this Chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, the license shall be revoked and no new license may issue for the location or tobacco retailer until three (3) years have passed from the date of revocation.

    (b)  Revocation and Suspension Procedures. If a license is subject to revocation or suspension, the Administrator shall provide written notice of revocation or suspension along with the reasons for revocation or suspension, facts suggesting violation, the penalties for violation, and ability to appeal pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. Within five (5) days of the mailing of notice of revocation or suspension, the tobacco retailer shall cease the operation of the business for which the license was issued.

    (c)   Appeal of Revocation or Suspension. A decision of the Administrator to revoke or suspend a license is appealable to the City Manager and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of mailing of the Administrator’s notice of revocation or suspension. If such an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. An appeal to the City Manager is not available for a revocation made pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. The date, time, and place of appeal hearings shall be provided in writing to the tobacco retailer with at least ten (10) days’ notice. If the tobacco retailer fails to present evidence establishing that tobacco retailer is entitled to retain the license or should not be subject to suspension, the City Manager shall uphold the revocation or suspension and give written notice to the tobacco retailer. Within five (5) days of the mailing of the notice of upheld revocation or suspension, the tobacco retailer shall cease operation of the business for which the license was issued.

    (d)  Revocation of License Wrongly Issued. A tobacco retailer’s license shall be revoked if the Administrator finds, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under Section 4-36-300 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The decision by the Administrator shall be the final decision of the City. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new license application.

 

4-36-650 ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Criminal Prosecution. Each incident of violation of this Chapter is an infraction subject to a One Hundred Dollar ($100.00) fine or otherwise punishable pursuant to Section 1-12-200(c) of this Code. Other violations of this Chapter may, in the discretion of the City Prosecutor, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. Enforcement of this Chapter shall be the responsibility of the Police Chief or designee. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this Chapter.

    (b)  Civil Enforcement by the City.

    (1)  Fines. Violations of this Chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the City of San Leandro, punishable by a civil fine not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) and not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per violation.

    (2)  Injunctions, Nuisance Abatement, and Code Enforcement. In addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter or by other law, any violation of this Chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. Where the City pursues a civil action to remedy a violation of this Chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees and costs if the City elects, at the beginning of that action, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees and costs pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5 as that section may be amended from time to time.

    (c)   General Provisions.

    (1)  Cumulative Remedies. The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

    (2)  Violations. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall also constitute a violation of this Chapter. A violation exists for each day on which an electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette product, electronic cigarette paraphernalia, tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this Chapter. A violation also exists for each individual retail electronic cigarette, electronic cigarette product or tobacco product and each individual retail item of electronic cigarette paraphernalia or tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this Chapter.

    (3)  Nuisances. Violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

    (4)  No Testimony for Persons Under Eighteen (18). Whenever evidence of a violation of this Chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this Chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented.

 

4-36-700 OPERATIVE DATE OF CHAPTER.
    This chapter shall be operative on August 15, 2018.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-017, 10/16/17)

CHAPTER 4-37 TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE
4-37-100 PURPOSE.
    In enacting these regulations the City Council recognizes the need to protect long-term tenants and tenant households in need from the adverse health, safety and economic impacts of displacement. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to mitigate such impacts on these residents consistent with this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-016, 9/18/17)

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
4-37-200 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

    (a)   BASE RENT means the rent for residential property required to be paid by the tenant to the landlord in the month immediately preceding the effective date of the rent increase. Base rent shall not include ancillary services, including, but not limited to, pet deposits, storage, additional parking or utility pass-throughs.

    (b)  CITY means the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR means the Director of the Community Development Department of the City of San Leandro, or designated representative.

    (d)  CITY COUNCIL means the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

    (e)   LANDLORD means any person, partnership, corporation, or other business entity offering for rent or lease any residential property in the City. “Landlord” shall include the agent or representative of the landlord, provided that such agent or representative shall have full authority to answer for the landlord and enter into binding agreements on the landlord’s behalf.

    (f)   LANDLORD-CAUSED TERMINATION means a landlord taking action to terminate the tenancy of a tenant occupying residential property. A landlord-caused termination also includes the circumstance where a landlord provides the tenant with a proposed rent increase that raises the rent, or proposed multiple rent increases that cumulatively raise the rent, to an amount more than twelve percent (12%) greater than the base rent that was in place at any time during a twelve (12) month period, and the tenant elects to not remain in the residential property. This excludes circumstances where the proposed rent increase is rescinded by the landlord and excludes residential properties where landlords may establish the initial and all subsequent rental rates for a residential property pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1954.52. A landlord-caused termination shall not include the following circumstances:

    (1)  Failure to Pay Rent. Tenant failed to pay rent within three (3) days of receiving written notice from the landlord demanding payment in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1161.

    (2)  Breach of Rental Contract. Tenant violated a material term of the rental agreement with the landlord for occupancy of residential property.

    (3)  Tenant Illegal Activities. Tenant has used the residential property for an illegal purpose, including, but not limited to, the unlawful distribution of a controlled substance as contemplated by California Civil Code Section 3486, or the unlawful use, manufacture, or possession of weapons and ammunition as contemplated by California Civil Code Section 3485.

    (4)  Failure to Allow Landlord Access. Tenant failed to allow landlord access to the residential property, after receiving due notice as required by California Civil Code Section 1954.

    (5)  Residential Property Uninhabitable Without Landlord Fault. The residential property becomes uninhabitable as a result of the tenant’s negligence or willful conduct or as a result of an earthquake, fire, flood or other acts of God.

    (6)  Termination of Employment. The lawful termination of the tenant’s employment by the landlord, where such employment was an express condition of, or consideration for, the tenancy pursuant to the rental agreement.

    (7)  Temporary Repairs or Renovations. The tenant is temporarily displaced from the residential property due to repairs, remodeling or renovations, where the landlord provides the tenant with alternative housing for the duration of the repairs, remodeling or renovations.

    (8)  Prior Notice of Renovations. Landlord notified tenant prior to entering into the rental agreement of the landlord’s intent to renovate the residential property within one year of tenant occupying the residential property and the landlord files plans with the City to renovate the residential property at the time the landlord notifies the tenant of termination of tenancy.

    (9)  Landlord Occupancy. Landlord occupancy, which shall include and be limited to the landlord, his or her spouse, landlord’s parent or parents or landlord’s spouse’s parent or parents, landlord’s child or children or landlord’s spouse’s child or children, and landlord’s or landlord’s spouses grandchildren.

    (g)  RENT means the amount of fixed periodic compensation paid by a tenant to a landlord, as defined by the rental agreement between the tenant and landlord, for the possession and use of residential property. Rent shall not include ancillary services, including, but not limited to, pet deposits, storage, additional parking or utility pass-throughs.

    (h)  RENT INCREASE means any upward adjustment of the rent from the base rent amount.

    (i)   RENTAL AGREEMENT means the legal written agreement, including all changes and addenda governing occupancy of the residential property, between landlord and tenant.

    (j)   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means any housing unit offered for rent or lease in the City, provided that such housing unit is in a parcel that contains two (2) or more tenant-occupied housing units and mobile homes. Mobile homes are subject to this Chapter only if a tenant rents the mobile housing unit itself. Residential property shall exclude any housing unit that is subject to a recorded affordable housing regulatory agreement that requires that the housing unit be rented at restricted rents to income qualified tenants as defined by the regulatory agreement.

    (k)  SPECIAL-CIRCUMSTANCES HOUSEHOLD means a tenant or anyone else authorized by the landlord to occupy residential property with any of the following characteristics at the time of notice of a landlord-caused termination:

    (1)  At least one resident of the residential property is sixty-two (62) years of age or older;

    (2)  At least one resident of the residential property qualifies as disabled as defined by Title 42, United States Code, No. 423 or handicapped as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50072; or

    (3)  One or more minor children (under eighteen (18) years of age) who are legally dependent (as determined for Federal income tax purposes) reside in the residential property.

    (l)   TENANT means any person having the legal responsibility for the payment of rent for residential property in the City as identified under a valid lease or rental agreement with a landlord.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-016, 9/18/17)

 

ARTICLE 3. REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE RELOCATION ASSISTANCE
4-37-300 REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.
    No landlord shall effectuate a landlord-caused termination without paying relocation assistance in accordance with this Chapter.

 

4-37-305 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.
    The landlord shall provide relocation assistance, in a total amount not to exceed Seven Thousand Dollars ($7,000.00), where required by Section 4-37-300, to an eligible tenant in the following amounts:

    (a)   Three (3) times the most current Fair Market Rents as published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) for the Oakland-Fremont, California HUD Metro FMR Area in the Federal Register, or three (3) times the monthly rent that the tenant(s) is paying at the time the notice of the landlord-caused termination is delivered, whichever amount is greater.

    (b)  One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for special-circumstances households. A tenant is only entitled to claim a special-circumstances household payment of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per residential property.

 

4-37-310 PROCEDURES FOR RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PAYMENT.
    The landlord shall pay relocation assistance as follows:

    (a)   The entire relocation assistance amount shall be paid to the tenant or tenants who executed the rental agreement. If the residential property is occupied by two (2) or more individuals, then relocation assistance shall be paid to the individual entitled to occupy the residential property under the rental agreement; provided, however, if the tenant receives, as part of the termination of tenancy, relocation assistance from a governmental agency, then the amount of that relocation assistance shall operate as a credit against any relocation assistance to be paid to the tenant. Landlord may deduct from the relocation assistance payable any and all past due rent owed by tenant during the twelve (12) months prior to termination of tenancy and may deduct from the relocation assistance any amounts paid by the landlord for any damage, cleaning, key replacement, or other purposes served by a security deposit as defined by the rental agreement, to the extent the security deposit is insufficient to provide the amounts due for such costs. To the extent landlord is required to comply with an enforcement order of the City that requires the payment of relocation benefits pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17975 et seq., then the amount of that relocation benefit shall operate as a credit against any relocation assistance paid or to be paid to a tenant under this Chapter.

    (b)  After taking into account any adjustments in the amount of the relocation assistance under Section 4-37-310(a), the landlord shall pay one-half of the relocation assistance no later than five (5) business days following service of the notice to a tenant of landlord-caused termination and one-half of the relocation assistance no later than five (5) days after the tenant has vacated the residential property. For landlord-caused terminations where a landlord provides a proposed rent increase that raises the rent, or proposed multiple rent increases that cumulatively raise the rent, to an amount more than twelve percent (12%) greater than the base rent at any time during a twelve (12) month period and the tenant elects to not remain in the residential property, the landlord shall pay one-half of the relocation assistance no later than five (5) business days following receipt of written notice that the tenant intends to vacate the residential property and one-half of the relocation assistance no later than five (5) days after the tenant has vacated the residential property. If the tenant ultimately fails to vacate the residential property following a landlord-caused termination where a landlord provides a proposed rent increase that raises the rent, or proposed multiple rent increases that cumulatively raise the rent, to an amount more than twelve percent (12%) greater than the base rent at any time during a twelve (12) month period, the tenant shall reimburse relocation assistance to the landlord.

    (c)   Nothing provided herein prohibits a landlord and a tenant from agreeing to relocation assistance different than as provided in this section. A landlord shall not attempt to influence a tenant to agree to relocation assistance different than as provided in this section in bad faith by means of fraud, intimidation, or coercion (including, but not limited to, threats based on immigration status).

 

4-37-315 NOTICE OF TERMINATION AND NOTICE OF ENTITLEMENT TO RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.
    The landlord shall provide a written notice of termination to all tenants subject to termination of tenancy from a residential property required by State law at least ninety (90) days prior to the date a tenant must vacate the residential property for landlord-caused terminations. Written notice of tenant’s entitlement to relocation assistance shall be provided by the landlord at the same time that the landlord provides notice of termination of tenancy from a residential property. For landlord-caused terminations where a landlord provides a proposed rent increase that raises the rent, or proposed multiple rent increases that cumulatively raise the rent, to an amount more than twelve percent (12%) greater than the base rent at any time during a twelve (12) month period and the tenant elects to not remain in the residential property, the landlord shall provide a written notice of tenant’s entitlement to relocation assistance at the same time that the landlord provides notice of a rent increase. Such notice of entitlement to relocation assistance shall be posted on the door to the residential property and sent certified mail or first class mail, or personally served upon tenant, and shall be provided in the three (3) predominant languages spoken in the City. The City Manager or designee shall determine the predominant languages spoken in the City.

 

4-37-320 TEXT OF NOTICE.
    The notice of entitlement to relocation assistance shall state:

 

       NOTICE: Under Title 4, Chapter 37 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, a landlord must provide tenants that have occupied residential property under a valid lease or rental agreement with a landlord with ninety (90) days’ notice prior to termination of tenancy. At the same time the landlord provides a qualifying tenant with notice of termination of tenancy, the landlord must provide this notice of the tenant’s entitlement to relocation assistance. Qualifying tenants are entitled to the following forms of relocation assistance: (a) a relocation fee which shall be the cash equivalent of three (3) times the most current Fair Market Rents as published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) for the Oakland-Fremont, California HUD Metro FMR Area in the Federal Register, or three (3) times the monthly rent that the tenant(s) is paying at the time the notice of the landlord-caused termination is delivered, whichever amount is greater; and (b) One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for special-circumstances households. Special-circumstances households include the following: (1) at least one member is sixty-two (62) years of age or older; (2) at least one member qualifies as disabled as defined by Title 42, United States Code, Section 423 or handicapped as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50072; or (3) is a household with one or more minor children (under eighteen (18) years of age) who are legally dependent (as determined for Federal income tax purposes). Under Civil Code Section 1942.5, it is illegal for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant for lawfully and peaceably exercising his or her legal rights.

 

    The notice of entitlement to relocation assistance for landlord-caused terminations where a landlord provides a proposed rent increase, or proposed rent increases, that raise the rent to an amount more than twelve percent (12%) greater than the base rent during a twelve (12) month period and the tenant elects to not remain in the residential property shall state:

 

       NOTICE: Under Civil Code Section 827(b) a landlord must provide a tenant with thirty (30) days’ notice prior to a rent increase of ten percent (10%) or less and sixty (60) days’ notice of a rent increase of greater than ten percent (10%). Under Title 4, Chapter 37 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, a landlord must at the same time as a notice under Civil Code Section 827(b), provide this notice of the tenant’s entitlement to relocation assistance. Qualifying tenants are entitled to the following forms of relocation assistance: (a) a relocation fee which shall be the cash equivalent of three (3) times the most current Fair Market Rents as published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) for the Oakland-Fremont, California HUD Metro FMR Area in the Federal Register, or three (3) times the monthly rent that the tenant(s) is paying at the time the notice of the landlord-caused termination is delivered, whichever amount is greater; and (b) One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for special-circumstances households. Special-circumstances households include the following: (1) at least one member is sixty-two (62) years of age or older; (2) at least one member qualifies as disabled as defined by Title 42, United States Code, Section 423 or handicapped as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50072; or (3) is a household with one or more minor children (under eighteen (18) years of age) who are legally dependent (as determined for Federal income tax purposes). Under Civil Code Section 1942.5, it is illegal for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant for lawfully and peaceably exercising his or her legal rights.

 

4-37-325 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
    Commencement of eviction proceedings against a tenant for exercising his or her rights under this Chapter shall be considered a retaliatory eviction. Under Civil Code Section 1942.5, it is illegal for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant for lawfully and peaceably exercising his or her legal rights.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-016, 9/18/17)

 

ARTICLE 4. ENFORCEMENT
4-37-400 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
    A landlord’s failure to comply with any requirement of this Chapter may be asserted as an affirmative defense in an action brought by the landlord to recover possession of the residential property. Additionally, any attempt to recover possession of a residential property in violation of this Chapter shall render the landlord liable to the tenant for actual and punitive damages, including damages for emotional distress, in a civil action for wrongful eviction. The tenant may also seek injunctive relief and money damages for wrongful eviction and/or failure to pay relocation assistance. A landlord may seek money damages for a tenant’s failure to reimburse relocation assistance if the tenant ultimately fails to vacate the residential property following a landlord-caused termination where a landlord provides a proposed rent increase that raises the rent, or proposed multiple rent increases that cumulatively raise the rent, to an amount more than twelve percent (12%) greater than the base rent at any time during a twelve (12) month period. The prevailing party in an action for wrongful eviction and/or failure to pay relocation assistance or reimburse relocation assistance shall recover costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-016, 9/18/17)

 

 

ARTICLE 5. MISCELLANEOUS
4-37-500 ANNUAL REVIEW.
    The Community Development Director shall annually prepare a report to the City Council assessing the effectiveness of the relocation assistance program established under this Chapter and recommending changes as may be appropriate.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-016, 9/18/17)

CHAPTER 4-38 PERMITTED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY
4-38-100 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
    The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to regulate commercial cannabis activity (as defined below) in accordance with State law to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the City. The City is authorized to regulate this activity pursuant to the MAUCRSA. The goals of this regulation are to ensure the City’s regulatory framework is not preempted by State law in the areas of cannabis distribution, dispensing, manufacture, testing and cultivation of cannabis for adult use. It is City policy to permit the dispensing and retailing of cannabis in accordance with City of San Leandro Municipal Code Chapters 4-33 and 4-38, to permit the manufacture of cannabis products at City permitted dispensaries, to permit the manufacture and laboratory testing of cannabis products for medicinal and adult use, and to prohibit cultivation of cannabis, except for personal use that comports with State law. Any references to “medicinal cannabis” or medical cannabis shall also be applicable to adult-use cannabis. The City’s permitted medical cannabis dispensaries shall be allowed to conduct retail sales for adult use to any customer who is verified as being twenty-one (21) years of age or older.

 

4-38-200 DEFINITIONS.
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

    (a)   “A-License” means a State License issued under Division 10, commencing with Section 26000 of the Business and Professions Code, for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults twenty-one (21) years of age and over and who do not possess physician’s recommendations or an interim license issued by the State for the same.

    (b)  “A-Licensee” means any Person holding a State License under Division 10, commencing with Section 26000, of the Business and Professions Code for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults twenty-one (21) years of age and over and who do not possess physician’s recommendations or an interim license issued by the State for the same.

    (c)   “Adult Use Cannabis” means the non-medical use of cannabis by adults of age twenty-one (21) and over as permitted by MAUCRSA and other applicable State and City laws.

    (d)  “Cannabis” shall have the same meaning as in Section 26000 of the Business and Professions Code.

    (e)   “Cannabis Dispensary” or “Dispensary” shall be as defined in City of San Leandro Municipal Code Section 4-33-100(d)

    (f)   “Cannabis Product” shall have the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

    (g)  “City” shall be the City of San Leandro.

    (h)  “City Council” means the current members of the City Council of the City.

    (i)   “City Manager” means the individual duly appointed by a majority of the City Council to serve in the capacity as executive officer of the City on a permanent or interim basis or such other official as designated by the City to fulfill such duties.

    (j)   “Commercial Cannabis Activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided for in this Chapter and Division 10, commencing with Section 26000, of the Business and Professions Code.

    (k)  “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

    (l)   “Deliver” or “Delivery” means the commercial transfer or delivery of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer.

    (m) “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between State licensees.

    (n)  “Indoor Cultivation” means a cultivation using exclusively artificial lighting.

    (o)  “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product from such blends, extractions, or infusions.

    (p)  “Medicinal Cannabis” or “Medicinal Cannabis Product” means cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician’s recommendation.

    (q)  “Mixed Light Cultivation” means a cultivation facility using a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting.

    (r)   “Outdoor Cultivation” means any cultivation conducted without the use of artificial lighting.

    (s)   “Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

    (t)   “State License” means a State license issued under Division 10, commencing with Section 26000, of the Business and Professions Code, and includes both an A-license and M-license as well as a testing laboratory license.

    (u)  “State Licensee” means a person that has been issued a State license.

    (v)  “Testing” means the laboratory testing of the quality, makeup, or purity of cannabis and cannabis products as required by applicable State law.

4-38-300 ADULT-USE CANNABIS ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.
    All commercial cannabis activity, including any that would be allowed under an A-license or to an A-licensee or for adult use, and all cultivation, including any indoor cultivation, mixed light cultivation and outdoor cultivation, other than cultivation for personal use in accordance with State law, is prohibited within the City, except as permitted by this Chapter.

 

4-38-400 PERMITTED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY.
    The following are permitted commercial cannabis activity within the City of San Leandro:

    (a)   Cannabis distribution and dispensing from a State-licensed cannabis dispensary for medical and adult use by persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older that also has a City-issued cannabis dispensary operating permit awarded pursuant to City of San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-33, and a City-issued conditional use permit awarded pursuant to City of San Leandro Zoning Code Article 22;

    (b)  Delivery of cannabis within the City of San Leandro from State-licensed cannabis dispensaries;

    (c)   The manufacture of cannabis product by a State licensee in accordance with all City of San Leandro ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited to, the City of San Leandro Zoning Code and the City of San Leandro Administrative Code;

    (d)  The testing of cannabis and cannabis product within a laboratory by a State licensee in accordance with all City of San Leandro ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited to, the City of San Leandro Zoning Code and the City of San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

4-38-405 STATE LICENSES.
    Subject to the requirements of this Chapter, and in accordance with the MAUCRSA and Division 10, commencing with Section 26000 of the Business and Professions Code, the following State license classification types, including temporary licenses, will be allowed within the City:

    (a)   Type 6—A or M - Manufacturer 1. (A - Adult Use; M - Medicinal) (Type 1 denotes manufacturers that do not use solvents in the manufacturing process).

    (b)  Type 7—A or M - Manufacturer 2. (A - Adult Use; M - Medicinal) (Type 2 denotes manufacturers that do use solvents in the manufacturing process).

    (c)   Type 8—Testing Laboratory.

    (d)  Type 10—A or M - Retailer. (A – Adult Use; M - Medicinal).

    (e)   Type 11—A or M - Distributor. (A – Adult Use; M - Medicinal).

    (f)   Cannabis dispensaries may also operate with a Type 6 M - Manufacturer 1 State license. Cannabis dispensaries shall not operate with a Type 7 M - Manufacturer 2 State license.

    (g)  Cannabis dispensaries shall not operate with a Type 8 - Testing Laboratory State license.

    (h)  Cannabis dispensaries may operate with a Type 10 A or M - Retailer (non-storefront) State license.

    (i)   Unless determined by the City Manager that cross-permitting would negatively impact public safety, and unless otherwise provided herein, State license Types 6, 7, and 8 are for both commercial adult-use cannabis activity and commercial medicinal cannabis activity.

 

4-38-500 ENFORCEMENT.
    (a)   Any commercial cannabis activity within the City in violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.

    (b)  Any person who willfully or knowingly: (1) engages in a violation of this Chapter; or (2) owns, possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel of real property in the City upon which a violation of this Chapter is maintained and who has actual knowledge of such violation (or would have actual knowledge of such violation after a reasonable inquiry), shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided by this Chapter.

    (c)   Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each day the violation occurs or persists.

    (d)  Any person in violation of any provision of this Chapter or who causes another person to be in violation of this Chapter shall have committed a misdemeanor. In addition, such violation may be punishable by a fine of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation and for each day the applicable violation continues to persist.

    (e)   Any person in violation of any provision of this Chapter may be subject to an administrative fine of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per offense.

    (f)   These penalties and remedies are cumulative, and in addition to any other penalties and remedies available to the City.

    (g)  Any person in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be reported to the State Bureau of Cannabis Control, or other applicable licensing authority as defined in Section 26000 of the Business and Professions Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-019, 12/4/17; Ordinance No. 2019-004, 4/1/19 (Sections 4-38-100—4-38-500))

CHAPTER 4-39 MOBILEHOME SPACE RENT STABILIZATION
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
4-39-100 SHORT TITLE.
    This Chapter shall be known as the “Mobilehome Space Rent Stabilization Ordinance.”

 

4-39-105 DEFINITIONS.
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall be defined as follows:

    (a)   “Affected Mobilehome Owners” means those Mobilehome Owners whose Space Rent is affected by a Rent adjustment made pursuant to this Chapter that is not covered by a valid lease meeting the requirements of California Civil Code Section 798.17(b) of the Mobilehome Residency Law, or otherwise legally exempt from local rent stabilization regulation.

    (b)  “Base Rent” means the Rent in effect for that Space on July 1, 2018, as adjusted in accordance with this Chapter.

    (c)   “Base Year” means the 2018 calendar year or, if a Fair Return Application subsequently establishes a new Base Rent pursuant to this Chapter, the calendar year preceding the year the application is made for the new Base Rent that is established.

    (d)  “Capital Improvement” means the installation of new improvements and facilities not including ordinary maintenance or repairs or Capital Replacement Costs. Capital Improvements are required to be amortized over the useful life of the improvements pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and the United States Internal Revenue Code.

    (e)   “Capital Improvement Costs” means all costs reasonably and necessarily related to the planning, engineering and construction of Capital Improvements and shall include debt service costs, if any, incurred as a direct result of Capital Improvements. Capital Improvement Costs do not include ordinary maintenance or repairs or Capital Replacement Costs.

    (f)   “Capital Replacement” means an improvement required to maintain the common facilities and areas of the park in a decent, safe and sanitary condition or to maintain the existing level of park amenities and services. A Capital Replacement is an expenditure as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Code that replaces, upgrades or repairs an existing improvement, such as, but not limited to, an on-site water or electrical distribution or sewage collection system, a street, a parking area, or common facility, such as a laundry, community kitchen or meeting room. If the expenditure qualifies for treatment as a capital expenditure which must be depreciated under the Internal Revenue Code, it is a Capital Replacement. If it can be fully deducted in one year as a business expense, it does not qualify as a Capital Replacement.

    (g)  “Capital Replacement Costs” means all costs reasonably and necessarily related to the planning, engineering and construction of Capital Replacement and shall include debt service costs, if any, incurred as a direct result of the Capital Replacement. Capital Replacement does not include Capital Improvement Costs.

    (h)  “Consumer Price Index or CPI” means the annual percentage change in the prices paid by urban consumers for a representative basket of goods and services. For purposes of this Chapter, the consumer price index is defined as follows: All Urban Consumers, San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA Area, All Items, 1982-1984=100, as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor.

    (i)   “Fair Return Application” means an application made to the City that seeks to increase Space Rents beyond the lesser of the CPI or four percent (4%) during the most recent twelve (12)-month period ending December of the prior year in order to provide a fair return to the Park Owner.

    (j)   “Hearing Officer” The City Manager or their designee who conducts a hearing or hearings pursuant to this Chapter. The minimum qualifications of the Hearing Officer shall be as established by the rent review procedures. A person shall not be appointed as a Hearing Officer if the City Manager or designee determines that the person has an actual or potential conflict of interest in the matter or if such appointment would have the appearance of a conflict of interest in the matter. For example, a person who is a mobilehome owner, a park owner or an immediate family member of a mobilehome owner or park owner shall be ineligible to serve as a Hearing Officer.

    (k)  “Interest Allowance on Amortized Expenses” means the interest rate on the cost of the amortized expense equal to the “average rate” for thirty (30)-year fixed rate home mortgages plus two percent (2%). The “average rate” shall be the rate Freddie Mac last published in its weekly Primary Mortgage Market Survey (“PMMS”) as of the date of the initial submission of the application. In the event that this rate is no longer published, the index which is most comparable to the PMMS index shall be used.

    (l)   “Legal Expenses” means reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness’ fees, and legal costs.

    (m) “Mobilehome Residency Law” means the California Mobilehome Residency Law codified in California Civil Code Section 798 et seq., as now enacted and hereafter amended.

    (n)  “Mobilehome” has the meaning set forth in Section 798.3 of the Mobilehome Residency Law as of the date of enactment of this Chapter as follows:

    (1)  A structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the Vehicle Code, including a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code, and a mobilehome, as defined in Section 18008 of the Health And Safety Code, but, except as provided in subsection (n)(2) of this definition, does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 799.29 of the Civil Code and Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code or a commercial coach as defined in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code.

    (2)  “Mobilehome” for purposes of this Chapter and pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.3(b) “includes trailers and other recreational vehicles of all types defined in Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code, other than motor homes, truck campers, and camping trailers, which are used for human habitation, if the occupancy criteria of either subsection (n)(2)(i) or (n)(2)(ii) of this definition, as follows, are met:”

    (i)   “The trailer or other recreation vehicle occupies a mobilehome site in the park, on November 15, 1992, under a rental agreement with a term of one month or longer, and the trailer or other recreational vehicle occupied a mobilehome site in the park prior to January 1, 1991.” (Civil Code Section 798.3(b)(1))

    (ii)  “The trailer or other recreational vehicle occupies a mobilehome site in the park for nine (9) or more continuous months commencing on or after November 15, 1992.” (Civil Code Section 798.3(b)(2))

    (o)  “Mobilehome Owner” means a person who is the owner of a Mobilehome and legally occupies the Mobilehome within a Mobilehome Park.

    (p)  “Mobilehome Park” or “Park” has the meaning set forth in Section 798.6 of the Mobilehome Residency Law, which is defined as of the date of enactment of this Chapter as any area of land within the City of San Leandro where two (2) or more mobilehome spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation.

    (q)  “Mobilehome Space” or “Space” is the site within a Mobilehome Park intended, designed or used for the location or accommodation of a Mobilehome and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction therewith.

    (r)   “Mobilehome Park Owner” or “Park Owner” means the owner or operator of a mobilehome park or an agent or representative authorized to act on said owner’s or operator’s behalf in connection with the maintenance or operation of such park.

    (s)   “Party” means any Affected Mobilehome Owner and/or Park Owner involved in proceedings under this Chapter.

    (t)   “Prospective Mobilehome Owner” means a person who is in the process of negotiating a Space tenancy in a Mobilehome Park.

    (u)  “Rent” means any consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity demanded or received by a Park Owner for, or in connection with, the use or occupancy of a Mobilehome Space, or in connection with the assignment of a lease, or in connection with subleasing of a Space. Rent shall not include:

    (1)  Utility charges for sub-metered gas and electricity.

    (2)  Charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer service, and/or other services, which are either provided and charged to Mobilehome Owners solely on a cost pass-through basis and/or are regulated by State or local law.

    (3)  Any amount paid for the use and occupancy of a Mobilehome unit (as opposed to amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a Mobilehome Space).

    (4)  Charges for laundry services.

    (5)  Storage charges.

    (v)  “Rent Increase” means any increase in Base Rent charged by a Mobilehome Park Owner to a Mobilehome Owner or offered to a Prospective Mobilehome Owner.

    (w)  “Rent Review Officer” means the Community Development Director or designee who shall serve as the Rent Review Officer to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Rent Review Officer shall have the power and duty to receive, investigate, and make findings and decisions regarding petitions for rent adjustment.

    (x)  “Rent Stabilization Administration Fee” means the fee established by this Chapter and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

    (y)  “Service Reduction” means a decrease or diminution in the basic service level provided by the Park Owner occurring at any time since January 1, 2019, including, but not limited to, services the Park Owner is required to provide pursuant to:

    (1)  California Civil Code Sections 1941.1 and 1941.2;

    (2)  The Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code Section 798 et seq.;

    (3)  The Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 18200 et seq.; or

    (4)  An express or implied agreement between the Park Owner and the Space tenant.

    (z)   “Special Circumstances Household” means a Mobilehome Owner or anyone else leasing a Space who has the following characteristics at the time of notice or implementation of a Mobilehome Park Owner action prescribed by this Chapter:

    (1)  Has total household income at or below fifty percent (50%) of the Alameda County area median household income as established annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or closest equivalent if the HUD income limits no longer exist; and

    (2)  Is sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or

    (3)  Has total household income at or below fifty percent (50%) of the Alameda County area median household income as established annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or closest equivalent if the HUD income limits no longer exist; and

    (4)  Qualifies as disabled as defined by Title 42, United States Code Section 423; or

    (5)  Is handicapped as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50072.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-010, 7/3/19 (Sections 4-39-100—4-39-105))

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-39-200 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Article is to establish an efficient method for reviewing certain requested Mobilehome Space Rent Increases in Mobilehome Parks to protect Mobilehome Owners from arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable Rent adjustments while enabling Park Owners and/or operators and investors to earn a fair and reasonable return on their investment in their Mobilehome Parks.

 

4-39-202 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless specifically defined in this Article or the context specifically requires otherwise, the terms used herein are defined in Article 1, Definitions, of this Chapter.

 

4-39-205 APPLICABILITY.
    This Article shall be applicable to all Mobilehome Spaces within the City of San Leandro except those specifically exempted by this Chapter or State law.

 

4-39-207 EXEMPTIONS.
    (a)   The following exemptions from local Rent regulations are provided by State law:

    (1)  Spaces that are subject to a lease that exempts that Space from Rent regulation pursuant to the Mobilehome Residency Law.1

 

Note
        1       Civil Code Section 798.17(a)(1) (“Rental agreements satisfying the criteria for exemption under Civil Code Section 798.17(b) shall be exempt from any City ordinance, rule, regulation, or initiative measure that establishes a maximum amount that a landlord may charge a tenant for rent. The terms of a rental agreement meeting the criteria of subdivision 798.17(b) shall prevail over conflicting provisions of an ordinance, rule, regulation, or initiative measure limiting or restricting rents in mobilehome parks, only during the term of the rental agreement or one or more uninterrupted, continuous extensions thereof. If the rental agreement is not extended and no new rental agreement in excess of twelve (12) months’ duration is entered into, then the last rental rate charged for the space under the previous rental agreement shall be the base rent for purposes of applicable provisions of law concerning rent regulation, if any.”)

 

    (2)  New Mobilehome Spaces exempted pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.45 of the Mobilehome Residency law.2

 

Note
        2       Civil Code Sections 798.45 and 798.7 (Newly constructed Mobilehome Spaces initially held out for rent after January 1, 1990 “shall be exempt from any City ordinance, rule, regulation, or initiative measure adopted by any City, County, or City and County, which establishes a maximum amount that a landlord may charge a tenant for rent.”)

 

    (3)  Spaces that are not the principal residence of the Mobilehome Owner, and that are exempt pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.21 of the Mobilehome Residency Law.

    (b)  This Article shall not apply to Mobilehomes or Mobilehome Parks owned or operated by any governmental agency or any rental unit where Rent is subsidized pursuant to a public program that limits the Rent that can be charged for the Mobilehome.

    (c)   This Article shall not apply to Mobilehome Parks with fewer than ten (10) Spaces.

 

 

4-39-210 BASE RENT.
    (a)   Base Rent in 2018 for Non-exempt Spaces: Base Rent in 2018 for non-exempt Spaces means the Rent in effect for that Space on July 1, 2018. Except as provided in this Article, a Mobilehome Park Owner shall not demand, accept or retain Rent for a Mobilehome Space exceeding the Base Rent.

    (1)  If a previously rented Mobilehome Space was not rented in the 2018 calendar year, the Park Owner shall not demand, accept, or retain Rent for said Space in an amount exceeding the ninetieth (90th) percentile of all subject Rents in effect at the time the Space is rented. The Park Owner shall provide evidence verifying compliance with the terms of this provision to the Rent Review Officer upon request.

    (2)  If an existing Mobilehome Space is rented for the first time after the 2018 calendar year, the rent charged by the Park Owner in that year shall be the Base Rent for the Space.

    (b)  Base Rent Following Expiration of an Exempt Lease: Base Rent for a Mobilehome Space that becomes subject to this Chapter upon the expiration of an exempt lease shall be the Rent in effect under the exempt lease as of the date of its expiration. Mobilehome Space Rents shall be verified by information required on the annual registration application or any other documentation required by the City.

    (c)   Base Rent Following Termination or Permanent Removal: Under either of the following circumstances listed below, a Park Owner shall be permitted to charge a new Base Rent for the Mobilehome Space not to exceed the ninetieth (90th) percentile of all subject rents in effect at the time the Space is rented:

    (1)  The termination of the tenancy of the Affected Mobilehome Owner in accordance with the Mobilehome Residency Law; or

    (2)  The voluntary permanent removal of a Mobilehome by a Mobilehome Owner. A removal of the Mobilehome from the Space for the purpose of performing rehabilitation or Capital Improvements to the Space or for the purpose of upgrading the Mobilehome shall not constitute a voluntary removal of the Mobilehome.

    The Park Owner shall provide evidence verifying compliance with the terms of this provision to the Rent Review Officer upon request.

    (d)  Base Rent Following a Fair Return Application: Base Rent shall be the allowable Rent determined as a result of a Fair Return Application.

 

4-39-212 ANNUAL RENT INCREASES.
    (a)   Annual Rent Increase:

    (1)  Starting in 2019, on or after January 1 of each year, a Mobilehome Park Owner may impose a Rent Increase for a Mobilehome Space that shall be equal to the lesser of CPI or four percent (4%) of the Rent charged for the Space in the preceding year, except as permitted by this Article in accordance with a CPI Decrease, an In-place Mobilehome transfer, or extraordinary circumstances. Such Rent Increase may be imposed once in any twelve (12) month period.

    (2)  CPI Decrease: In the event that the CPI decreases, no Rent decrease shall be required pursuant to this section.

    (b)  Notice of Allowable Annual Rent Increase:

    (1)  Calculation of Annual Increase. The allowable annual Rent Increase shall be equal to the lesser of CPI or four percent (4%) annually unless the Rent Review Officer or designee elects to set an alternate cap on the annual increase due to a CPI Decrease or extraordinary circumstances.

    (2)  Notice of Annual Increase. If the Rent Review Officer elects to change the amount of the Annual Increase due to a CPI Decrease or extraordinary circumstances, notice shall be: (i) posted by February 15 of each year in City Hall and on the City’s website; (ii) mailed and/or emailed by the City to each Park Owner and Affected Mobilehome Owner in each Park; and (iii) posted by the Park Owner on a notice board in each Mobilehome Park within three (3) business days after it is received by the Park Owner.

    (c)   Compliance with State Law: Rent Increases permitted pursuant to this section shall not be effective and shall not be demanded, accepted, or retained until the Park Owner has given the notice required by State law.

    (d)  Notice: A written notice of the amount and duration of each Rent Increase or new or increased Capital Improvement Cost or Capital Replacement Cost pass-through charge made under the provisions of this section shall be filed by the Park Owner with the Rent Review Officer or designee, and provided to each Affected Mobilehome Owner, at least ninety (90) days before the Rent Increase goes into effect or as required by the Mobilehome Residency Law. The notice shall identify the Park and shall specify the dollar amount of the increase, the percentage of the increase, the duration of the increase, an itemization of all new or increased pass-throughs and additional Rent charges, the specific Space affected, the date the increase will go into effect, how each increase was calculated, and the date the Rent on each affected Space was last increased. The notice shall also advise each Affected Mobilehome Owner of any right to petition for review of a proposed Rent Increase and that a petition form may be requested from the Rent Review Officer or Designee.

 

4-39-215 VACANCY DECONTROL, RENT INCREASES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW BASE RENT.
    (a)   A Park Owner shall be permitted to charge a new Space Rent for a Mobilehome Space subject to the terms of this Chapter whenever a lawful Space vacancy occurs. The new Space Rent shall become the Base Rent upon which future rent increases pursuant to this Chapter will be calculated. For the purposes of this Chapter, a lawful Space vacancy is defined as any of the following:

    (1)  Voluntary in place transfer, which is a sale, transfer or other conveyance of a Mobilehome with the Mobilehome remaining on the Mobilehome Space following the sale, transfer or conveyance. A transfer of title whereby the Mobilehome Owner adds or removes one or more co-owners and continues to reside in the Mobilehome as their primary residence shall not constitute an in-place transfer. No increase may be imposed pursuant to this section when an existing Mobilehome Owner replaces an existing Mobilehome with another Mobilehome, occupying the same Mobilehome Space. No increase may be imposed pursuant to this section where title to the Mobilehome passes to one or more person(s) who, at the time of the title transfer: (i) was/were also lawful, authorized resident(s) of the Mobilehome; or (ii) were/are parents, siblings, children, grandchildren, nieces, or nephews of the Mobilehome Owner and the Mobilehome remains in the same Space. A Park Owner may not condition an in-place transfer of a Mobilehome, or condition the assignment of an existing lease to a prospective Mobilehome Owner that is subject to this Article, upon agreement to an increased Rent.

    (2)  Voluntary removal of a Mobilehome by the Mobilehome Owner who will no longer be a resident of the Park. Removal of the Mobilehome from the Space for the purpose of performing rehabilitation or Capital Improvements to the Space or for the purpose of upgrading the Mobilehome with a newer Mobilehome shall not constitute a voluntary removal of the Mobilehome under this section.

    (3)  A vacancy occurring after the Park Owner obtains a judgment of unlawful detainer (an eviction), a judgment of abandonment for an “Abandoned Mobilehome” as defined by and pursuant to the Mobilehome Residency Law, or other termination of the tenancy of the Affected Mobilehome Owner in accordance with the Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code Sections 798.55 through 798.60, as amended.

    (4)  Abandonment of the Mobilehome as determined by a judgment of abandonment pursuant to Section 798.61 of the Mobilehome Residency Law.

    (b)  Rent Increases authorized by this section shall be in addition to any other Rent Increases authorized by this Article.

 

4-39-217 FAIR RETURN RENT INCREASES.
    (a)   Fair Return: A Park Owner has the right to obtain a Rent Increase to maintain net operating income (“MNOI”) equal to the Base Year net operating income adjusted by the percentage increase in the CPI since the Base Year. It shall be presumed this standard provides a fair return. Nothing in this Article shall preclude the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, from granting a Rent Increase that is necessary in order to meet constitutional fair return requirements.

    (b)  If a Park Owner presents evidence to the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, including any financial records requested by the Rent Review Officer, which proves that the Park Owner is denied a fair return by the provisions of this Article, the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, may authorize an increase in Rent as deemed appropriate by the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, to provide a fair return to the Park Owner. The Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, shall use the method set forth in this Article to determine the fair return.

 

4-39-220 METHOD TO DETERMINE A FAIR RETURN.
    (a)   Maintenance of Net Operating Income: It shall be presumed that the net operating income produced by the property during the Base Year provided a fair return. A Park Owner shall be entitled to Rents sufficient to earn a fair and reasonable return and to maintain and increase the Base Year net operating income in accordance with this section. This method shall be called Maintenance of Net Operating Income (“MNOI”) and shall be included in all Fair Return Applications.

    (b)  Adjustment of Base Year Net Operating Income: The Park Owner or the Affected Mobilehome Owners may apply to the Rent Review Officer to rebut the presumption of fair and reasonable return based upon the Base Year net operating income. To make such a determination and in order to adjust to the Base Year net operating income, the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer on appeal, must make the following findings:

    (1)  Exceptional Expenses in the Base Year. The Park Owner’s operating expenses in the Base Year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating operating expenses so the Base Year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the park over a reasonable period of time. The following factors shall be considered in making such a finding:

    (i)   Extraordinary amounts were expended for necessary maintenance and repairs.

    (ii)  Maintenance and repairs were below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of services provided.

    (iii) Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the application of prudent business practices.

    (2)  Exceptional Circumstances in the Base Year. The gross income during the Base Year was disproportionately low due to exceptional circumstances. The following factors shall be considered in making such a finding:

    (i)   If the gross income during the Base Year was lower than it might have been because some Mobilehome Owners were charged reduced rent.

    (ii)  If the gross income during the Base Year was significantly lower than normal because of the destruction of the Park and/or temporary eviction for construction or repairs.

    (iii) The pattern of rent increases in the years prior to the Base Year and whether those increases reflected increases in the CPI.

    (iv) Base Year Rents were disproportionately low in comparison to the Base Year Rents of other comparable parks in the City.

    (v)  Other exceptional circumstances, excluding any comparisons of Base Year Rents to Rents of other comparable parks located outside of the City or to market rents determined from comparable Parks located outside of the City.

    (c)   Calculation of Net Operating Income:

    (1)  Net Operating Income. Net operating income shall be calculated by subtracting operating expenses from gross rental income.

    (2)  Gross Rental Income.

    (i)   Gross rental income shall include the following:

    (A)  Gross Rents calculated as gross rental income at one hundred percent (100%) occupancy, adjusted for uncollected Rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent such vacancies or bad debts are beyond the control of the Park Owner. Uncollected Space Rents in excess of three percent (3%) of gross Space Rent shall be presumed to be uncollectable unless established otherwise and shall not be included in computing gross rental income.

    (B)  All other income or consideration received or receivable in connection with the use or occupancy of the Rental Unit, except as excluded below.

    (ii)  Gross rental income shall not include the following:

    (A)  Utility charges for submetered gas and electricity.

    (B)  Charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer service, and/or other services which are either provided and charged to Mobilehome Owners solely on a cost pass-through basis and/or are regulated by State or local law.

    (C)  Any amount paid for the use and occupancy of a Mobilehome unit (as opposed to amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a Mobilehome Space).

    (D)  Charges for laundry services.

    (E)  Storage charges.

    (F)  Rental Income from Spaces exempted from Rent limitation by State law or this Chapter.

    (3)  Operating Expenses.

    (i)   Operating expenses shall include the following:

    (A)  Reasonable costs of operation and maintenance.

    (B)  Management expenses. It shall be presumed that management expenses increase by the percentage increase in Rents or the CPI, whichever is greater, between the Base Year and the prior year unless the level of management services has either increased or decreased significantly between the Base Year and the prior year.

    (C)  Utility costs, except where the consideration of the income associated with the provision of the utility service is regulated by State law and consideration of the costs associated with the provision of the utility service is preempted by State law.

    (D)  Real property taxes attributable to the Base Year or prior year regardless of when actually paid.

    (E)  License and registration fees required by law to the extent these expenses are not otherwise paid or reimbursed by Mobilehome Owners.

    (F)  Park Owner-performed labor compensated at reasonable hourly rates. No Park Owner-performed labor shall be included as an operating expense unless the Park Owner submits documentation showing the date, time, and nature of the work performed. There shall be a maximum allowed under this subsection of five percent (5%) of gross income unless the Park Owner shows greater services were performed for the benefit of the Mobilehome Owners.

    (G)  Legal Expenses incurred: (1) in connection with successful good faith attempts to recover Rents owed; (2) pursuit of rights under or in relationship to this Article, including Legal Expenses incurred in the course of pursuing successful Fair Return Applications; (3) under unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable law and, when incurred in the normal operation of the Park, to the extent such expenses are not recovered from adverse or other parties.

    (H)  Interest allowance on amortized expenses.

    (ii)  Exclusions from Operating Expenses. Operating expenses shall not include the following:

    (A)  Mortgage principal or interest payments or other debt service costs.

    (B)  Penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of any provision of this Chapter or other provisions of law.

    (C)  Land lease expenses.

    (D)  Political contributions and payments to organizations which are substantially devoted to legislative lobbying purposes.

    (E)  Depreciation.

    (F)  Expenses for which the Park Owner has been reimbursed by any utility rebate or discount, security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement or any other method or device.

    (G)  Unreasonable increases that deviate substantially from the historical average increase in expenses since the Base Year.

    (H)  Expenses associated with the provision of master-metered gas and electricity services.

    (I)   Expenses attributable to unreasonable delays in performing necessary maintenance or repair work or the failure to complete necessary replacements.

    (J)   Expenses attributable to a Park-owned Mobilehome, including, but not limited to, any Mobilehomes rented out by the Park Owner except when provided to a Park manager as a component of employment compensation.

    (K)  Expenses attributable to Spaces exempt from Rent limitations by State law or this Chapter shall be excluded, for the purpose of determining applicable rents for non-exempt Spaces, by reducing the total allowed operating expenses by the amount attributable to exempt Spaces. This may be done by reducing the total allowed operating expenses by the percentage of operating expenses attributable to the total number of exempt Spaces in the Park, or by another method approved by the Rent Review Officer.

    (iii) Adjustments of Operating Expenses. Base Year and/or current operating expense items shall be averaged with other expense levels for the same types of items for other years or amortized or adjusted by the CPI or may otherwise be adjusted, in order to establish an expense amount for the item(s) that most reasonably serves the objectives of obtaining a reasonable comparison of Base Year and prior year expenses. Grounds for such adjustments include, but are not limited to:

    (A)  Either the amount or nature of an expense item for a particular year is not representative.

    (B)  The Base Year expense is not a reasonable projection of average past expenditures for that item in the years immediately preceding or following the base year.

    (C)  The prior year expense is not a reasonable projection of expenditures for that item in recent years or of future expenditures for that item.

    (D)  If a particular item of expense exceeds the normal industry or other comparable standard for the area, the Park Owner shall bear the burden of proving the reasonableness of the expense. To the extent that it is found that the expense is unreasonable it may be adjusted to reflect the normal industry standard.

    (E)  A Base Year expense is exceptionally low by industry standards and/or on an inflation adjusted basis is exceptionally low relative to the prior year expense although the level or type of service for which the expense is incurred has not changed significantly.

    (F)  An increase in maintenance or management expenses is disproportionate to the percentage increase in the CPI, while the level of services has not changed significantly and/or is not justified by special circumstances.

    (d)  Constitutionally Required Fair Return: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer, if on appeal, is authorized to approve any Rent Increase that is constitutionally required by law to yield a fair return.3

 

Note
        3       Fisher v. Berkeley, 37 Cal. 3d 644, 693 P.2d 261, 209 (The court held that a standard allowing the landlord to recover a reasonable return on investment was sufficient to withstand a facial challenge. The court suggested a Net Operating Income Method would be acceptable, provided landlords’ income was not indefinitely frozen at the nominal amount earned in the base year.)

 

    (e)   Rent Increase Effective Date: Rent Increases approved by the Rent Review Officer shall be effective on the date given by the applicant in the notice to the Affected Mobilehome Owners required in Section 798.30 of the California Civil Code. In the event that the period for determining the allowable Rent Increase exceeds one hundred twenty (120) days, the Park Owner may recover a Rent charge retroactive to one hundred twenty (120) days after the Fair Return Application is deemed complete. Delays or continuances that are mutually agreed to in writing by all parties concerned, extensions authorized in this Article, and the number of days that lapse between applicant receiving notice of the necessity of replenishing their cost account with the City and paying the required amount pursuant to the fee payment procedure for review of Fair Return Applications, including any costs of expert analysis ordered pursuant to this Article, shall not be counted in determining whether said one hundred twenty (120)-day period has expired. In order to avoid undue hardship on the Mobilehome Owners affected by the decision, the retroactive Rent charge shall be amortized and paid over a period of five (5) years, unless the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, determines that a different amortization period is more reasonable. Interest may be charged on this amortized Rent.

    (f)   Per Space Rent Adjustment Pursuant to Fair Return Standard: The allowable Rent Increase per Mobilehome Space pursuant to this section may not be increased as a result of exempt Spaces in the Park.

 

4-39-222 SETTLEMENT PROPOSALS.
    (a)   At least ten (10) days prior to the date specified when the Rent Review Officer will take under submission a Fair Return, Capital Replacement, or Rent Reduction application filed pursuant to this Article, or ten (10) days prior to any appeal hearing, the Mobilehome Owner Representative or the Park Owner may submit a written settlement offer to the other party to settle the claims or requests made in the application and to allow a decision or award to be made in accordance with the terms and conditions stated in the offer.

    (b)  The offer shall include a statement of the terms and conditions that the offering party is willing to accept, and a provision that allows the accepting party to indicate acceptance of the offer by signing a statement that the offer is accepted. At the same time that the offering party submits its offer to the other party, the offering party shall also file a copy of the written settlement offer with the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer if on appeal, in a separately sealed envelope, with a statement on the outside of the envelope identifying the offeror and stating that it is a written settlement offer submitted pursuant to this section. The sealed copy of the written settlement offer that is filed with the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer if on appeal shall not be opened until it is either timely accepted by the opposing party or, if it is not timely accepted by the opposing party, after the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer, as appropriate, has rendered a final decision on the application or appeal.

    (c)   Acceptance of the offer must be in writing and shall be signed by the counsel for the accepting party or, if unrepresented by counsel, by the accepting party.

    (d)  If the offer is accepted, the parties shall notify the Rent Review Officer, and the Hearing Officer if the application is on appeal, and the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer, as appropriate, shall enter the accepted offer as the final decision respecting the application or appeal.

    (e)   If the offer is not accepted within seven (7) calendar days of the offer’s receipt by the opposing party, the offer shall be deemed withdrawn and cannot be given in or considered as evidence as part of the Rent Review Officer’s or Hearing Officer’s decision.

    (f)   Legal Expenses. If an offer made pursuant to this section is not accepted and the rejecting party fails to obtain a more favorable award or decision, the rejecting party shall not recover their post-offer Legal Expenses and shall pay the Legal Expenses incurred by the offering party from the time of the offer. If competing offers to settle are timely submitted but have not been timely accepted, the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer, as may be appropriate, shall determine which party has failed to obtain a more favorable decision or award and assign responsibility for the payment of legal expenses accordingly.

    (1)  The Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer shall mail and email to the parties a notice of assignment of Legal Expense liability (“Legal Expense Notice”) within seven (7) days after issuance of a final decision on the application or appeal. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the Legal Expense Notice, each party shall simultaneously serve a written request for the awarding of and an accounting of Legal Expenses on the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer and all parties by regular mail and electronic mail. Said requests shall include detailed records of fee billings, time records and supporting declarations executed under penalty of perjury. Within seven (7) days of receiving the requests, opposing parties may file and serve objections in the same manner as service of the original requests. Within seven (7) days after service of the oppositions or within seven (7) days of the deadline for the filing of oppositions, if none is submitted, the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer may submit a proposed supplemental decision stating the amount of legal expenses each party is required to pay and the reasons therefor.

    (i)   When issued by the Rent Review Officer, said supplemental decision shall become final when issued and shall be appealable separately from the Rent Review Officer’s decision pertaining to the merits of the application. The appellate procedures set forth in this Article shall govern an appeal of a Rent Review Officer’s decision pertaining to the awarding of Legal Expenses, but an appeal of a Legal Expenses award shall be consolidated with any appeal taken of the Rent Review Officer’s final decision pertaining to the merits of the application.

    (ii)  When issued by the Hearing Officer, said supplemental decision shall become final seven (7) days after the proposed decision, unless either party requests an evidentiary hearing within said seven (7) days in which case a final decision shall be made within seven (7) days after the evidentiary hearing is concluded. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall become final upon mailing, with proofs of service, to all parties of the: (A) final decision on the merits of the application; or (B) final decision on the Legal Expenses award, whichever occurs last.

    (iii) In their discretion, the Rent Review Officer or the Hearing Officer, as appropriate, may reduce or offset from any Legal Expense award made in favor of the applicant by the amount of legal expenses the applicant may be required to pay.

    (2)  Any award of Legal Expenses shall be itemized by the Park Owner separately from any Rent Increase or Services Reduction award. Legal Expenses awarded to Park Owners shall be shown as a limited time pass-through charged to the Affected Mobilehome Owners. A Legal Expense award to a Park Owner plus Allowable Interest on Amortized Expenses shall be recovered in equal monthly payments over a five (5)-year period, unless the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer determines that a different period is more appropriate, and shall be eliminated after payment is completed at the end of the amortization period. Legal Expenses awarded to Mobilehome Owners shall be made as either a Rent credit or direct payment to the Mobilehome Owners.

    (3)  In determining whether a party has obtained a more favorable award or decision than that proffered in a written settlement offer not accepted by that party, the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer shall rely upon and be guided by legal precedent and authorities construing the same term as it is used in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 998.

    (g)  The time limits prescribed in this section may be extended by the Rent Review Officer or the Hearing Officer, as appropriate, upon a showing of good cause.

 

4-39-225 PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF RENT.
    (a)   The following matters are subject to review by the Rent Review Officer upon application:

    (1)  Fair Return Rent Increase.

    (2)  Preapproval of a temporary Rent Increase for specified Capital Improvements and Capital Replacements.

    (3)  Rent reduction for Service Reduction.

    (b)  Limit on Frequency of Applications: Only one application pursuant to this Article may be filed for a Mobilehome Park within any twelve (12)-month period, except in the event of extraordinary circumstances that could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time the prior application was filed.

    (c)   Filing of Application:

    (1)  Applications for Rent adjustments for fair return Rent Increases, temporary Capital Improvements and Capital Replacements Rent Increases, or Rent reductions for Service Reductions shall be on forms prescribed by the Rent Review Officer.

    (2)  The Rent Review Officer may require an application to contain any information as he or she deems relevant, including, but not limited to:

    (i)   A list of the names and addresses of all Mobilehome Owners subject to the proposed Rent adjustment.

    (ii)  A statement of the date the Rent adjustment is proposed to be effective.

    (iii) The Rent for each Space in the park in the Base Year, and the three (3) prior years.

    (iv) An income and expense statement for the Base Year, and the four (4) prior years.

    (v)  Evidence documenting the income and expenses claimed by the Park Owner.

    (vi) All other documentation and opinion testimony upon which the Park Owner is relying upon to justify the Rent Increase, or upon which the Mobilehome Owner is relying upon to justify a Rent reduction.

    (vii) A statement of the applicant’s theories in support of the Rent Increase or Rent reduction.

    (d)  Notice of Application: The applicant and the City shall provide notice of an application as follows:

    (1)  The applicant and City: by sending a hard copy and electronic copy of the application to either: (i) each Affected Mobilehome Owner; or (ii) the Park Owner, as appropriate;

    (2)  The applicant: by providing the City with hard and electronic copies of the application.

    (e)   Determination that Application is Complete: Within sixty (60) days after filing an application, the Rent Review Officer will determine if it is complete. An application will be considered complete only if and when the required fees have been paid. If the application is incomplete, the Rent Review Officer will inform the applicant in writing as to what additional information is required. Within forty-five (45) days of the applicant’s submittal of requested additional information or fees, the Rent Review Officer shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant of the Rent Review Officer’s determination. This process shall continue until the Rent Review Officer issues a written notice advising the applicant that the application is complete. The time period for Rent Increase effective date shall begin running on the date the Rent Review Officer delivers said completeness notice to the applicant.

    (f)   Access to Application: Applications shall be available upon request for inspection and copying by the public during the City’s normal business hours.

    (g)  Expert Analysis: Upon the receipt of an application authorized by this Article, the Rent Review Officer shall determine if the employment of experts will be necessary for a thorough analysis of the application. The Rent Review Officer may retain a certified public accountant to, among other things, verify the accuracy of the expense and income items stated in the application; an expert in the use and theory of the fair return and MNOI methods utilized in this Article; and/or, a licensed appraiser.

    (h)  Response by Other Party: The party not filing the application may submit a written response to the application within thirty (30) days after the application is determined complete, unless the Rent Review Officer determines that there is good cause to extend that deadline. The party filing a written response shall deliver it to the applicant and to the Rent Review Officer.

    (i)   Decision by Rent Review Officer: Applications filed pursuant to this Article shall be decided by the Rent Review Officer based on substantial evidence and without a hearing or personal appearances by any of the involved parties or their representatives. The decision will be made within sixty (60) days of the date that the application is deemed complete, unless the Rent Review Officer determines that there is good cause to extend that deadline. The Rent Review Officer shall email all involved parties or their representatives the date on which the Rent Review Officer will consider the matter under submission and beyond which the Rent Review Officer will not accept additional information, briefs, evidence or arguments (the “Submission Date”). The Rent Review Officer shall email notice of the Submission Date to all parties or their representatives at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the Submission Date. The Rent Review Officer’s decision on the merits of the application shall be emailed and sent by mail, with proof of mailing, to the Mobilehome Owner, the Park Owner, the Park Owner’s and Mobilehome Owners’ representatives, and the Mobilehome Owners’ Association Representative, if any.

    (j)   Required Findings in Fair Return Decision: Any Rent adjustment decision pursuant to this Article that approves a fair return rent increase shall include a determination that the Park Owner would be denied a fair return according to the method in this Chapter and shall include findings made of the following:

    (1)  Base Year and prior year rental income;

    (2)  Base Year and prior year operating expenses by category;

    (3)  Base Year and prior year overall operating expenses;

    (4)  Base Year and prior year net operating income;

    (5)  The percentage change in net operating income between the Base Year and the prior year;

    (6)  The percentage change in the CPI between the Base Year and prior year;

    (7)  The ratio of the percentage change in net operating income to the percentage change in the CPI between the Base Year and prior year;

    (8)  The rent adjustment required under the MNOI standard, if applicable to the application.

    (k)  Conditions for Allowance or Disallowance of Rent Increase: The allowance or disallowance of any proposed Rent Increase (or decrease) or portion thereof may be reasonably conditioned in any manner necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Article.

    (l)   Representation of Parties:

    (1)  Each party may be represented by any person of its choosing. The representative need not be an attorney.

    (2)  Written designation of representatives shall be filed with the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer.

    (3)  The written designation of the representative shall include a statement that the representative is authorized to bind the party to any stipulation, decision or other action taken by the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer.

    (m) Overall Period for Review of Application: Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a decision on an application for Rent adjustment made pursuant to this Article shall be made within one hundred twenty (120) days after the application is deemed complete, unless extended by the Rent Review Officer or Hearing Officer for good cause.

    (n)  Standard of Review: The applicant shall bear the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, on all issues necessary to the granting of the petitioner’s petition, both at the Rent Review Officer and Hearing Officer levels of review.

 

4-39-227 APPEAL OF THE RENT REVIEW OFFICER’S DECISION.
    (a)   The decision of the Rent Review Officer on an application for Rent Increase for fair return, Capital Improvements, or Capital Replacements, or Rent reduction for Service Reduction may be appealed within thirty (30) days after the date of its mailing. An appeal by the Park Owner shall be signed by the Park Owner or its lawfully authorized agent. An appeal by the Mobilehome Owners must be signed by the Mobilehome Owners residing on twenty-five percent (25%) of the Mobilehome Spaces that are subject to the Rent Review Officer’s decision. An appeal must be in writing and must be delivered to the opposing parties and the City within the thirty (30)-day appeal period. If the Rent Review Officer’s decision is not timely appealed, the Rent Review Officer’s decision shall become final on the thirty-first (31st) day after the decision is mailed. The appealing party shall be required to pay for the costs of the appeal, including those imposed by the Hearing Officer and those established by resolution of the City Council. The appeal shall be conducted through a de novo evidentiary hearing, which shall consider at least the following: the application, all information, expert opinions and arguments submitted by the parties to the Hearing Officer; the opinions of the City’s experts; additional arguments or facts upon which the Hearing Officer’s decision is based; and the briefs, evidence and testimony accepted or rejected by the Hearing Officer in support of or in opposition to the application by any of the parties to the proceedings.

    (b)  Procedure for Selection of a Hearing Officer:

    (1)  Hearing Officers shall be licensed attorneys of the State Bar of California in good standing, and shall have no financial interest in Mobilehomes, Mobilehome Spaces or Mobilehome Parks and shall not have represented Mobilehome Park Owners or Mobilehome Park Mobilehome Owners in Rent setting cases or Park closings, Park conversions or any disputes between Park Owners and Park residents.

    (2)  A Hearing Officer shall be selected through the California Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). In the event OAH is unavailable or unable to provide a Hearing Officer, the City Manager or designee may elect to contract with another agency, lawyer, or law firm that provides arbitration or Hearing Officer services or may establish a panel from which the Hearing Officer is selected in accordance with this section.

    (3)  In the event a list of Hearing Officers is established, the City Manager or designee shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that the list is comprised of at least five (5) qualified candidates. A Hearing Officer shall disqualify himself or herself from serving as Hearing Officer in a particular matter where he/she has a conflict of interest within the meaning of the Political Reform Act (Government Code Section 87100 et seq.), and shall otherwise comply with the disqualification provisions of Canon (3)E. of the Code of Judicial Ethics. The City shall make the initial selection of the Hearing Officer from the panel. The parties to the appeal shall be advised in writing of the selected Hearing Officer, and advised of their right to disqualify the selected Hearing Officer within five (5) days of receipt of the notice of selection. In the event of a disqualification, another Hearing Officer shall be randomly selected from the panel by the City, and a new notice of hearing sent to the parties. Each party shall have the right to disqualify one Hearing Officer for a particular appeal if there are five (5) or fewer Hearing Officers on the list and may disqualify up to two (2) Hearing Officers if there are eight (8) or more Hearing Officers on the list.

    (c)   Time of and Scheduling of Hearing:

    (1)  A hearing on the appeal shall commence within thirty (30) days of the selection of the Hearing Officer unless both parties agree to a different schedule. The hearing shall be completed within fifteen (15) days after it is commenced. These time deadlines may be extended by the Hearing Officer for good cause.

    (2)  The hearing may be scheduled during normal business hours of the City unless a majority of the residents that are subject to the appeal requests that the hearing be scheduled outside of normal City business hours. The hearing shall be scheduled at a time that is convenient for the residents’ and Park Owner’s representatives.

    (d)  Presentations by each party at the hearing and of the City staff and experts shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes each unless the Hearing Officer determines good cause exists to extend those time periods. Each party and the City shall be permitted a cumulative total of one hour of cross-examination of the opposing party’s expert witnesses, unless the Hearing Officer determines good cause exists to extend those time periods. The City may provide legal counsel to help prepare the City’s experts for their presentation at the appeal hearing, to defend the City’s expert witness and to cross examine the expert witnesses of the parties.

    (e)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated herein, whether or not the City decides to appear, submit documents and/or briefs, retain counsel to represent the City, or otherwise participate in the administrative appellate proceedings shall be left to the discretion of the City.

    (f)   Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the hearing.

    (g)  Requests for Additional Information Not Previously Provided to the Rent Review Officer by Opposing Party:

    (1)  Either party or the City may request that additional, supporting documentation that was not previously provided to the Rent Review Officer as part of its initial examination and decision be provided to substantiate the claims made by a party. The request shall be presented in writing to the Hearing Officer.

    (2)  The Hearing Officer may order production of such requested documentation if the Hearing Officer determines the information is relevant to the proceedings.

    (h)  Responses:

    (1)  Mobilehome Owners or the Park Owner may submit responses to the decision of the Rent Review Officer or to reports by the City’s experts. Responses shall be submitted to the other parties and the Hearing Officer at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Responses shall be in printed and electronic form.

    (2)  Rebuttal reports may be submitted by the Park Owner, Mobilehome Owners, and/or City or its expert(s). Such reports shall be submitted to the parties and Hearing Officer at least five (5) days prior to a hearing. Rebuttals shall be in printed and electronic form.

    (3)  The parties’ responses and rebuttal reports shall be considered the prehearing briefs of the parties and the City and no other prehearing briefs shall be allowed unless requested by the Hearing Officer for good cause.

    (i)   Conduct of Hearing:

    (1)  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the City Council and any rules set forth by the Hearing Officer.

    (2)  The Hearing Officer shall have the power and authority to require and administer oaths or affirmations where appropriate, and to take and hear evidence concerning any matter pending before the Hearing Officer.

    (3)  The rules of evidence generally applicable in the courts shall not be binding in the hearing. Hearsay evidence and any and all other evidence which the Hearing Officer deems relevant may be admitted and considered.

    (4)  Any party or such party’s representative, designated in writing by the party, may appear at the hearing to offer such documents, oral testimony, written declaration or other evidence as may be relevant to the proceedings.

    (5)  The Hearing Officer may grant or order not more than two continuances of the hearing for not more than ten (10) working days each. Additional continuances may be granted only if all parties stipulate in writing or if the Hearing Officer finds that there is a good cause for the continuance. Such continuances may be granted or ordered at the hearing without further written notice to the parties.

    (6)  A recording of the proceedings shall be made or arranged by the Hearing Officer in a format that is made easily available, upon request, within thirty  (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing.

    (7)  The hearing shall be conducted in a manner that ensures the parties have an opportunity to obtain documents and to obtain information about the theories and facts to be presented by the opposing parties in adequate time in advance of the hearing to enable preparation of their respective cases.

    (8)  Deadline for Decision: Appeals shall be decided by the Hearing Officer within ninety (90) days of the date of the filing of the appeal and payment of all appellate fees, unless extended by the Hearing Officer for good cause or by the Rent Review Officer to accommodate scheduling availability of a Hearing Officer.

    (9)  Notice of Decision: The Rent Review Officer shall mail hardcopies of the Hearing Officer’s decision to the Park Owner and all Affected Mobilehome Owners within fifteen (15) calendar days of the City’s receipt of the Hearing Officer’s written decision. The decision shall be emailed to the Park Owner’s and Mobilehome Owners’ representatives as soon as possible after the decision is received by the City.

    (j)   Modification of Decision in the Event of Mathematical or Clerical Inaccuracies: Any party alleging that the Hearing Officer’s statement of decision contains mathematical or clerical inaccuracies may so notify the Hearing Officer and the other party within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of mailing of the decision. The Hearing Officer may make corrections and shall file a corrected statement of decision within ten (10) working days after receiving the request to correct. Alternatively, the Hearing Officer may decline to correct the decision and shall so notify the parties of his/her determination. Upon filing a corrected statement of decision or a determination not to correct the decision, the Hearing Officer’s decision shall be final.

    (k)  Preservation of Record: Written findings made by the final decision maker pursuant to this section shall be permanently preserved in the City records.

 

4-39-230 TEMPORARY RENT INCREASES FOR SPECIFIED CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS AND CAPITAL REPLACEMENTS.
    (a)   A Park Owner shall be permitted to obtain a temporary Rent increase to reimburse specified Capital Improvements and Capital Replacements pursuant to this section.

    (b)  The City Council shall from time to time adopt an amortization schedule for typical Capital Improvements and Capital Replacements subject to the provisions of this section.

    (c)   Prior to making a Capital Replacement or Capital Improvement, the Park Owner may file an application with the Rent Review Officer for approval of a temporary Rent Increase to reimburse Capital Improvement Costs or Capital Replacement Costs. Except as provided in subsection (h), a Park Owner who commences and completes a Capital Improvement project prior to obtaining a temporary Rent Increase approval under this section, shall be deemed to have conclusively waived its right to seek a Rent Increase for that Cost.

    (d)  Applications for a temporary Rent Increase shall contain at a minimum the following information:

    (1)  A description and cost of the proposed project. The estimated cost of the proposed project shall be reflected in at least two (2) bids or proposals from qualified and licensed (if required by law) contractors, installers and/or builders;

    (2)  Evidence establishing that the project is necessary at the time the Park Owner seeks to implement it;

    (3)  The date(s) upon which the Park Owner proposes to commence and complete the project;

    (4)  The manner by which the Park Owner will notify the City of the commencement of the work to allow the City to monitor construction and ensure, as practicable, that the work is completed consistent with the temporary Rent Increase approval;

    (5)  The period of time during which the Park Owner proposes to amortize the Rent Increase and the rationale therefor;

    (6)  Evidence that the project will be made at a direct cost of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per affected Mobilehome Space or at a total direct cost of not less than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is lower, or such other amounts as adjusted by resolution of the City Council;

    (7)  Calculation of costs amortized over a period of not less than thirty-six (36) months, or a different time period if the monthly payment amount will not impose an unreasonable financial burden on the Mobilehome Owners;

    (8)  Evidence that the costs do not include any additional costs incurred for property damage or deterioration that result or have resulted from any unreasonable delay in undertaking or completing any repair or improvement;

    (9)  Evidence that the costs do not include costs incurred to bring the Park, improvement or other property into compliance with a provision of the San Leandro Municipal Code or State law where the original installation of the improvement was not in compliance with code requirements;

    (10) A representation by the Park Owner stating that at the end of the amortization period, the allowable monthly Rent will be decreased by any amount it was increased because of a Rent Increase approval granted under this section; and

    (11) Evidence that the amortization period is in conformance with any schedule adopted by the City Council, unless it is determined that an alternate period is justified based on the evidence presented during the consideration of the Park Owner’s application.

    (e)   Capital Replacement: Upon receipt of a Capital Replacement application, the Rent Review Officer shall provide notice (“Capital Replacement Notice”) of the application to all Affected Mobilehome Owners. The Capital Replacement Notice shall state the proposed Capital Replacement, the amortization schedule including interest for the project, and the resulting temporary Rent Increase proposed. The Rent Review Officer shall email the application and all of its attachments to the Affected Mobilehome Owners. The Park Owner shall post a complete, physical copy of the application and its attachments at a location that is obvious and accessible to all Mobilehome Owners.

    (1)  A temporary Rent Increase for Capital Replacement shall be approved and the protest provisions under subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) shall not apply if the Park Owner submits evidence with its application that the Park Owner has:

    (i)   Consulted with the Affected Mobilehome Owners prior to initiating construction of the Capital Replacement project regarding the nature and purpose of the project and estimated cost; and

    (ii)  Obtained the prior written consent of an adult household member from at least fifty percent (50%) plus one of the Spaces whose Rent would be affected by the requested Capital Replacement temporary Rent Increase. Evidence of such consent must be presented at the time of filing the application with the City.

    (iii) Provided that the two criteria listed in (i) and (ii) have been satisfied, the Rent Review Officer or their designee shall approve the application as submitted, and shall send notice to the Park Owner and Affected Mobilehome Owners stating that the application is granted and identifying the amount of the approved temporary Rent Increase. Said decision by the Rent Review Officer or their designee shall be final and shall not be appealable.

    (2)  In the event that one adult household member from at least fifty percent (50%) plus one of the affected Mobilehome Spaces protest the application in writing to the Rent Review Officer within forty-five (45) days after the date the Rent Review Officer mails or emails the Capital Replacement Notice to the Affected Mobilehome Owners, the Rent Review Officer shall determine whether the application is complete, including determining whether all applicable fees have been paid. The Rent Review Officer may require additional information if the application is deemed incomplete. Upon determining that the application is complete, the Rent Review Officer may retain expert assistance as necessary to review the application, and may require the Park Owner to pay the cost of expert assistance. The complete application shall be reviewed by the Rent Review Officer, and approved, rejected or modified, pursuant to this Chapter.

    (3)  In the event that one adult household member from at least fifty percent (50%) plus one of the affected Mobilehome Spaces whose Rent would be increased if the application were approved do not protest the application in writing to the Rent Review Officer within forty-five (45) days after the date the Rent Review Officer mails or emails the Capital Replacement Notice to the Affected Mobilehome Owners, the Rent Review Officer shall approve the application as submitted, and send a notice to the applicant and the Affected Mobilehome Owners stating that the application has been granted and identifying the amount of the temporary Rent Increase allowed to be charged the Affected Mobilehome Owners. Said decision by the Rent Review Officer shall be final and shall not be appealable.

    (f)   Capital Improvements: A Park Owner shall be entitled to seek a temporary Rent Increase to make a Capital Improvement only if the Park Owner submits evidence with its application that the Park Owner has:

    (1)  Consulted with the Affected Mobilehome Owners prior to initiating construction of the project regarding the nature and purpose of the project and estimated cost;

    (2)  Limited the annual increase in Rent solely attributable to Capital Improvements to less than or equal to four percent (4%) of the Rent for Spaces being rented by Special Circumstances Households, such that the total increase in Rent inclusive of approved Capital Improvements is limited to eight percent (8%) per year for Special Circumstances Households; and

    (3)  Obtained the prior written consent of an adult household member from at least fifty percent (50%) plus one of the Spaces whose Rent would be affected by the requested Capital Improvement temporary Rent Increase. Evidence of such consent must be presented at the time of filing the application with the City.

    Provided that the above three criteria have been satisfied, the Rent Review Officer shall approve the application as submitted, and shall send notice to the applicant Park Owner and Affected Mobilehome Owners stating that the application is granted and identifying the amount of the approved temporary Rent Increase.

    (g)  No temporary Rent Increase granted pursuant to this section shall become effective until the first full calendar month following the filing by the Park Owner of a notice of completion of the Capital Improvement or Capital Replacement project with the Rent Review Officer, and determination by the City that the work was completed in accordance with the Rent Increase approval. A Rent Increase approved pursuant to this section shall be itemized separately on the rental billing provided to the Affected Mobilehome Owners and shall terminate upon the conclusion of the approved amortization period.

    (h)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the Park Owner from making emergency Capital Replacements required as a result of a disaster or other emergency event to preserve or secure the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property. In such event, the Park Owner may make limited and reasonable Capital Replacements required to protect the public health and safety and to limit further damage to the Park, and to thereafter or simultaneously seek a Rent adjustment for such Capital Replacement pursuant to this section.

 

4-39-232 RENT REDUCTION FOR SERVICE REDUCTION.
    Rent may be reduced and/or refunded if a Service Reduction results in the reduction in the Mobilehome Owners’ enjoyment of their Mobilehomes.

    (a)   Filing and Processing a Service Reduction Application: A Service Reduction application must be signed by at least one adult Mobilehome Owner from each of twenty-five percent (25%) plus one of the Spaces subject to this Chapter.

    (b)  If the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer on appeal, finds that a material Service Reduction has occurred, the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer on appeal, shall determine the resultant percentage reduction in the Mobilehome Owners’ enjoyment due to the Service Reduction. Rent shall be reduced by that percentage or amount. In addition, the Mobilehome Owners shall be entitled to, and the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer on appeal, shall award a rebate in the amount of the monthly Rent reduction multiplied by the number of months between the date the Mobilehome Owners notified the Park Owner of the reduction in service and the date the Rent Review Officer, or Hearing Officer on appeal, determined the Rent reduction. Any rebate authorized pursuant to this section may be amortized over a maximum five (5) year period, and bear the Interest Allowance for Amortized Expenses. In the event the Park Owner was not notified of the Service Reduction by the Mobilehome Owners or applicant and the Park Owner did not know nor should have known that the Service Reduction occurred prior to the filing of the application, no rebate shall be awarded. If a preponderance of the evidence proves that the Park Owner knew or should have known of the Service Reduction, a rebate shall be awarded and calculated from the date that the Park Owner knew or should have known of the start of the reduction.

    (c)   No rebate shall be allowed or authorized if a Service Reduction of a recreational facility or service, and resulting Rent decrease, has the prior written approval signed by at least one adult Mobilehome Owner from each of fifty percent (50%) plus one of the Spaces subject to this Article.

    (d)  No Service Reduction may include a condition created by the Park management’s failure to maintain the physical improvements in the common facilities in good working order, or condition for which the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.84 provides a remedy.

    (e)   No recreational service or facility that has been reduced or eliminated shall be reinstituted at any cost to the Mobilehome Owners without prior written approval signed by at least one adult Mobilehome Owner from each of fifty percent (50%) plus one of the Spaces subject to this Article.

    (f)   In the event that a Service Reduction application is filed while a Fair Return Application is pending, the Rent Review Officer, may require consolidation of applications. The Park Owner, or the Affected Mobilehome Owners may request consolidation of the applications.

 

4-39-234 CAUSE FOR TERMINATION.
    (a)   A Mobilehome Park Owner may not terminate or refuse to renew a Tenancy except in the same manner as provided for in Chapter 2.5 of the Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code sections 798.55 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.

    (b)  For the purposes of this section, a “Tenancy” means the right of a person or persons to use a Mobilehome Space on which to locate, maintain, and occupy a Mobilehome or any other vehicle or structure for the purpose of human habitation.

    (c)   In adopting this section, the City Council finds and declares that structures and vehicles that do not meet the technical definition of a Mobilehome, but are nevertheless located on a Mobilehome Space, often share many of the same characteristics as a Mobilehome. These structures or vehicles are not generally intended to be moved frequently, if at all, and often have site improvements and accessory structures constructed onto or adjacent to the structure or vehicle. The City Council finds and declares that there is a high cost of moving these vehicles and structures and a potential for damage resulting from a move, such that the owners of these structures or vehicles used for human habitation and located in a Mobilehome Space need the special protections provided for in this section.

 

4-39-235 WAIVERS.
    (a)   Any waiver or purported waiver by a Mobilehome Owner of rights granted under this Article shall be void as contrary to public policy.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for a Park Owner to require or attempt to require as a condition of tenancy in a Mobilehome Park a Mobilehome Owner or a prospective Mobilehome Owner to waive in a lease or rental agreement or in any other agreement the rights granted to a Mobilehome Owner by this Article.

    (c)   It shall be unlawful for a Park Owner to deny or threaten to deny tenancy in a Mobilehome Park to any person on account of such person’s refusal to enter into a lease or rental agreement or any other agreement under which such person would waive the rights granted to a Mobilehome Owner by this Article.

 

4-39-237 RIGHTS OF PROSPECTIVE MOBILEHOME OWNERS.
    (a)   Prospective Mobilehome Owners shall be offered the option of renting a Space in a manner that will permit the “Mobilehome-to-be” to receive the benefits of the Mobilehome Park Rent Stabilization Program codified herein, which includes, but is not limited to, rental of a Mobilehome Space on a month-to-month basis. A prospective Mobilehome Owner cannot be denied the option of a tenancy of twelve (12) months or less in duration.

    (b)  The Park Owner shall provide each prospective Mobilehome Owner with a copy of this Chapter.

    (c)   Any effort to circumvent the requirements of this Article shall be unlawful.

 

4-39-240 ANNUAL REGISTRATION AND OTHER NOTICES REQUIRED FROM PARK OWNER.
    (a)   Due Date: No later than May 31 of each year, each Park Owner shall file with the City an annual registration statement, on a form prescribed by the Rent Review Officer.

    (b)  Contents of Registration Form: The registration form shall include, but not be limited to, the name(s), business address(es), and business telephone number(s) of each person or legal entity possessing an Ownership interest in the Park and the nature of such interest; the number of Mobilehome Spaces within the Park; a Rent schedule reflecting the current Space Rents within the Park; a listing of all other charges, including utilities not included in Space Rent, paid by Mobilehome Owners within the Park and the approximate amount of each such charge; the name and address to which all required notices and correspondence may be sent; the name and address of each Mobilehome Owner; the name and address of each person renting a Mobilehome; an identification of those Spaces or Mobilehomes which the Park Owner considers exempt from this Article and a statement of the reasons therefor; a statement of the number of recreational vehicle Spaces in the Park, the names of the RV owners and renters, and the current rent and utilities charged for each space; and other information required by the Rent Review Officer.

    (c)   Certification of Registration Forms: All registration forms, and any documentation accompanying registration forms, shall contain an affidavit or declaration signed by the Park Owner or a designated agent, with his/her signature notarized, certifying that the information contained therein is true, correct and complete.

    (d)  Notice of Sale of a Park: Upon the sale or transfer of the Mobilehome Park, the seller or transferor shall notify the Rent Review Officer and all Mobilehome Owners within the Mobilehome Park of the sale or transfer and of the name and address of the buyer or transferee. Within ten (10) days of the sale or transfer of a Mobilehome Park, the buyer or transferee shall provide a new registration form meeting the requirements of this section and a copy of the statement of the Base Year income, expenses, and net operating income of the Park and supporting documents that the previous Park Owner had provided to them pursuant to subsection (e) of this section.

    (e)   Notice to Prospective Park Purchasers: The Park Owner shall provide prospective Park purchasers with a copy of this Chapter.

 

4-39-242 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for a Park Owner to evict a Mobilehome tenant where the Park Owner’s motive in seeking to recover possession of the space is:

    (1)  Retaliation for the Mobilehome Owner’s organizing, petitioning for Rent relief, or exercising any right granted under this Article; or

    (2)  Evading or circumventing the purposes of this Article.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for a Park Owner to retaliate against a Mobilehome Owner because of the Mobilehome Owner’s assertion or exercise of rights under this Article in any manner, including, but not limited to:

    (1)  Threatening to bring or bringing an action to recover possession of a space.

    (2)  Engaging in any form of harassment that causes the Mobilehome Owner to quit the premises.

    (3)  Decreasing housing services.

    (4)  Unlawfully increasing Rent.

    (5)  Imposing or increasing a security deposit or other charge payable by the Mobilehome Owner.

 

4-39-245 TIME OF ALLOWED RENT INCREASE/ADJUSTMENT.
    (a)   Once within a twelve (12) month period, the Park Owner may implement a CPI Rent adjustment or a Fair return increase, as authorized in this Article, but not both.

    (b)  A Capital Replacement Cost pass-through authorized by this Article may only be implemented on the effective date of the CPI or Fair return rent adjustment.

    (c)   The following Rent Increases or adjustments, as authorized by this Article, may be implemented at any time during the year:

    (1)  Government mandated expense pass-throughs;

    (2)  Utility pass-throughs;

    (3)  Capital Improvement Cost pass-throughs;

    (4)  In-place transfer Rent Increases.

    (d)  Rent Increases subject to approval by the Rent Review Officer shall be implemented after final determination.

    (e)   Rent reductions for Service Reductions shall be implemented at the time Service Reductions are ordered.

 

4-39-247 REFUSAL OF MOBILEHOME OWNER TO PAY ILLEGAL RENT.
    It shall be unlawful for a Park Owner to demand, accept, receive, or retain Rent in excess of the amounts authorized by this Article. An Affected Mobilehome Owner may refuse to pay any Rent in excess of the maximum Rent permitted by this Chapter. The fact that such unpaid Rent is in excess of the maximum Rent shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a Mobilehome Space for nonpayment of Rent or to collect the illegal Rent.

 

4-39-250 DISCLOSURES.
    A Park Owner shall disclose to each prospective Mobilehome Owner the current and proposed Base Rent for the Mobilehome Space, any rental agreement options, provide each prospective Mobilehome Owner a copy of this Chapter, and that if the prospective Mobilehome Owner signs a lease with a term of more than one year, that lease will be exempt from rent stabilization in addition to notice required pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.74.5 of the Mobilehome Residency Law. The Park Owner shall give the required disclosure and provide a copy of this Chapter to the prospective Mobilehome Owner at the time that the Park Owner, or Owner’s representative, receives the prospective Mobilehome Owner’s application for tenancy. The Park Owner shall obtain a signature of the prospective Mobilehome Owner on the disclosure form acknowledging receipt of the disclosures. The Park Owner shall retain the signed disclosure form throughout the entire tenancy of the Mobilehome Owner. This signed form shall be made available to the Rent Review Officer upon reasonable written notice.

 

4-39-252 PROSPECTIVE MOBILEHOME OWNER; TENANCY TWELVE MONTHS OR LESS.
    All prospective Mobilehome Owners shall be offered the option of a tenancy of twelve (12) months or less upon terms consistent with the provisions of this Article. This section shall not apply to prevent a mutually agreed upon assignment between a Park Owner and an existing Mobilehome Owner of an existing lease, provided any such assignment does not violate the provisions in this Article applicable to in-place transfer Rent Increases.

 

4-39-255 RENT STABILIZATION ADMINISTRATION, FEES.
    (a)   Administrative Regulations: The Rent Review Officer may administratively adopt implementing regulations that are consistent with the provisions and intent of this Article.

    (b)  Rent Stabilization Administration Fee: All or any portion of the costs to administer this Chapter may be collected by the imposition of an annual rent stabilization administration fee, which shall be established by the City Council. The fee, if any, shall be chargeable against every Mobilehome Space in the City subject to rent stabilization. The Park Owner shall remit payment to the City within thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter, and may pass through up to one-half of the fee to those Mobilehome Owners subject to the fee as a government mandated expense pass-through. The fee is intended to cover the full cost of administration and the fee assessment amount may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

    (c)   Other Fees: The City Council may adopt by resolution additional fees as necessary to reimburse the City for its costs to implement this Chapter, and may allocate specified charges to the respective Parties.

 

4-39-257 AMENDMENT.
    Any amendment to this Article shall require a prior public hearing before the City Council with notice thereof mailed to all Affected Mobilehome Owners in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-010, 7/3/19 (Sections 4-39-200—4-39-257))

CHAPTER 4-40 SHORT-TERM RENTALS
4-40-100 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish criteria and procedures for hosted rental of all or part of a residential dwelling unit for fewer than thirty (30) days. Hosted rentals are limited to residential dwelling units. The City finds it necessary to establish such requirements to regulate short-term rentals of property in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

4-40-110 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    No person shall establish, operate, or maintain a hosted short-term rental without first obtaining a valid permit pursuant to this Chapter.

 

4-40-120 WHERE AND HOW PERMITTED.
    Hosted short-term rentals are permitted in all dwelling units or portions of dwelling units that are also bedrooms. All other short-term rental of dwellings and parts of dwellings, except as permitted by the San Leandro Zoning Code, is prohibited. By approving a hosted short-term rental permit, the City is not conferring a vested right. Permits are not transferable. Permits are limited to one per dwelling unit. Only natural persons may obtain a permit.

    Hosted short-term rentals are prohibited in secondary dwelling units (ADUs).

 

4-40-130 STANDARDS.
    All hosted short-term rentals shall conform to the following standards:

    (a)   All hosted short-term rentals are limited to a total of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days per permit term. Portions of calendar days shall count as full days.

    (b)  The dwelling unit that includes the hosted short-term rental must be the permittee’s primary, permanent residence.

    (c)   If the permittee is not the owner, the permittee must have the owner’s written permission to operate a hosted short-term rental on the property.

    (d)  The dwelling unit must have a smoke detector, a fire extinguisher, a carbon monoxide detector, and adequate egress, all as required by current codes and regulations.

    (e)   The permittee shall post in a prominent place within the dwelling unit a diagram of exits, fire extinguisher locations, Fire and Police Department phone numbers, the permittee’s contact information, and the City Noise Ordinance hours.

    (f)   The permittee must obtain and maintain a current Business License and pay Transient Occupancy Tax as may be required by the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    (g)  The permittee must inform and update the City regarding what advertising platforms are in use to advertise the dwelling unit or bedroom for hosted short-term rental.

    (h)  The hosted short-term rental shall not result in a nuisance. The permittee shall post or provide a good neighbor policy in the dwelling unit that at a minimum includes the maximum occupancy, smoking regulations, compliance with all laws, instructions on managing noise or any other disturbance (including, but not limited to, the quiet and orderly arrival and departure of renters), parking restrictions, emergency procedures, neighborhood information including, but not limited to, local restaurants, retail stores, food markets, and points of interest, and property upkeep, including, but not limited to, trash disposal.

    (i)   Parking shall be only in designated or available parking spaces upon the property. Permittee shall instruct its renters or guests to not park on public streets.

    (j)   Cameras, including, but not limited to, security cameras whether they have recording capability or not, shall be prohibited in all bedrooms, and bathrooms. Sound receiving or recording capabilities on all cameras shall be off during a hosted short-term rental.

 

4-40-140 APPLICATION.
    Application for a hosted short-term rental permit shall be submitted to the Finance Department on a form provided by the Finance Director, which shall include an application to operate a hosted short-term rental prepared and approved by the Community Development Department, including, but not limited to, the following, the applicant’s name and the address of the dwelling unit where the hosted short-term rental would occur:

    (a)   Driver license or State identification card;

    (b)  If the permanent primary occupant is not the owner, written permission from the owner to operate hosted short-term rentals, with owner contact information;

    (c)   Photos of smoke detector, carbon monoxide detector, and fire extinguisher in the area of the dwelling unit to be rented, and egress from the rental space to the exterior of the building;

    (d)  One of the following documents to prove that the applicant/permittee is the primary, permanent resident of the property where the short-term rental is proposed to occur:

    (1)  Proof of Homeowner’s Tax Exemption,

    (2)  Voter Registration Card or Certificate,

    (3)  Proof of vehicle registration,

    (4)  Original proof of car insurance,

    (5)  One original and most recent utility bill such as from EBMUD, ACI, Waste Management, or PG&E,

    (6)  Lease.

    (e)   Statement of what advertising platforms will be used to advertise the space to be rented;

    (f)   Statement on the locations, recording capabilities, including any sound recording capabilities, and number count of all cameras, security or otherwise, in use within the residential dwelling unit;

    (g)  Current City of San Leandro Business License.

 

4-40-150 APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
    The Finance Director shall consider applications for short-term rentals. The Finance Director may consult, as the Director deems necessary, with the Chief Building Official, Fire Marshal, Community Development Director and Police Chief, or their designees on any application. The Community Development Director shall provide notice to adjacent property owners of a permittee’s application to operate a hosted short-term rental. The Community Development Director may refer any application to the Board of Zoning Adjustments / Planning Commission for consideration. If considered by the Board of Zoning Adjustments / Planning Commission, the application shall be heard at a public hearing, which shall be noticed in the same manner as consideration of Conditional Use Permits are noticed. The Finance Director or the Board of Zoning Adjustments / Planning Commission, as the case may be, may approve or disapprove an application or impose conditions of approval which, in his/her/its judgment, are necessary to ensure conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. The decision may be appealed to the City Manager, whose review and decision shall be final.

 

4-40-160 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
    In order to approve a short-term rental permit, the Community Development Director and Finance Director shall find that the proposed hosted short-term rental conforms to the standards in Section 4-40-130.

 

4-40-170 RENEWAL.
    A short-term rental permit shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which it was issued or renewed. A valid permit which has not been surrendered, suspended, or revoked may be renewed for subsequent periods of no longer than one year upon the following terms and conditions:

    (a)   All annual short-term rental permits issued under this Chapter, except the first permit issued for a newly established short-term rental, shall be considered to be issued on January 1 of each year and shall expire on December 31 of the same year, all of which shall coincide with business license annual renewals.

    (b)  An application for renewal of a short-term rental permit shall be filed with the Finance Department before the short-term rental permit expires, on a form provided by the Finance Director, accompanied by a statement indicating whether any information required by Section 4-40-140 has changed for the renewal period.

    (c)   The Finance Director shall review the renewal application. The Finance Director may, at the Director’s discretion, consult with the Chief Building Official, Fire Marshal, Community Development Director and Police Chief, or their designees, to ensure the short-term rental’s continued compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and any conditions of approval, and to assess any outstanding violations or complaints. The Finance Director may request additional information from the permittee in order to complete the review. To renew a short-term rental permit, the Finance Director and the Community Development Director must make the same findings as for approval of an initial permit.

    (d)  Upon completion of the review, the Finance Director shall determine whether to renew the application, and shall promptly inform the renewal applicant of his/her decision. If the permit is renewed, the Director shall provide a new permit for the renewal period. In renewing the short-term rental permit, the Director may modify or delete any existing conditions of approval, and impose any new conditions of approval, as they deem appropriate. If the permit is not renewed, the Director shall provide a written explanation to the renewal applicant detailing the reasons for the non-renewal. If the permit is not renewed, the renewal applicant shall immediately cease operating the hosted short-term rental.

 

4-40-180 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMIT.
    A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to suspension, revocation, or modification for the violation of any provision of this Code or for any grounds which would warrant the denial of the issuance of such original permit. Code Enforcement or the Police Department may issue notices of violation or take any enforcement action necessary for any failure to comply with any requirement of this Chapter, violations of any State law, local ordinance or regulation, or any condition of the permit. Notices of violation shall set forth the action necessary to come into compliance and a time frame for compliance. If the noncompliance is not abated, corrected, or rectified within the time specified by Code Enforcement in the said notice, or the Police, or any other regulatory authority, the Finance Director may revoke, suspend, or modify the permit, upon seven (7) days’ notice. If the Director decides to suspend or revoke the permit, the permittee shall cease operation of the short-term rental immediately.

    Revocation of a permit shall be a permanent bar to obtaining any new short-term rental permit.

 

4-40-190 APPEALS.
    (a)   A decision of the Director on a new short-term rental permit pursuant to Section 4-40-150 may be appealed to the City Manager. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.

    (b)  If the Community Development Director refers a new short-term rental permit application to the Board of Zoning Adjustments / Planning Commission for consideration pursuant to Section 4-40-150, the decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustments / Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Manager, whose decision shall be final.

    (c)   A decision by the Finance Director to revoke, suspend, or modify a short-term rental permit pursuant to Section 4-40-180 may be appealed to the Administrative Hearing Board in accordance with Chapter 1-12. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Board shall be final. If the Administrative Hearing Board issues an order to revoke or suspend the permit, the permittee shall cease operation of the short-term rental immediately.

 

4-40-200 ENFORCEMENT.
    The City Attorney shall have authority to initiate a civil action to enforce the provisions of this Chapter without prior City Council approval.

 

4-40-210 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Chapter:

    (a)   “Hosted” means that the primary occupant of the dwelling within which the rental takes place occupies the dwelling during the entire rental period.

    (b)  “Non-hosted” means that the primary occupant of the dwelling within which the rental takes place is absent from the dwelling for some or all of the rental period.

    (c)   Dwelling, Duplex. A building containing two (2) dwelling units.

    (d)  Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.

    (e)   “Dwelling, Secondary Unit” also means an “Accessory dwelling unit” (ADU), which is an attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. ADUs shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling is situated.

    (f)   Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing one dwelling unit.

    (g)  “Dwelling Unit” means one room, or a series of rooms that provides not more than one kitchen and one or more bathrooms, and is intended for occupancy by a single housekeeping unit. An individual dwelling unit is characterized by a single main pedestrian entry, with all other points of entry being visually subordinate, and an interior stairway provided between all stories.

    (h)  “Bedroom” means a room used for sleeping, living, or dining purposes, excluding enclosed places (e.g., closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, rooms without windows for egress, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, garages, cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces).

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-009, 7/3/19 (Sections 4-40-100—4-40-210))

CHAPTER 4-41 NON-HOSTED SHORT-TERM RENTALS PROHIBITED
4-41-100 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to prohibit the non-hosted rental of all or part of a residential dwelling unit for fewer than thirty (30) days. The City finds it necessary to establish this prohibition to regulate non-hosted short-term rentals of property in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

4-41-110 NON-HOSTED SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
    The renting, letting, or operating of non-hosted short term rentals in all dwelling units, bedrooms, buildings, structures or properties within the City of San Leandro is prohibited. The penalties for renting or operating a non-hosted short term rental shall be as follows:

    (a)   First Notice of Violation (NOV): Misdemeanor prosecuted by City, One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) fine or six (6) months in jail.

    (b)  Second violation: One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) fine or six (6) months in jail, declaration of a public nuisance, and legal action by the City against host or property owner to enjoin illegal use of the property, with pleading to include repayment of City’s attorneys’ fees and costs.

    (c)   Third violation within a two (2) year period: One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) fine or six (6) months in jail, and triple damages for a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two (2)-year period, and repayment of City’s attorneys’ fees and costs. City Attorney is authorized to bring without City Council approval an action for punitive damages for willful violation of the Code.

 

4-41-120 DEFINITIONS.
    As used in this Chapter:

    (a)   “Non-Hosted” means that the primary occupant of the dwelling within which the rental takes place is absent from the dwelling for some or all of the rental period.

    (b)  “Dwelling Unit” means one room, or a series of rooms that provides not more than one kitchen and one or more bathrooms, and is intended for occupancy by a single housekeeping unit. An individual dwelling unit is characterized by a single main pedestrian entry, with all other points of entry being visually subordinate, and an interior stairway provided between all stories.

    (c)   “Bedroom” means a room used for sleeping, living, or dining purposes, excluding enclosed places (e.g., closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, rooms without windows for egress, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, garages, cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces).

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-005, 5/20/19 (Sections 4-41-100—4-41-120))

TITLE 5 STREETS AND PARKS
CHAPTER 5-1 ENCROACHMENTS
CHAPTER 5-2 STREET TREES
CHAPTER 5-3 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 5-4 STREET AND EASEMENT ABANDONMENT
CHAPTER 5-5 FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 5-6 NEWSRACK REGULATIONS.
CHAPTER 5-7 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDED BY STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS

CHAPTER 5-1 ENCROACHMENTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1-100 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

    (a)   ENCROACH, ENCROACHMENT. “Encroach” or “encroachment” includes going upon, over, under, or using any street in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with its normal use, including, but not limited to, the performance thereon of any of the following acts:

    (1)  Excavating, filling or disturbing the street;

    (2)  Erecting or maintaining any post, pole, fence, guard rail, wall, loading platform, or other structure on, over or under the street;

    (3)  Planting any tree, shrub or other growing thing within the street;

    (4)  Placing or leaving on the street any rubbish, brush, earth or other material of any nature whatever;

    (5)  Constructing, placing, or maintaining on, over, under, or within the street any pathway, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, any culvert or other surface drainage or sub-surface drainage facility, any pipe, conduit, wire, or cable;

    (6)  Traveling on the street by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of dimension, weight or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit;

    (7)  Moving any building in, into, through or from the City of San Leandro on, over or through any street;

    (8)  Lighting or building a fire;

    (9)  Constructing, placing, planting or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree or other object adjacent to the street which causes or will cause an encroachment;

    (10) Placing or causing to be placed any material, machinery or apparatus on the street for building, paving or other purposes for over twenty-four (24) hours;

    (11) Placing street furniture, including bicycle racks, within the public right-of-way;

    (12) Deploying, installing, or locating of small cell wireless facilities upon existing or new structures within the public roadway right-of-way;

    (13) Using, accessing, or connecting to conduits, circuits, panels, or related infrastructure in connection with the deployment, installation, or location of small cell wireless facilities in the public roadway right-of-way.

    (b)  PERMITTEE. “Permittee” means any person that proposes to do work or encroach upon a street as herein defined and has been issued a permit for said encroachment by the Public Works Director.

    (c)   PERSON. “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation, including any public agency or utility, or any agent or representative thereof and includes successors in interest.

    (d)  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. “Public Works Director” shall mean the San Leandro Public Works Director, Engineering and Transportation Director or designee.

    (e)   STREET. “Street” shall mean the full width of the right-of-way of any street, as defined in the California Vehicle Code used by the general public, whether or not such street has been accepted as and declared to be part of the City system of streets, including streets forming a part of the State Highway System. “Street” also includes easements where the City is the grantee of the easement and property owned by the City of San Leandro, the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro or the Parking Authority of the City of San Leandro.

    (f)   SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES. “Small cell wireless facilities” shall mean a wireless telecommunications facility that meets each of the following conditions:

    (1)  The structure on which antenna facilities are mounted:

    (a)   Is fifty (50) feet or less in height, or

    (b)  Is no more than ten percent (10%) taller than other adjacent structures, or

    (c)   Is not extended to a height of more than ten percent (10%) above its preexisting height as a result of the collocation of new antenna facilities; and

    (2)  Each antenna (excluding associated antenna equipment as defined by 47 C.F.R. § 1.1320(d)) is no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume; and

    (3)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility are cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume; and

    (4)  The facility does not require antenna structure registration under 47 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter A, Part 17; and

    (5)  The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36 C.F.R. § 800.16(x); and

    (6)  The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. § 1.1307(b).

 

5-1-105 EXEMPTIONS.
    This Chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the City acting in the discharge of his or her official duties; to any work being performed by any person or persons, firm or corporation under contract with the City; or when permission to encroach has been expressly granted by the City Council.

 

5-1-110 EXCEPTION IN CASE OF EMERGENCY.
    This Chapter shall not prevent any person from maintaining any pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any street, or from making excavation, as may be necessary, for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises, provided that said person shall notify the Public Works Director by telephone the day such work is performed or the day the offices of the City are again opened. Said person shall then apply on the proper form within five (5) working days confirming the work performed.

 

5-1-115 RIGHT OF LAWFUL USE.
    Any permit granted under this Chapter shall be subject to the right of the City or any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of the street for any purpose for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of the street shall be unduly obstructed at any time. All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will least interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the general public.

 

5-1-120 PROHIBITED ENCROACHMENTS.
    No application will be approved nor permit issued for constructing or maintaining a loading platform upon or in any street or for erecting or maintaining therein or thereon a post, pole, column or structure for support for advertising signs, except as provided in Chapter 4 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

5-1-125 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES—PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE.
    (a)   Permittee shall be responsible for all liability for personal injury or property damage which may result from work permitted and done by permittee under the permit, or proximately caused by failure on permittee’s part to perform his or her obligations under said permit in respect to maintenance. If any claim of such liability is made against the City, its officers, or employees, permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them and each of them, harmless from such claim including any claim based on the active or passive negligence of the City, its officers or employees, insofar as permitted by law.

    (b)  Permittee shall be required to obtain public liability insurance in such form and amount as may be required by the Public Works Director to protect the City, its officials, officers, directors, employees and agents from claims which may arise from permittee’s operations under the permit.

 

5-1-130 COMPLETION OF WORK AND/OR RESTORATION OF STREET BY CITY.
    If the work or use authorized by a permit is unsafe, in violation of this Chapter, or is unduly delayed by the permittee, the Public Works Director may, upon written notice, revoke the permit and complete the work or any portion thereof, or make the site safe or return it to the same condition existing prior thereto. The actual cost of performing such work by the City plus overhead shall be charged to and paid for by the permittee.

 

5-1-135 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
    (a)   No person shall paint, mark, or write on, or post or otherwise affix, any handbill or sign to or upon any public property including, but not limited to, any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street, lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light or pier or telephone or telegraph pole, or wire appurtenance thereof or upon any fixture of the fire-alarm or police telegraph system or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain, street sign, street light or traffic sign.

    (b)  Any handbill or sign found posted or otherwise affixed upon any public property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the City. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof and the City Manager or designee is authorized to effect the collection of said cost.

    (c)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of a metal plaque or plate in a sidewalk commemorating an historical, cultural or artistic event, location or person for which the City Manager or designee has granted approval.

    (d)  Nothing in this section shall apply to the painting of house numbers upon curbs done in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-1-620.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 84-020, 10/1/84; Ordinance No. 2011-014, 12/5/11 (Section 5-1-100); Ordinance No. 2017-008, 5/1/17 (Section 5-1-100); Ordinance No. 2019-001, 1/7/19 (Section 5-1-100))

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
5-1-200 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    No person shall encroach or cause to be made any encroachment of any nature whatever within, upon, over or under the limits of any street in the City, or make or cause to be made any alteration of any nature within, upon, over, or under such street; or construct, put upon, maintain or leave thereon, or cause to be constructed, put upon, maintained or left thereon, any obstruction or impediment of any nature whatever; or remove, cut or trim trees thereon; or set a fire thereon; or place on, over or under such street any pipe line, conduit or other fixture; or move over or cause to be moved over the surface of any street or over any bridge, viaduct, or other structure maintained by the City any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other object of dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging the street; or place any structure, wall, culvert, or similar encroachment, or make any excavation or embankment in such a way as to endanger the normal usage of the street without having first obtained a permit as required in this Chapter. No permit shall be granted pursuant to this Chapter for any small cell wireless facilities encroachment of any nature upon any existing or new structure in the public roadway right-of-way unless a permit applicant provides evidence satisfactory to the City demonstrating the property owner’s consent or other form of proof demonstrating applicant’s legal right to use the property upon which applicant proposes to attach the small cell wireless facility. The applicant must demonstrate evidence satisfactory to the City for each and every proposed small cell wireless facility.

 

5-1-205 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    The Public Works Director shall provide an application form which shall contain such information as in the judgment of the Public Works Director is necessary, including information to establish the exact location, nature, dimensions, duration, and purpose of the proposed use or encroachment. The application shall be filed with the Public Works Director.

 

5-1-210 PERMIT APPLICATION EXHIBITS.
    The application shall be accompanied by maps, plats, sketches, diagrams, or similar exhibits to the size and in the quantity as the Public Works Director shall prescribe on which shall be plainly shown any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate, or identify the proposed use or encroachment and the right of the applicant to so use or encroach thereon.

 

5-1-215 CONSENT OF PUBLIC AGENCIES.
    The application shall be accompanied by the written order or consent to any work thereunder which may be required by law or any other public agency or body.

 

5-1-220 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
    Applications may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. The Public Works Director shall act on the application within thirty (30) working days. Where the Public Works Director finds that the requirements of this Chapter have been met and the required fees and changes have been paid, he or she shall issue a permit for the use or encroachment, attaching such conditions as he or she may deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public and for the protection of the City. If the Public Works Director finds the requirements of this Chapter have not been met he or she shall deny the permit, giving the reasons therefor in writing.

 

5-1-225 FEES AND CHARGES.
    Fees for issuance of the permit and charges shall be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution upon recommendation of the Public Works Director.

    A public agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public street shall not be subject to a fee for issuance of a permit but shall be required to pay all other charges. A public agency or utility may at the option of the Public Works Director arrange to be billed for the required fees and charges.

 

5-1-230 CASH OR BOND DEPOSIT.
    Prior to issuance of a permit, unless waived by the Public Works Director, the permittee shall deposit with the City cash, a certified or cashier’s check or an approved surety bond in a sum to be fixed by the Public Works Director as sufficient to reimburse the City for costs of restoring the street to its former condition and, in the case or an encroachment permit for moving a building, sufficient to reimburse the City for the estimated costs of doing any work necessary to enable the building to be moved or to restore the street of any private property damaged by the move or altered to allow the building to be moved. If the permittee anticipates applying for a number of permits throughout the year he or she may file a cash deposit or approved surety bond in a sum estimated by the Public Works Director as sufficient to cover the permittee’s activities during any twelve (12) month period.

 

5-1-235 ADDITIONAL BOND OR CASH DEPOSIT.
    The Public Works Director may require an additional bond or cash deposit at any time when in his or her opinion the amount of the bond or cash deposit previously made is insufficient.

 

5-1-240 CONDITION OF BOND AND CASH DEPOSIT.
    The condition of any bond or cash deposit made pursuant to this Article shall be that the permittee will diligently and with good faith comply with this Chapter and the terms and conditions of the permit.

 

5-1-245 BOND PAYABLE TO CITY--TERM OF BOND.
    Any bond or cash deposit required by the Public Works Director pursuant to this Chapter shall be payable to the City of San Leandro. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the permit, and fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, including the guaranty period set forth in Section 5-1-335, the bond or cash deposit will be released, provided that the Public Works Director may, in his or her discretion, allow the earlier release of the bond or cash deposit.

 

5-1-250 EXCLUSIONS.
    Cash deposits or bonds will not be required of any public utility holding a franchise with the City or public agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any street.

 

5-1-255 TERM OF PERMIT.
    The permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter within ninety (90) days from date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not completed within ninety (90) days, or within the time stated in the permit, then the permit shall become void, and the Public Works Director may restore the street in accordance with Section 5-1-130. An extension of time for good cause may be granted by the Public Works Director when requested in writing.

 

5-1-260 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
    The permittee shall keep any permit at the work site or in the cab of a vehicle when movement thereof on a street is involved, and the permit must be shown to any authorized representative of the Public Works Director or law enforcement officer on demand.

 

5-1-265 CHANGES IN PERMIT.
    No changes may be made in the location, dimension, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the Public Works Director.

 

5-1-270 NON-TRANSFERABLE.
    No permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be transferable or assignable to any other person.

 

5-1-275 ISSUANCE OF OTHER PERMITS NOT COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER.
    Issuance of a building permit, electrical permit, plumbing permit, swimming pool permit and/or demolition permit which may be required by law at the same location and in connection with the same activity for which a permit would be issued hereunder shall not constitute authorization to encroach on any street.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-001, 1/7/19 (Section 5-1-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. PERFORMANCE OF WORK
5-1-300 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
    The Public Works Director shall from time to time establish such standards and specifications as he or she deems necessary for the proper construction, use and maintenance of encroachments and for the safety, protection and convenience of the public, which standards and specifications shall be applicable to all permittees. Any work or use done under all permits shall conform to the City’s standard plans and specifications, unless otherwise required by the Public Works Director. All work or use pertaining to the deployment, installation or location of small cell wireless facilities shall conform with applicable general guidelines and specific design criteria set forth in this Code, and administrative guidelines established by the City and in effect, as may be amended from time to time. If inadequate provision is made for the safety, protection and convenience of the public by the permittee, the Public Works Director may take such action as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public and shall charge the permittee therefor.

 

5-1-305 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE SAFETY LAWS.
    The permittee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including Department of Industrial Relations of the State of California (CAL-OSHA) rules and regulations.

 

5-1-310 INSPECTIONS.
    The permittee shall allow the Public Works Director to inspect any or all work done pursuant to the permit at reasonable times.

 

5-1-315 NOTIFICATION--COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.
    The permittee shall notify the Public Works Director at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of beginning work. If appropriate the permittee shall give such advance notice as may be required by the Public Works Director to the Police Department and/or Fire Department of the location and nature of the proposed work.

 

5-1-320 RESTORATION OF STREET.
    Upon completion or the work, acts or things for which the permit was issued, or when required by the Public Works Director, the permittee shall replace, repair or restore the street at the place of work to the same condition existing prior thereto, unless otherwise provided in the permit. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, impediments, material or rubbish caused to be or placed upon the street under the permit, and shall do any other work or perform any act necessary to restore the street to a safe and usable condition.

 

5-1-325 DRAINAGE.
    If the work, use or encroachment authorized in the permit shall interfere with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage as directed by the Public Works Director.

 

5-1-330 NOTIFICATION--COMPLETION OF WORK.
    Upon completion of all work authorized in the permit, the permittee shall notify the Public Works Director in writing. No work shall be deemed to be completed until such notification of completion is given and final inspection has been made by the Public Works Director unless such final inspection is waived by the Public Works Director in writing.

 

5-1-335 GUARANTY PERIOD.
    After completion of all work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in monitoring and maintaining the area affected by the encroachment. For a period of two (2) years after final inspection of the work by the Public Works Director or the date of waiver of final inspection, the permittee shall repair any injury or damage to any portion of the street which occurs as the result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the street which would not have occurred had such work not been done. Any public utility, public agency or franchisee which is authorized by law or contract to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any street shall monitor, maintain, and/or repair the street or any portion of it where the public utility, public agency or franchisee has made any excavation for the life of any works or facilities contained in or under the street.

    The permittee shall repair any injury or damage in any portion of the street, resulting from the work done under the permit within the period of time required by the Public Works Director. In the event that the permittee fails to act timely or should repair or replacement be required before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the City may make or cause to be made the necessary repairs or replacements or perform the necessary work and the permittee shall be charged with all the expenses incurred in the performance of said work, including overhead.

 

5-1-340 RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS.
    If any future construction, reconstruction, or maintenance work by the City or required by the City on a street requires the relocation, removal or abandonment of installations or encroachments in, on or under a street, the permittee owning, controlling, or maintaining such installations or encroachments shall relocate, remove or abandon the same at his or her sole expense. When removal, relocation or abandonment is required, the Public Works Director shall give said permittee a written demand specifying the place of relocation, or that the installations or encroachment must be removed or abandoned. If said permittee fails to comply with said instructions, the City may cause the removal, relocation or abandonment of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-001, 1/7/19 (Section 5-1-300))

 

ARTICLE 4. SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, CURBS
5-1-400 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to repair or construct, or cause to be repaired or constructed by private contract in the City of San Leandro any sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, or paving, or to cut any curb for the purpose of constructing a driveway, or to begin excavation for the purpose of constructing a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, or paving within any street without first obtaining a permit as required in Article 2 of this Chapter.

 

5-1-405 REMOVAL OF DRIVEWAY.
    When a driveway shall permanently cease to be used, the curb cut therefor, and all or a portion of the driveway, as determined by the Public Works Director, shall be removed and standard curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be constructed. The property owner shall remove the curb cut and driveway and construct curb, gutter and sidewalk or cause same to be removed and constructed, within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice from the Public Works Director to do so. Should the property owner fail to perform such work or cause it to be performed within said thirty (30) days, the Public Works Director shall have such work done at the expense of the property owner. The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing driveways whether or not the use thereof was heretofore abandoned, as well as to all such driveways which are constructed after the effective date of this section.

 

5-1-410 DENIAL OF BUILDING PERMIT WHILE SIDEWALK INCOMPLETE.
    No building permit shall be issued under the terms of this Code for construction, additions or remodeling on any lot, tract, or parcel of land on the street frontage of which the sidewalk, curb, or gutter is not complete, unless said building permit is accompanied by the issuance of a permit under the terms of this Chapter for the completion of said improvements on the street frontage; except that if the Public Works Director determines that it is in the public interest he or she may waive all or a portion of the improvements required by the provisions of this section.

 

5-1-415 REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS--REPORTING DEFECTS.
    Any person owning real property in the City shall repair any dangerous or defective sidewalk lying in front of or along the side of his or her property. Any tenant of real property in the City shall report to the Public Works Director in writing any dangerous or defective sidewalk which exists in front of or along the side of property occupied by him or her. If, as a consequence of any sidewalk being dangerous or defective sufficient to endanger persons passing thereon, any person exercising ordinary care to avoid the danger who proximately suffers damage to his or her person or property because of a dangerous or defective sidewalk shall have recourse for such damages against the person failing to repair such defect or against the person failing to report the defect.

 

5-1-420 SIDEWALK REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
    The City of San Leandro hereby adopts by this reference the provisions of Chapter 22, Part 3, Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code for purpose of maintaining and repairing sidewalks and assessing the costs thereof. The said provisions shall be supplementary and alternative to all other authority of the City of San Leandro, and the Public Works Director is hereby authorized at his or her sole discretion to undertake sidewalk repairs in any other manner deemed necessary and proper. This section shall not be construed as creating an additional cause of action or liability on behalf of any property owner, person or the City.

 

5-1-425 VEHICLE ACCESS UNLAWFUL EXCEPT AT DRIVEWAY.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across a sidewalk unless the vehicle is driven on a driveway constructed for that purpose.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 1192 N.S., 2/9/59; Ordinance No. 1278 N.S., 8/22/60)

 

ARTICLE 5. MOVING BUILDINGS, OVERSIZED VEHICLES OR OBJECTS
5-1-500 FINDINGS REQUIRED.
    No encroachment permit shall be issued under Article 2 for any encroachment as defined in Section 5-1-100(a)(6) and (7) unless the Public Works Director finds that:

    (a)   Any building as defined in Section 5-1-100(a)(7), except a building being moved out of the City meets the City building code requirements in effect at the time the building was constructed except as otherwise required by the Public Works Director; and

    (b)  All applicable Federal and State regulations have been complied with.

 

5-1-505 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
    No building, oversized vehicle or object being moved on, over or through any street shall be allowed to remain in any one location on such street for a longer period than necessary to move the building, oversized vehicle or object along its route except with the written consent of the Public Works Director.

 

 

 

5-1-510 COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL LAWS.
    The permittee shall comply with the general laws regulating travel over a street, including posted signs or notices which limit speed or direction of travel, or the weight, width or height that may be moved thereon or thereover, or otherwise restrict or control travel on a street.

 

5-1-515 WIRE AND STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS.
    In the event that the moving of any building, oversized vehicle or object for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to move, remove, or displace any pole or other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any public utility in the City of San Leandro, or to cut, displace or change the location of any wire, cable or other equipment upon said poles or structure, the permittee shall notify the owner or owners of such pole or structure and/or the wires, cables or other equipment thereon, at least five (5) working days prior to the time that the moving of such building, oversized vehicle or object will necessitate the removal of such obstructions.

    (a)   The permittee shall not at the expiration of said time of notice or at any time, cut, move or in any way disturb such public utility or city property; and, unless otherwise required or authorized by the Public Works Director, such work shall be done only by the authorized workmen of the public utility interested or, if City property, by City employees.

    (b)  The permittee shall pay to said public utility, or to said City of San Leandro, as the case may be, any and all costs or expenses for the removal, rearrangement and/or displacement of any pole or other structure or equipment thereon or of any damage to such property.

 

5-1-520 TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBS.
    In the event that the moving of any building, oversized vehicle or object for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or replant any tree, plant or shrub belonging to or under the control of the City of San Leandro, the permittee shall notify the Public Works Director at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time that the moving of such building, oversized vehicle or object will necessitate the removal of such obstructions.

    (a)   The permittee shall not at the expiration of said time or notice or at any time, move, remove, replant or otherwise disturb such trees, plants or shrubs; and such work shall be done only by City employees unless otherwise approved and so ordered by the Public Works Director.

    (b)  The permittee shall pay to said City of San Leandro any and all costs or expenses for the trimming, moving, removing or replacing of trees, plants or shrubs or of any damage thereto.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 6. MISCELLANEOUS
5-1-600 REVOCATION.
    Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Public Works Director for violation of the provisions of this Chapter or if the permitted activity poses an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

 

5-1-605 APPEAL.
    An applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the Public Works Director concerning the denial or revocation of a permit to the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of Title I, Chapter 9. The City Manager may deny the appeal or grant the appeal with terms and conditions necessary to protect the public health and safety.

 

5-1-610 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
    All permittees and other persons maintaining permanent facilities within a street shall keep up-to-date records of the location and description of all such facilities, which records shall be furnished to the Public Works Director upon request. As used herein, “facilities” shall include, but shall not be limited to, underground pipes, wires and tanks.

 

5-1-615 MAIL BOXES.
    All mail boxes shall be placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Post Office Department, but no box shall be so placed within the street as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public.

 

5-1-620 MARKING OF CURBS, ETC.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit under this Chapter, to solicit on a commercial or donation basis, to place or maintain any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design, or other marking upon any street; except that markings for the purpose of identifying survey, utility or construction locations shall not be subject to this Chapter. A permit for placing or maintaining numbers, figures, letters, carvings, drawings, designs or other markings under this Chapter may be issued only to non-profit organizations which have their principal and permitted meeting place within the City limits and have been organized and established within the City for a minimum of one year continuously preceding application for a permit.

 

5-1-625 MONUMENTS.
    Any monument of granite, concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines and/or elevation of any street, property subdivision, or a precise survey point or reference point shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the Public Works Director to do so. Replacement of removed or disturbed monuments will be at the expense of the permittee.

 

5-1-630 HEDGES, FENCES, SHRUBBERY AND LAWNS.
    (a)   No hedge, shrub, or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure shall be planted, erected or maintained in a street without a permit. No encroachment of any nature will be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs, or denies such pedestrian or other lawful travel, or which impairs adequate sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

    (b)  Maintenance. The permittee or property owner shall maintain all hedges, shrubs, walls, fences or similar structures erected for landscaping purposes in a neat and orderly condition; if such structures are not so maintained, the Public Works Director may direct that permittee or property owner to remove the same and restore the street to its former condition, at the expense of the permittee or property owner.

    (c)   Lawns. Any person otherwise entitled to may maintain a lawn of any grass, or type not prohibited by other law, within the street without a permit. The lawn shall not extend into the roadway or walkway nor into the drainage ditches, gutter or other drainage facilities.

 

5-1-635 UNLAWFUL STORAGE.
    No person shall store any item of business inventory, including vehicles, upon any street or sidewalk.

 

5-1-640 PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to impair or prohibit the use of streets for those activities described in Chapter 20 of Title IV of this Code, relating to parades and assemblies, or to the exercise of any right or franchise guaranteed by the general laws and constitution.

 

5-1-645 BICYCLE RACKS.
    Bicycle racks shall not be placed in the City-owned right-of-way without permission from the Public Works Director or designee. Permitted bicycle racks shall be installed following the regulations specified in Title 8 Chapter 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

5-1-650 PARKLETS.
    Parklets shall be temporary spaces in the public right-of-way for the use of the general public that are privately constructed and maintained according to permits issued by the City that in addition to such requirements of the San Leandro Municipal Code also shall meet the requirements in Title 8, Chapter 13 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

    (a)   Parklets shall remain publicly accessible with signage to this effect.

 

    (b)  Table service is not permitted and neither alcohol nor smoking are allowed at a parklet.

    (c)   Commercial signage and advertising are not permitted on parklets.

 

5-1-655 ENFORCEMENT.
    The Public Works Director is designated as the enforcement authority for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 84-02, 1/16/84; Ordinance No. 2011-014, 12/5/11 (Sections 5-1-645, 5-1-650); Ordinance No. 2017-008, 5/1/17 (Sections 5-1-650, 5-1-655))

CHAPTER 5-2 STREET TREES
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
5-2-100 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

    (a)   DIRECTOR: “Director” shall mean the Public Works Director or designee.

    (b)  PERSON: “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership and to the extent of the City’s jurisdiction, public entities.

    (c)   PARKWAY STRIP: “Parkway strip” shall mean that area within the public right-of-way lying between the curb and the sidewalk.

    (d)  STREET TREE: “Street tree” shall mean that plant of arborescent form planted and maintained by the City within the public right-of-way.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-015, 10/21/19 )

 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL
5-2-200 PROHIBITIONS.
    It shall be unlawful, a public nuisance, and an infraction punishable by up to a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000.00) fine for any person to plant, remove, prune, injure or destroy any street tree, as hereinafter defined, except in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter

 

5-2-205 STREET TREES PROPERTY OF CITY.
    All street trees within the City of San Leandro are the property of the City. The Director shall have exclusive authority, except as hereinafter provided, to plant, remove, prune, inspect, maintain, root prune or otherwise alter such street trees.

 

5-2-210 REQUESTS FOR REMOVAL, PRUNING.
    Any person may request the removal, pruning, root pruning, or replacement of a street tree on, or in the right-of-way abutting his or her property. Upon such request, the Director may inspect such tree, and in his or her sole and exclusive determination, cause the removal, pruning, root pruning, or replacement of such street tree.

 

5-2-215 REQUESTS FOR REMOVAL, PRIVATE WORKS.
    Upon approval of the Director, any person requesting street tree service pursuant to Section 5-2-210 may undertake such work privately or by agreement with a private nursery or tree service. Such work shall conform with all of the following:

    (a)   The property owner shall obtain an encroachment permit from the Engineering and Transportation Department prior to pruning or removal of a City tree.

    (b)  The tree removal shall include stump-grinding, with return of the planting area to either softscape or hardscape that does not create a tripping hazard.

    (c)   If a replacement tree is not requested, the property owner shall be required to pay the City the fee set forth in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code for a tree to be planted in a location of the City’s choosing.

 

5-2-220 STREET TREE PLANTING, LISTS, REPLACEMENTS, PRIVATE WORK, SUBDIVISIONS.
    (a)   Upon approval of the Director, any person may undertake privately, or by agreement with a private nursery or tree service, the planting of a street tree provided that the location, species and manner of planting are acceptable to the Director.

    (b)  The Director shall prepare a list of those tree species which are acceptable for use as street trees. The Director shall also establish such criteria relating to the location and manner of planting such street trees as will protect public safety and public and private improvements.

    (c)   All new planting of street trees as replacements for street trees existing on the effective date of this Chapter shall conform to the species and planting criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section.

    (d)  There may be imposed a condition of approval for all parcel and subdivision maps that the subdivider plant street trees at such locations and in such manner as may be determined by the Director.

 

5-2-225 DUTY OF UTILITY TO PROTECT TREES, EXCAVATIONS.
    It shall be the duty of any person owning or operating any utilities within the public right-of-way (including, but not limited to, water, sewers, gas, electrical, telephone, fiber optics, and cable television services) to maintain such utilities in a manner to prevent damages to street trees.

 

5-2-230 LIABILITY, TREE DAMAGE.
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to release or relieve any owner or real property within the City of San Leandro from a duty to maintain his or her property, including such portions of the public right-of-way that are the maintenance responsibility of the property owner. Provided, however, in the sole and exclusive determination of the Director whenever damage to the public right-of-way is directly caused by the action of a street tree, the City may repair and/or reconstruct the right-of-way improvements exclusively or on any proportional cost basis as set forth in the City’s Sidewalk Repair Program (specifically, §8.1.120 of the San Leandro Administrative Code). This section shall not be construed as creating an additional cause of action or liability on behalf of any property owner, person or the City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 78-38, 9/18/78; Ordinance No. 83-032, 11/21/83; Ordinance No. 2019-015; 10/21/19 (Sections 5-2-200, 5-2-210, 5-2-215, 5-2-225 and 5-2-230))

CHAPTER 5-3 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 85-025 repealed Ordinance Nos. 1089.N.S., 70-24, 73-44, 78-28 and 78-54.

 

ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
5-3-100 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

    (a) COMMISSION. “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.

    (b) PERSON. “Person” shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association and their agents and employees.

    (c) POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground. within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated services.

    (d) UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT. “Underground Utility District” or “District” shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 5-3-205 of this Chapter.

    (e) UTILITY. “Utility” shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-025, 8/5/85)

 

ARTICLE 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF UNDERGROUND DISTRICTS
5-3-200 PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL.
    The City Council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, television, or similar associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) calendar nays prior to the date hereof and shall provide said owners with a summary description of the proposed underground utility district.

 

5-3-205 COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT BY RESOLUTION.
    If after any such public hearing the City Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. The City Council shall allow a reasonable time for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.

 

5-3-210 UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN OVERHEAD WIRES.
    Whenever the City Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when said overhead structures in the District after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 5-3-235 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.

 

5-3-215 OVERHEAD WIRES--EXCEPTION BY SPECIAL PERMISSION.
    The Community Development Director may grant special permission, on such terms as the Director may deem appropriate, in cases of emergency or unusual circumstances, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate, poles and overhead wires, and associated overhead structures, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter. The Community Development Director may establish administrative regulations specifying such emergency or unusual circumstances.

 

5-3-220 OVERHEAD WIRES, POLES, STRUCTURES, EXCEPTIONS.
    This Chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

(a) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director.

(b) Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting, fire alarm boxes or emergency services.

(c) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.

(d) Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts.

(e) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.

(f) Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.

(g) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.

(h) Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.

 

5-3-225 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the District created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any other person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, television, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 5-3-205, together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.

 

5-3-230 RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.

 

5-3-235 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
(a) Every person owning a building or structure, and every applicant for a zoning approval or other entitlement as specified in Section 5-3-325 herein, the applicant whether owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a District, shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 5-3-230 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

(b) In the event any person described in subsection (a) above does not comply with the provisions of subsection (a) within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof, the Community Development Director shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) calendar days thereafter shall have the authority to request the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property, or

(c) In the alternative, if the above described work is not accomplished by any person described in subsection (a) above within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof, the Community Development Director shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of such notice.

(1) The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of San Leandro. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. The Community Development Director shall also cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.

(2) The notice given by the Community Development Director to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and that the work shall be accomplished in conformance with relevant City requirements, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of such notice, the Community Development Director will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property and become a lien upon such property.

(3) If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the Community Development Director shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the Community Development Director shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the Community Development Director, he or she shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10) calendar days thereafter.

(4) The Community Development Director shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

(5) Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

(6) If any assessment is not paid within five (5) calendar days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Community Development Director, and the Community Development Director is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said Assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law.

 

5-3-240 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.
City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user or such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof.

 

5-3-245 EXTENSION OF TIME.
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 5-3-205 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-025, 8/5/85)

 

ARTICLE 3. MASTER PLAN
5-3-300 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT MASTER PLAN.
To carry out the purposes of this Chapter to provide a planning basis for the equitable allocation of costs associated with the conversion of existing overhead utilities; and to insure that adequate funds are available to complete proposed underground utility conversion projects, the City Council may adopt by resolution an Underground Utility District Master Plan.

 

5-3-305 FINDINGS.
The City Council hereby finds and declares that the undergrounding of utility services is a benefit that inures to property within an Underground Utility District. It is appropriate and necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of and for the furtherance of the purposes of this Chapter that a portion of the cost for such undergrounding be paid by the, property owners in accordance with the benefits received.

It is the further finding of the Council that payment of assessments in accordance with the benefits received will be used to reimburse such revolving funds or accounts as contemplated herein and shall be expended only for expansion of, maintenance of or construction of Underground Utility Districts and facilities.

It is the further finding of the Council that the primary benefit of underground utilities conversion inures to property being redeveloped for a higher and better use. Consequently, it is equitable to impose assessments for such work on the basis of benefits which accrue at the time that such property liable for assessment is rezoned or is granted entitlements of use.

It is the further finding of the Council that redevelopment of property for a higher and better use necessarily intensifies utility use beyond the capacity of existing aerial utility service facilities to provide safe, adequate and beneficial service to the redeveloped property. Therefore, conversion of such service is necessary and appropriate to serve such new uses and to regulate the design and improvement of such uses.

 

5-3-310 RESOLUTION OF INTENTION--NOTICE.
Prior to adoption of a Master Plan the City Council shall by resolution indicate its intention to adopt such a Master Plan. The City Clerk, when directed to do so by the City Council, shall publish such Resolution of Intention once in the official newspaper of the City. The Resolution of Intention shall contain a map or maps depicting the underground utility districts proposed in the Master Plan. Following a public hearing at the time and place specified in the Resolution of Intention (or as the same may thereafter be continued) the City Council may adopt the Master Plan.

 

5-3-315 CONTENTS OF MASTER PLAN.
The Master Plan shall contain the following elements:

(a) A depiction of all real property within each proposed underground utility district.

(b) A proposed and tentative schedule for commencement and completion of work in such proposed underground utility districts.

(c) An estimate of the cost of the underground utility conversion project in current dollars.

(d) An allocation of such costs to the affected utilities in accordance with their tariff on file with the Commission, the City and the real property within the proposed district, including any offset of such costs to real property as a result of prior payments.

(e) Special regulations relating to the development of property within the proposed underground utility district.

(f) Such other matters which will accomplish the purposes of this Chapter, including procedure for the administration hereof.

(g) Such rules as may be required by the Finance Director to account for the funds deposited pursuant to this Chapter and the Master Plan.

 

5-3-320 MASTER PLAN CONSTITUTES A SPECIFIC PLAN.
It is the intention of the City Council that the Master Plan is necessary and convenient for the implementation of the General Plan of the City. For such purposes and for purposes of the Subdivision Map Act, the Master Plan shall be and is hereby deemed a specific plan of the City of San Leandro.

 

5-3-325 IMPOSITION OF FEES FOR DEVELOPMENT WITHIN PROPOSED UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapters 1 and 5 of Title VII of this Code and the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro to the contrary, no property shall be reclassified; no subdivision map or parcel map approved; no conditional use permit, variance, general development plan or precise development plan approved; and no building permit for construction of multi-family residential, commercial, industrial or other uses shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor deposits with the Finance Director such fees for underground utility conversion as are specified in or pursuant to the Master Plan.

(b) If such fees are paid following the completion of the underground utility conversion project then such fee shall represent the pro rata allocation of actual costs attributable to the property assessed on a front foot basis or such other basis as in the opinion of the City is fair, just and equitable. If such fees are paid prior to the underground utility conversion project then such fees shall represent, the pro rata allocation of estimated costs in current dollars attributable to the property assessed on a front foot basis or such other basis as the opinion of the City is fair, just and equitable.

 

5-3-330 PAYMENT AND DEPOSIT OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY CONVERSION FEES.
Fees payable under the terms of this Chapter and the Master Plan shall be paid in cash to the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall deposit such funds received pursuant to this Chapter in a separate fund or account for underground utility conversion projects. All earnings on such sums deposited shall be credited to such fund or account. Any refunds granted shall be paid only from such fund or account.

 

5-3-335 MODIFICATION OF OBLIGATION.
If upon a determination by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the BZA, or any City official or employee authorized by the City Council to grant a zoning approval or other entitlement as specified in Section 5-3-325(a), feels that an undue hardship would result from the imposition of the fees in the manner set forth in Section 5-3-325, or that utility improvements to be made by the developer or owner of property subject to the payment of a fee as provided in Section 5-3-325, will reduce the cost of and be usable as a part of an underground utility conversion project, the Community Development Director may authorize a modification in the amount or manner of payment of the obligation. If utility improvements in lieu of all or a portion of the fee are to be approved, the fee shall be reduced by the cost of said utility improvements, as estimated by the serving utility companies. If deferred payment or improvements are approved, such approval shall be by written agreement with adequate security therefor executed by the property owner or authorized representative of property owner, to undertake such improvements or make such payments at the time that the underground utility conversion project is commenced. Standards for modification of obligations in accordance with this section shall be set forth in detail in the Master Plan.

 

5-3-340 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL UNAFFECTED.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to prohibit or limit the attachment of conditions to any subdivision or parcel map or entitlement of use otherwise provided by law.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-025, 8/5/85)

CHAPTER 5-4 STREET AND EASEMENT ABANDONMENT
ARTICLE 1. PROCEDURE FOR VACATION OF STREETS AND EASEMENTS
5-4-100 VACATION OF STREET OR PUBLIC EASEMENT.
The City Council may vacate any street or part of any street or public easement or part thereof in the City of San Leandro in the manner provided in this Chapter. The election of the City Council to proceed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be expressed in its resolution of intention to order any vacation.

 

5-4-105 MULTIPLE VACATIONS.
One or more streets or parts of streets or one or more easements or parts of easements, whether contiguous or not, may be included and vacated in the same proceeding.

 

5-4-110 RESOLUTION OF INTENTION.
Before the vacation of any street or part thereof or the vacation of any easement or part thereof is ordered, the City Council shall pass a resolution of intention declaring its intention to do so, referring to the street or part thereof by its official name. If the vacation is of an easement, the resolution of intention shall briefly describe the easement which it is proposed to vacate. The resolution of intention shall refer to a map on file in the office of the City Clerk for particulars as to the proposed vacation. The resolution of intention shall contain also a notice of the day, time and place when and where any and all persons having any objections to the proposed vacation may appear before the City Council and show cause why the proposed vacation should not be ordered. The time shall not be less than fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of the passage of the resolution. The City Clerk shall cause the resolution of intention to be published once a week for at least two (2) successive weeks prior to the date of public hearing stated in said resolution. Said resolution of intention shall be posted conspicuously along the line of the street or easement proposed to be vacated at least two (2) weeks before the date set for hearing. Such resolution shall be posted not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, but at least three (3) shall be posted.

 

5-4-115 PROOF OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
Proof of publication of a notice or posting shall be made by affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury reciting the facts of such publication or posting. An officer required to have any notice published or posted shall file the affidavit in his or her office. Failure to do so does not invalidate proceedings under this Chapter. An affidavit so filed is prima facie evidence of the facts stated in it.

 

5-4-120 HEARING/ORDER OF VACATION.
The City Council shall, on the day fixed for the hearing, or on the day to which the hearing is postponed or continued, hear the evidence offered by any person interested. If the City Council finds, from all the evidence submitted, that any street or part thereof or easement or part thereof, described in the resolution of intention, is unnecessary for present or prospective public uses, the City Council may by ordinance make its order vacating such street or part thereof, or easement or part thereof.

 

5-4-125 EFFECT OF ORDER/RECORDATION.
Upon the making of such order of vacation, the public easement in the street or easement vacated ceases and the title to the land previously subject thereto reverts to the respective owners thereof free from the public easement for street purposes. The City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of such ordinance attested by the City Clerk under the seal of the City to be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

 

5-4-130 POWER OF CITY/EASEMENTS RESERVABLE.
In any proceeding for the vacation of any street or part thereof, the City may reserve and except from the vacation the permanent easement and right at any time, or from time to time, to construct, maintain, operate, replace, remove, and renew sanitary sewers and storm drains and appurtenant structures in, upon, over and across any street or part thereof proposed to be vacated and pursuant to any existing franchises or renewals thereof, or otherwise, to construct, maintain, operate, replace, remove, renew and enlarge lines of pipe, conduit, cables, wires, poles, and other convenient structures, equipment and fixtures for the operation of gas pipe lines, telegraphic and telephone lines, railroad lines, and for the transportation or distribution of electric energy, petroleum and its products, ammonia, water, and incidental purposes, including access and the right to keep the property free from inflammable materials, and wood growth, and otherwise protect the same from all hazards in, upon and over the street or part thereof proposed to be vacated.

 

5-4-135 RESOLUTION OF INTENTION/ RECITAL OF RESERVATIONS.
In any proceedings for the vacation of any street or part thereof wherein the City Council may determine that the public convenience and necessity require the reservation of easements and rights of way for structures in Section 5-4-130, such determination shall be recited in the resolution of intention in addition to any other matter required to be recited therein. Said resolution of intention shall also recite that the proceedings are taken subject to such reservations and exceptions. All subsequent proceedings of the City in relation to the vacation, including any deed or conveyance, if any, to the owners of the land underlying such street or part thereof, shall be subject to and governed by the reservations and exceptions contained in the resolution of intention.

 

5-4-140 AUTHORITY/PROCEDURE.
The authority granted and the procedure provided by this Chapter is an alternative to any other authority or procedure provided by law.

 

5-4-145 DETERMINATIONS OF THE COUNCIL SHALL BE FINAL.
All the decisions and determinations of the City Council, upon notice and hearing as aforesaid,, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal under the provisions of this Chapter, as to all errors, informalities, omissions, irregularities and other defects, which Council might have avoided, or might have remedied, during the progress of the proceeding, or which it can at that time remedy.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 1304 N.S. 2/6/61; Ordinance No. 87-018, 11/2/874)

CHAPTER 5-5 FRANCHISES
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-5-100 GENERAL.
No person, firm or corporation shall exercise any franchise mentioned in this Chapter in the City except insofar as he or she or it may be entitled to do so by direct authority of the general laws of the State of California, the Constitution of the State of California or of the United States, unless he or she or it shall have obtained a grant therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate any lawful franchise heretofore granted nor to necessitate the obtaining of a new franchise for a use for which a franchise holder shall have a valid unexpired franchise.

 

5-5-105 AUTHORITY TO GRANT.
The City Council may grant by ordinance a franchise to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, to furnish the City and its inhabitants with transportation, communication, terminal facilities, refuse, garbage or trash collection, water, light, heat, power, refrigeration, storage or any other public utility, service or commodity, or to use the public streets, ways, alleys and places, as the same may now or may hereafter exist, in connection therewith.

 

5-5-110 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISES.
The City Council, in granting franchises, shall prescribe the terms and conditions of such franchise, including the term of years, in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto and may in such franchise impose such other and additional terms and conditions not in conflict with this Chapter, whether governmental or contractual in character, as in the judgment of the City Council, are in the public interest.

 

5-5-115 PURCHASE OR CONDEMNATION OF PROPERTY OF GRANTEE BY CITY.
No franchise grant shall in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the City now or hereafter conferred upon it by law to acquire the property of the grantee thereof either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or to abridge either for a term or in perpetuity the City’s right of eminent domain with respect to any public utility.

 

5-5-120 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to relieve any franchisee of the requirements of Chapter 1 of this Title, relating to Encroachment Permits.

 

 

5-5-125 REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
    The franchisee shall remove or relocate without expense to the City any facilities installed, used, and maintained under the franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any street, including the construction of any subway or viaduct or the abandonment or vacation of any street by the City.

 

5-5-130 COMPENSATION TO CITY.
    No new franchise or the renewal of an existing franchise shall be granted without reserving to the City just and adequate compensation.

 

5-5-135 EXERCISING RIGHT WITHOUT FRANCHISE.
    The exercise of any person, firm or corporation of any privilege for which a franchise is required without procuring such franchise shall be a misdemeanor, and each such day that such condition continues shall constitute a separate violation.

 

5-5-140 METHOD OF GRANTING FRANCHISE.
    The City Council, in its discretion, shall provide the method by which franchises shall be granted by ordinance or resolution.

 

(Legislative History: Ord. No. )

CHAPTER 5-6 NEWSRACK REGULATIONS.
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-6-100 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
    (a)   The City has a substantial governmental interest in promoting the public health, safety, welfare and convenience by ensuring use of the public rights-of-way without unreasonable interference.

    (b)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that:

    (1)  Unreasonable interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic is avoided;

    (2)  Obstruction of views of traffic, traffic signs and pedestrians is eliminated;

    (3)  Damage to sidewalks and streets is minimized and repaired;

    (4)  The good appearance of the public streets, sidewalks and grounds is maintained;

    (5)  Trees and other landscaping are allowed to grow undisturbed;

    (6)  Access to emergency and other public facilities is maintained; and

    (7)  Ingress and egress from properties adjoining public rights-of-way are maintained.

 

    (c)   The unregulated placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way may unreasonably interfere with use of the public rights-of-way, and may present hazards to persons or property.

    (d)  The City has a substantial governmental interest in preserving the aesthetic character of the Special Newsrack Districts.

    (e)   The purpose of the regulations set forth in this Chapter is to ensure that the placement and appearance of newsracks in the public rights-of-way do not unreasonably interfere with the public health, public safety and convenience, and to preserve the aesthetic character of the Special Newsrack Districts, in particular.

    (f)   It is intended that the provisions of this Chapter, and compliance with such provisions, shall be consistent with all laws protecting access to services for persons with disabilities, including but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act.

    (g)  The regulation of newsracks as set forth in this Chapter provides the least intrusive and burdensome means for ensuring the purposes stated in this section are carried out while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news, opinion and information to the public.

    (h)  This Chapter is not intended to regulate the placement of newsracks on private property or property under the jurisdiction of any public agency other than the City.

 

5-6-105 DEFINITIONS.
    Whenever the following words or phrases are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section:

    (a)   DEPOSIT. “Deposit” means the refundable deposit in the amount established by the Director, which must accompany a permit application as provided in Section 5-6-205 of this Chapter, and which may be used by the City as provided in Article 6 of this Chapter. The deposit shall be refunded to the newsrack operator within thirty (30) days of expiration, nonrenewal or revocation of the permit.

    (b)  DIRECTOR. “Director” means the San Leandro Engineering and Transportation Director or designee. The responsibilities of the Director include, but are not limited to the following:

    (1)  Establishing the amount of the deposit that must accompany a permit application as provided in Section 5-6-205 of this Chapter;

    (2)  Designating certain areas within the City as Special Newsrack Districts, with the advice of the Office of Business Development, and with the consent and approval of the City Council, as provided in Article 3 of this Chapter;

    (3)  Receiving applications for newsrack permits as provided in Section 5-6-205 of this Chapter;

    (4)  Determining procedures for the allocation of newsrack spaces citywide and in Special Newsrack Districts as provided in Sections 5-6-210 and 5-6-310 of this Chapter;

    (5)  Designating the required color of newsracks as provided in Section 5-6-400 herein, with the advice of the Community Development Department;

    (6) Declaring additional newsrack placement standards if necessary, as provided in Section 5-6-410 of this Chapter; and

    (7)  Holding hearings upon the request of newsrack operators regarding the removal, repair or maintenance of newsracks in violation of this Chapter, as provided in Section 5-6-615 of this Chapter.

    (c)   SPECIAL NEWSRACK DISTRICTS. “Special Newsrack Districts” means those areas designated as Special Newsrack Districts by the Director, with the consent and approval of the City Council.

    (d)  MODULAR NEWSRACK. “Modular newsrack” means an industry standard structure with multiple compartments designed to contain newsrack inserts.

    (e)   NEWSRACK. “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers, periodicals or other publications.

    (f)   NEWSRACK INSERT. “Newsrack insert” means an individual newsrack designed to fit within a modular newsrack.

    (g)  NEWSRACK OPERATOR. “Newsrack operator” means a person or entity responsible for placing, installing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.

    (h)  OPAQUE DISPLAYS. “Opaque displays” shall have the meaning specified in Section 4-29-210 of this Code, as may be amended from time to time.

    (i)   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. “Public right-of-way” means any area used or intended for use by the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel within the City, including, but not limited to, public streets, highways, roadways, sidewalks, median strips, plazas, alleys, parks, trails, and bridges.

    (j)   HARMFUL MATTER—PERSON—MINOR. For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms “harmful matter,” “person,” and “minor,” shall have the meanings specified in Section 4-29-100 of this Code, as may be amended from time to time.

    (k)  DISTRIBUTE—KNOWINGLY—EXHIBIT. For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms “distribute,” “knowingly,” and “exhibit” shall have the meanings specified in Section 313 of the California Penal Code, as may be amended from time to time.

 

5-6-110 NEWSRACKS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS OR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
    No newsrack operator shall place, install, use or maintain any newsrack within, or encroaching upon, public property or a public right-of-way within the City except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The provisions of this Chapter constitute the exclusive requirements for newsracks located on public property or in public rights-of-way within the City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Sections 5-6-100—5-6-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMITS REQUIRED
5-6-200 NEWSRACK PERMIT REQUIRED.
    Each newsrack operator shall obtain a newsrack permit from the City as required by this Chapter prior to placing, installing or maintaining a newsrack on public property or within a public right-of-way.

 

5-6-205 PERMIT APPLICATION.
    Application for a newsrack permit shall be made to the Director or his/her designee on the form provided by the City. Each newsrack permit application shall include and be accompanied by the following:

    (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person(s) responsible for placement, installation, and maintenance of the newsrack(s);

    (b)  The number of newsracks to be placed or installed;

    (c)   A description of the proposed location for placement or installation of each newsrack, sufficiently detailed to demonstrate conformity with the requirements of this Chapter;

    (d)  The type or brand of newsrack, including a description sufficiently detailed to demonstrate conformity with the requirements of this Chapter;

    (e)   A nonrefundable fee, in the amount established by resolution or ordinance of the City Council;

    (f)   Evidence of insurance in an amount and form acceptable to the City’s Risk Manager;

    (g)  An indemnification agreement pursuant to Section 5-6-710 of this Chapter;

    (h)  Identification of the size of each newsrack insert, if the proposed location of the newsrack is within the Special Newsrack Districts; and

    (i)   The deposit, which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier’s check payable to the City. The deposit shall be refunded to the newsrack operator within thirty (30) days of expiration, nonrenewal or revocation of the permit.

 

5-6-210 REVIEW AND ACTION ON APPLICATION.
    Applications will be processed in the order received. The content or viewpoint of the material to be distributed from a newsrack shall not be considered in reviewing and acting on the application. Upon receipt of a complete application, a newsrack permit shall be issued within fifteen (15) business days if the type of newsrack and location proposed meet the standards set forth in this Chapter, except as otherwise provided in Article 3 of this Chapter. If newsrack spaces applied for exceed newsrack spaces available, the Director shall determine procedures for the allocation of newsrack spaces by lottery or other method of random, content-neutral selection, and shall issue permits accordingly. If an application for a newsrack permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reason for denial within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the application, and of the right to appeal in accordance with Section 5-6-715 of this Chapter.

 

5-6-215 PERMIT RENEWAL.
    Newsrack permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance. Thirty (30) days prior to the anniversary of the date of issuance, each permit holder must submit evidence of insurance in an amount and form acceptable to the City’s Risk Manager. If such evidence is submitted, the holder’s permit shall be automatically renewed for one year.

 

5-6-220 CHANGE IN CONTACT INFORMATION.
    Permit holders are responsible for notifying the City of any changes to the name, address or telephone number of the person(s) responsible for placement, installation and maintenance of each permitted newsrack.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Sections 5-6-200—5-6-220))

 

ARTICLE 3. NEWSRACKS IN THE SPECIAL NEWSRACK DISTRICTS
5-6-300 IN GENERAL.
    The provisions of this Article apply solely to newsracks placed, installed or maintained on public property or within a public right-of-way located within the Special Newsrack Districts.

 

5-6-305 USE OF MODULAR NEWSRACKS REQUIRED.
    In order to preserve the aesthetic character of the Special Newsrack Districts, no newsrack may be placed, installed, used or maintained on public property or in a public right-of-way within the Special Newsrack Districts other than the modular newsrack design chosen by the City in accordance with a plan established by the Director.

 

5-6-310 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    Application for a newsrack permit for newsracks to be placed or installed on public property or in a public right-of-way within the Special Newsrack Districts shall be made in accordance with Article 2 of this Chapter, except that if newsrack spaces applied for exceed newsrack spaces available within a modular newsrack, the Director shall determine procedures for the allocation of newsrack spaces by lottery or other method of random, content-neutral selection, and shall issue permits accordingly.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Sections 5-6-300—5-6-310))

 

ARTICLE 4. NEWSRACK REQUIREMENTS
5-6-400 SIZE AND APPEARANCE.
    Any newsrack which rests, in whole or in part, upon or within public property or a public right-of-way, or which projects onto, into or over public property or a public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of this Article, or as subsequently modified by the Director, and with the following standards:

    (a)   Newsracks shall not exceed sixty (60) inches in height, including pedestal, measured from the ground to the top of the surface of the newsrack, not more than two (2) feet deep and not more than thirty (30) inches wide.

    (b)  Newsracks shall be painted the color or manufactured in the color specifically designated by the Director, samples of which shall be provided to all permit applicants.

    (c)   No advertising signs or material shall be displayed on the exterior of a newsrack other than those associated with the name of the publication contained therein.

    (d)  A notice shall be affixed to each newsrack providing the name and address of the newsrack operator, including a current telephone number for reporting a malfunction and for obtaining a refund in the event of a malfunction of a coin-return mechanism.

    (e)   Additional standards specifically defining size and appearance requirements may be declared by the Director, and such standards must be consistent with the findings, intent and purpose of this Chapter. Notice must be given to all permitted newsrack operators within a reasonable time before any changes to the standards in this Section 5-6-400 take effect.

 

5-6-405 MAINTENANCE.
    Any newsrack which rests, in whole or in part, upon or within public property or a public right-of-way, or which projects onto, into or over public property or a public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Article and with the following standards:

    (a)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times; for example, without limitation, the newsrack shall be reasonably free of dirt and grease; be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling or cracked paint; be reasonably free of rust and corrosion; have no broken or cracked plastic or glass parts; and have no broken structural parts.

    (b)  The area in the immediate vicinity of each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and clear of debris and discarded material, to the extent possible. Repeated violations of this section may warrant removal of the newsrack, in the reasonable discretion of the Director.

    (c)   No newsrack may be chained, locked or tied to any other newsrack, street tree, or any other public or privately owned fixture.

    (d)  Each coin-operated newsrack not in the Special Newsrack Districts shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism, which shall be maintained in good working order.

    (e)   Upon the removal of any newsrack not in the Special Newsrack Districts, the public right-of-way shall be returned to its original condition at the expense of the newsrack operator, including, but not limited to, the repair of any damage that may have been caused by the installation or use of the newsrack.

    (f)   The Director may declare additional standards specifically defining maintenance requirements, and such standards must be consistent with the findings, intent and purpose of this Chapter.

 

5-6-410 PLACEMENT.
    Any newsrack which rests, in whole or in part, upon or within public property or a public right-of-way, or which projects onto, into or over public property or a public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Article and with the following standards:

    (a)   No newsrack may be placed, installed, or maintained so that it projects onto, into or over any part of a roadway or street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway or street.

    (b)  No newsrack may be placed, installed, or maintained so that it rests, in whole or in part, upon, in or over any public sidewalk or right-of-way, when such placement, installation, or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property or when such site is used for public utilities, public transportation or other governmental use, or when such placement, installation or maintenance unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic, including access for the disabled, bicycle access, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, postal service collection boxes or other objects permitted at or near such locations.

    (c)   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

 

    (1)  Within any neighborhood that is zoned as a Residential District, as defined in Part II, Article 5 of the City of San Leandro Zoning Code;

    (2)  Within five (5) feet of any marked crosswalk, or within fifteen (15) feet of any unmarked crosswalk as measured from the curb return, or within five (5) feet of any wheelchair curb ramp not in a marked crosswalk;

    (3)  Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant;

    (4)  Within five (5) feet of any fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

    (5)  Within five (5) feet of any driveway;

    (6)  Within five (5) feet of any bus bench or shelter;

    (7)  Within fifteen (15) feet ahead of, and five (5) feet to the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop, relative to the direction of bus travel. Newsracks placed seven (7) feet from the curb, measured perpendicular to the roadway, are exempt from this limitation;

    (8)  At any location where the clear space or sidewalk space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than four (4) feet;

    (9)  In such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any building, the activity of any business or residence or the use of any commercial window display or sidewalk cafe.

    (d)  Additional standards specifically defining the placement requirements may be declared by the Director, and such standards must be consistent with the findings, intent and purpose of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Sections 5-6-400—5-6-410))

 

ARTICLE 5. DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATTER
5-6-500 PROHIBITION.
    No newsrack shall exhibit or display harmful matter in a public place from which minors are not excluded, unless opaque displays have been installed so that the lower two-thirds of the matter are not exposed to public view. No person shall knowingly exhibit, display, or cause to be exhibited or displayed, harmful matter in any newsrack located in a public place from which minors are not excluded, unless opaque displays have been installed so that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to public view.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Section 5-6-500))

 

ARTICLE 6. ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS
5-6-600 IN GENERAL.
    A newsrack in violation of this Chapter may be removed, repaired or maintained by the City at the direction of the Director in accordance with the provisions of this Article. A violation of this Chapter, including any continuing violation as set forth in Section 1-12-140 of this Code, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to the remedies for nuisance abatement provided in Chapter 1-12 of this Code, the City expressly reserves the right to utilize other enforcement remedies found within specific chapters of this Code, remedies available under any applicable state or federal statute or pursuant to any other lawful power the City may possess. All such remedies shall be alternative to or in conjunction with, and not exclusive of, one another. The election of remedies provided by this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City and its officials.

 

5-6-605 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
    Except as otherwise provided in this Article, before the City takes action to remove, repair or maintain a newsrack, the City shall notify the newsrack operator by written notice sent to the newsrack operator’s last known address and posted on the newsrack, providing ten (10) days to remedy the violation and/or to contest removal. Both forms of notice shall provide information necessary to request a hearing to contest repair, maintenance or removal of the newsrack. If no identification is shown on the newsrack and no newsrack permit has been issued, posting of the notice on the newsrack alone shall be sufficient.

 

5-6-610 EMERGENCY REMOVAL.
    A newsrack may be removed or relocated immediately and without prior notice required by Section 5-6-605 of this Article if the violation poses a danger to pedestrians or vehicles. The City will make a good faith effort to promptly notify the newsrack operator of such removal or relocation.

 

5-6-615 HEARING.
    To contest removal, repair or maintenance, a newsrack operator in receipt of a Notice of Violation pursuant to Section 5-6-605 of this Article may submit a written request for a hearing before the Director (or designee), which hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after the request is received. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be offered by either side. Action to remove the newsrack shall be stayed pending the decision of the Director (or designee) following the hearing. The newsrack operator will be sent written notice of the decision of the Director (or designee) within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing. Such decision may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 5-6-715 of this Chapter, and an action to remove a newsrack shall be stayed while such appeal, if timely filed, is pending.

 

5-6-620 DECISION TO REPAIR, MAINTAIN OR REMOVE NEWSRACK.
    The City may repair, maintain or remove a newsrack from public property or the public right-of-way pursuant to Sections 5-6-610 or 5-6-630 of this Article, or if:

    (a)   The newsrack operator responsible for such newsrack has neither requested a hearing pursuant to Section 5-6-615 of this Article nor remedied the violation within ten (10) days following the date of notice; or

    (b)  Following a hearing pursuant to Section 5-6-615 of this Article in which the Director (or designee) finds the newsrack in violation of this Chapter and orders its removal, repair or maintenance, the newsrack operator responsible for such newsrack fails to remedy the violation or to appeal the decision within ten (10) days after receiving notice of such decision.

 

5-6-625 USE OF DEPOSIT.
    If the City repairs, maintains or removes a newsrack pursuant to this Article 6, the City may use the deposit in order to pay for such repairs, maintenance, or removal of the newsrack, including the cleaning of any debris or discarded material in the immediate vicinity of the newsrack and which the Director determines, in his/her reasonable discretion, is attributable to that newsrack. If the City uses the deposit or any portion thereof for the above purposes, the newsrack operator shall be required to replenish the deposit to the full amount within thirty (30) days upon written notice thereof from the City. Failure to replenish the deposit as required by this section will constitute a violation of this Chapter, and may result in nonrenewal or revocation of the newsrack operator’s permit, and/or removal of the newsrack.

 

5-6-630 ABANDONED NEWSRACK.
    Any newsrack which has been left empty for a period of thirty (30) days shall be deemed abandoned, except a newsrack remaining empty due to a labor strike or other extraordinary interruption of distribution of the publication distributed from that newsrack. If the abandoned newsrack is in the Special Newsrack Districts, the City may remove any remaining materials from the newsrack, following thirty (30) days after the City has sent written notice to the newsrack operator’s last known address and posted notice on the newsrack that the newsrack has been deemed abandoned and the permit is subject to cancellation pursuant to this section. If the abandoned newsrack is outside of the Special Newsrack Districts, the City may remove the abandoned newsrack from public property or a public right-of-way following thirty (30) days after the City has sent written notice to the newsrack operator’s last known address and posted notice on the newsrack that the newsrack has been deemed abandoned and is subject to removal pursuant to this section.

 

 

5-6-635 RECOVERY AND DISPOSAL.
    Newsracks removed by the City shall be retained by the City for thirty (30) days, subject to recovery by the newsrack operator. Newsracks which are not claimed by the newsrack operator within thirty (30) days following removal shall be deemed permanently abandoned and may be disposed of by the City.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Sections 5-6-600—5-6-635))

 

ARTICLE 7. MISCELLANEOUS
5-6-700 COMPLIANCE—CITYWIDE.
    Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a newsrack lawfully in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter will not be required to come into compliance with this Chapter for the earlier of: (a) thirty (30) days after receiving written notice from the City requiring compliance; or (b) ninety (90) days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, provided that within thirty (30) days following the effective date, the newsrack’s operator provides the Director with a written report identifying the location of such newsrack.

 

5-6-705 COMPLIANCE—SPECIAL NEWSRACK DISTRICTS.
    A newsrack lawfully in existence within a Special Newsrack District after the Director has made a final determination as to the boundaries of such district (“boundary determination”), shall be allowed to remain at the same location for sixty (60) days following installation and written notice of availability of modular newsracks within the Special Newsrack District, provided that within thirty (30) days following the boundary determination, the newsrack operator provides the Director with a written report identifying the number and location of each such newsrack within the Special Newsrack Districts.

 

5-6-710 INDEMNIFICATION.
    Each newsrack operator installing, operating or maintaining a newsrack upon public property or within the public right-of-way in the City shall agree, prior to issuance of a newsrack permit, to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers from any loss, liability, damage, claims, expenses or cost (collectively “liability”) sustained by any person or property, arising from the installation, operation, maintenance or use of such newsrack, except such liability caused by the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the City.

 

5-6-715 APPEAL.
    Any applicant or newsrack operator may appeal any action, decision or determination made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter to the City Manager or designee. Such appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the City Manager’s office within ten (10) days following date of the action, decision or determination. The matter shall be scheduled to be heard by the City Manager (or designee) within ten (10) days following receipt of the appeal, or on a date mutually agreeable to the parties. The hearing shall be informal, but both sides may give oral and written evidence. At the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the City Manager (or designee) shall affirm, modify, or vacate the action, decision or determination being appealed. The appellant shall be informed that the decision of the City Manager (or designee) is final and subject to immediate judicial review.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2005-004, 6/6/05 (Sections 5-6-700—5-6-715))

CHAPTER 5-7 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDED BY STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS
5-7-100 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to set forth regulations for the provision of video service by state franchise holders, in accordance with the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act, California Public Utilities Code Sections 5800 through 5970 (“DIVCA”). This Chapter shall apply to video service providers operating within the City pursuant to a valid State franchise.

 

5-7-105 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   CITY: “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  CITY MANAGER: “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of San Leandro, or designee.

    (c)   FRANCHISE FEE: “Franchise fee” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (g) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

    (d)  GROSS REVENUES: “Gross revenues” shall have the meaning given that term by the California Public Utilities Code Section 5860 or its successor.

    (e)   HOLDER: “Holder” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

    (f)   MATERIAL BREACH: “Material breach” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code Section 5900 or its successor.

    (g)  NETWORK: “Network” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (l) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

    (h)  STATE FRANCHISE: “State franchise” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (p) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830.

    (i)   VIDEO SERVICE: “Video service” shall have the meaning given that term by the California Public Utilities Code Section 5830(s) or its successor.

 

5-7-110 FRANCHISE FEE FOR STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS.
    Each State franchise holder shall remit to the City a franchise fee in the amount of five percent (5%) of the gross revenues of the State franchise holder in compliance with California Public Utilities Code Sections 5840(q), 5860(a) and (d).

 

5-7-115 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENT CHANNELS.
    (a)   Each State franchise holder shall remit to the City a fee to support PEG channel facilities in the amount of one percent (1%) of the gross revenues of the State franchise holder in compliance with California Public Utilities Code Section 5870. All revenue collected pursuant to this fee shall be deposited in a separate fund and shall only be expended for the purpose of supporting PEG channel facilities.

    (b)  Each State franchise holder shall furnish, on an annual basis, a statement within ninety (90) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the State franchise holder, reflecting the total amount of gross revenues, as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5860, for the preceding calendar year, and all payments, deductions and computations used to determine the amount of the remittances required by subsection (a) of this section during the preceding calendar year. The City Manager may establish, and from time to time revise, such additional reporting requirements as are necessary to ensure that the basis for the calculation of the amount of remittances are adequately explained and documented, and each State franchise holder shall comply with such additional reporting requirements provided that each franchise holder shall have first been provided written notice of such requirements at least fifteen (15) days prior to the beginning of the calendar year.

    (c)   Notwithstanding subdivision (n) of Public Utilities Code Section 5870, upon expiration of any State franchise, without any action of the City Council, this section shall be deemed to have been automatically reauthorized, unless the state franchise holder has given the City written notice sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the state franchise that the section will expire pursuant to the terms of subdivision (n) of Public Utilities Code Section 5870.

 

5-7-120 CUSTOMER SERVICE PENALTIES BY STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS.
    (a)   Any State franchise holder shall comply with the customer service provisions set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5900.

    (b)  The City shall impose the following penalties against a State franchise holder for any material breach of the customer service provisions set forth in subsection (a) of this section:

    (1)  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.

    (2)  For a second occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as the first material breach that occurs within twelve (12) months, a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.

    (3)  For a third or further occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as the previous material breaches that occurred within the preceding twelve (12) months, a fine of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.

    (c)   The City Manager shall have the authority to assess penalties for any material breach by a holder of a State franchise. Prior to assessing penalties for a material breach, the City Manager shall first have provided the State franchise holder with written notice of any alleged material breach of the customer service provisions set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5900 and shall allow the State franchise holder at least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.

    (d)  A material breach for the purposes of assessing penalties shall be deemed to have occurred for each day within the jurisdiction of the City, following the expiration of the period specified in this section that any material breach has not been remedied by the video provider, irrespective of the number of customers affected. No monetary penalties shall be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the reasonable control of the State franchise holder.

    (e)   The City shall submit one half of any penalty amounts it receives to the Digital Divide Account established by California Public Utilities Code Section 280.5.

    (f)   No monetary penalties shall be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the reasonable control of the State franchise holder.

    (g)  The penalty amounts set out in subsection (b) of this section are based on the maximums allowed under subsection (d) of California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, and the City desires to set the penalty amounts at the highest amount authorized by law. Accordingly, the penalty amounts set out in subsection (b) of this section shall be automatically increased to reflect any increases the amounts allowed under subsection (d) of California Public Utilities Code Section 5900.

 

5-7-125 AUTHORITY TO EXAMINE AND AUDIT BUSINESS RECORDS.
    The City shall ensure that it receives all franchise fee revenue to which it is entitled at the times and in the amounts specified by Public Utilities Code Section 5860, and, to that end, the City Manager is hereby authorized, either with or without the assistance of a duly authorized representative, to examine the business records of the holder of the State franchise in accordance with subdivision (i) of Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2010-003, 3/15/10)

TITLE 6 VEHICLES
CHAPTER 6-1 TRAFFIC CONTROL
CHAPTER 6-2 PARKING METER AND TOW AWAY ZONES
CHAPTER 6-3 PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 6-4 ABATEMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 6-5 BICYCLES
CHAPTER 6-6 TAXIS
CHAPTER 6-7 TRUCK ROUTES
CHAPTER 6-8 TRANSPORTATION PERMITS
CHAPTER 6-9 OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES

CHAPTER 6-1 TRAFFIC CONTROL
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
6-1-100 MOTOR VEHICLE CODE DEFINITIONS.
    Whenever any words or phrases used in this Title are not defined, but are defined in Division 1 (commencing with Section 100) of the California Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply.

 

6-1-105 CITY MANAGER.
    “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager or designee.

 

6-1-110 ORDINANCE.
    Whenever action under this Title is required to be taken by ordinance, the ordinance shall be uncodified and the provisions thereof shall be included in the Traffic Code.

 

6-1-115 TRAFFIC CODE.
    “Traffic Code” shall mean that compilation of ordinances and resolutions and other regulations relating to traffic adopted pursuant to this Title and maintained by the City Clerk, as provided by Section 1-1-370 of this Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 75-2, 1/13/75; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82)

 

ARTICLE 2. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
6-1-200 NO TURNING—NO U-TURNS.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle (either left hand turn, right hand turn, through movement, or U-turn) at the intersection or between the intersections and between the hours and on the days designated by the City Council by ordinance.

 

6-1-205 NO RIGHT TURN ON RED.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a right turn at the intersections and between the hours and on the days designated by the City Council by ordinance.

 

6-1-210 STOP SIGNS—THROUGH STREETS.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop at the entrance or entrances to those streets or parts of streets designated by the City Council by resolution.

 

6-1-215 STOP SIGNS—INTERSECTIONS.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop at the entrance or entrances to those intersections designated by the City Council by resolution.

 

 

6-1-220 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
    The City Council, by resolution, shall designate the entrances to intersections on highways at which yield right-of-way signs shall be erected.

 

6-1-225 ONE-WAY STREETS.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive or park such vehicle on any street listed in the Traffic Code as a one-way street, except in the direction indicated in the Traffic Code. The City Council shall designate the one-way streets, and the direction of traffic thereon, by resolution. The City Manager shall erect official traffic control devices on such one-way streets in the manner provided in Vehicle Code § 21657.

 

6-1-230 TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
    The City Manager shall install traffic signals at such locations as designated by the City Council by resolution.

 

6-1-235 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any mechanical or electrical traffic signal, traffic sign or mark upon the street placed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

 

6-1-240 NEW SURFACING OR PAINT.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over or across any newly laid pavement or street surfacing or newly painted markings on any street when an appropriate barrier, sign, marker or any other warning device is in place.

 

6-1-245 STREET CLOSINGS.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any street or portion thereof when any barrier, sign, marker or other warning device gives notice that such street or portion thereof is closed.

 

6-1-250 TURNING MARKERS AND MOVEMENTS.
    The City Manager is authorized to place markings, signals, signs, devices or other indications upon or adjacent to a street indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles on such streets. The City Manager is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns. The City Manager is authorized to place turning markers in intersections whenever, in his or her opinion, traffic is sufficiently heavy to warrant such placement. It shall be unlawful to disobey such authorized markings, signals, signs, devices, or other indications.

 

6-1-255 BARRIERS AND SIGNS.
    No person, public utility, or any department in this City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type first approved by the Superintendent of Streets, except in cases of emergency pending the posting of a proper sign. It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instruction of any barrier or sign placed in any street by any public utility or by any department of this City, provided the type of barrier or sign so erected has been first approved by the Superintendent of Streets.

 

6-1-260 FUNERAL PROCESSION.
    It shall be unlawful for the operator or any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession, providing that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated, or authorized parade, and the disposition and the directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such procession or parade wishes to pass shall be entirely subject to the orders of the Police Department.

 

6-1-265 ROLLERSKATES, SKATEBOARDS, COASTERS—PROHIBITION.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a skateboard, rollerskate, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, upon any highway, sidewalk, roadway, Civic Center property, Library property, Marina Community Center property, parking lot or parking structure in any business district.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a skateboard, rollerskate, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device; (i) in any manner which damages, defaces, or scratches public property; (ii) in any park where signs are posted prohibiting skateboarding and (iii) on public tennis courts, basketball courts, or baseball fields.

 

6-1-270 REPAIRING VEHICLES ON STREET.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed, or repair, or cause to be repaired, any vehicle or part thereof, upon any street, excepting temporary repairs in case of accident.

 

6-1-275 PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN OR ABOUT A MOTOR VEHICLE.
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to be in or about any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle, to which he or she has right of access or control, unless the same is under the immediate control or operation of a person not under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.

 

6-1-280 RAILROAD STOPS.
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop before crossing the railroad grade crossings which have a demonstrated need for stop signs as designated by the City Council by resolution.

 

6-1-285 SHORTCUTS.
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive across a municipal parking lot, public property not intended for use as the public right-of-way or private property as a means of effecting a shortened route between or along highways except with the express permission of the owner of such property.

 

6-1-290 TOW CARS.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of a tow car to render assistance to a disabled vehicle unless the tow car has been summoned to render such assistance.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 65-3, 1/25/65; Ordinance No. 66-65, 9/26/66; Ordinance No. 75-34, 7/14/75; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 83-022, 8/15/83; Ordinance No. 85-017, 6/17/85; Ordinance No. 88-014, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 97-033, 12/15/97 (Section 6-1-265); Ordinance No. 06-012, 8/17/06 (Section 6-1-200))

 

ARTICLE 3. TRAFFIC CONTROLLED BY OFFICERS
6-1-300 POLICE MAY DIRECT TRAFFIC.
    Officers of the police department and Parking Aides are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by means of visible or audible signal. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of traffic or police officer, or at any regular established school crossing, to refuse to or fail to comply with any order, signal or direction of any person appointed by the Chief of Police to control traffic at school crossings, provided that such person giving any order, signal or direction at such school crossing shall at all times be wearing some insignia indicating such appointment.

 

6-1-305 PLACE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL.
    The Chief of Police is hereby granted the power to determine the streets and intersections on which, and the time at which movement of traffic shall be directed.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82)

 

ARTICLE 4. PARKING (GENERAL)
6-1-400 POSTING PROPERTY.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park a motor vehicle upon land or premises where the owner or the person occupying or having possession of or the agent thereof shall have posted on such property or premises a notice of a size at least seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches with letters at least one inch high in substantially the following form, and where the permission therein referred to shall not have been granted:

 

NOTICE

 

Notice is hereby given that this property is privately owned. Public parking or driving hereon without written permission of the owner or his or her agent shall constitute a violation of Section 6-1-400 of the San Leandro Municipal Code of 1985. Vehicles will be towed at the vehicle owner’s expense. For towed vehicles call San Leandro Police Department (577-3201)

 

_______________________

Owner

 

    It shall also be unlawful for any person without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof to park any motor vehicles in or upon any private property, so as to interfere with the use thereof.

    This section is substantially identical to Section 6-1-199 which was repealed on the effective date of this Chapter; consequently, any reference to Section 6-1-199 of the San Leandro Municipal Code of 1957 shall be deemed to be a reference to this section.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-020, 9/6/88)

 

6-1-405 WHEN VEHICLES MAY BE REMOVED FROM STREETS.
    Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department, and any regularly employed and salaried employee who is designated a Parking Aide by the Chief of Police and who is engaged in the direction of traffic or enforcement of parking laws and regulations, may remove a vehicle from a street under the following circumstances:

    (a)   When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours;

    (b)  When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of the City Council and signs are posted giving notice of such removal.

    (c)   When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street where the use of such street or portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or for the installation or repair of underground utilities or where the use of the street or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal.

 

6-1-410 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES FROM DISABLED PERSON’S PARKING SPACES.
    Any person described in Section 6-1-405 may cause the removal, from a stall or space designated for the exclusive use of vehicles of physically handicapped persons in an off-street parking facility owned or operated by the City, to the nearest garage, of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing placards or license plates described in Section 22511.8 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, if signs giving notice of such removal are posted in compliance with the provisions of said section.

 

6-1-415 ANGLE PARKING.
    The City Manager may designate these streets on which angle parking shall be permitted, provided that the City Manager shall mark or sign any such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. To park a vehicle in any orientation other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by signs or markings, or in any parking space equipped with a parking meter in any orientation other than with the front of the vehicle closest to the parking meter or curb, unless the space is expressly designated for "back in only" parking. A list of the streets on which angle parking is permitted shall be maintained in the Traffic Code.

 

6-1-420 PARKING FOR DEMONSTRATION.
 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 83-031, 11/7/83)

 

6-1-425 PARKING ON HILLS.
    No person driving, or in control of, or in charge of, a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any street or highway unattended when upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%), without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means.

 

6-1-430 OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED—OFF-STREET PARKING OF CERTAIN SIZE VEHICLES.
    (a)   Residential Streets:

    (1)  No motor vehicle having more than two (2) axles, or any single vehicle or combination of vehicles, which exceed twenty (20) feet in length, or any single vehicle or combination of vehicles seven (7) feet or more in height, or any single vehicle or combination of vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more shall be parked or left standing upon any street in any Residence District as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 515 between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Emergency vehicles as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 165 are exempt from this provision.

    (2)  No motor vehicle shall be parked or left standing upon any street in any Residence District as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 515 between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., if any portion of such vehicle, when so parked or left standing, extends beyond eight (8) feet from the face of the curb. Emergency vehicles as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 165 are exempt from this provision.

    (3)  The City Manager may exempt an individual vehicle from the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section for owners of recreational vehicles upon request by the person in possession and control of such recreational vehicle of a reasonable need therefor. Such exemption shall expire at a specified time within seventy-two (72) hours, except that the City Manager or designee may extend such exemption for no more than one additional period of seventy-two (72) hours upon a request by a person in possession and control of such recreational vehicle that because of unusual circumstances, enforcement of said provision as to such recreational vehicle would cause undue hardship to such person. Such exemption and extension may be allowed twenty-four (24) times per year, equating to twenty-four (24) roundtrip permits per year for each San Leandro household. Vehicle owners requesting an exemption must register each request for exemption with the San Leandro Police Department. For purposes of this section, a recreational vehicle is as defined in Sections 18009.3 and 18010 of the California Health and Safety Code.

    (4)  The City Manager shall grant a variance from the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section if, from the information presented in an application for such variance, the following facts are established:

    (i)   The vehicle in question would otherwise be subject to the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section; and

 

    (ii)  Such vehicle is the sole vehicle registered to persons residing at the premises in question and is customarily parked at such premises; and

    (iii) Such vehicle is unable to be parked off-street in compliance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.

    A variance granted pursuant to these provisions shall remain valid only so long as the necessary facts established in order to obtain the variance continue to exist.

    (b)  Off-Street Parking of Vehicles of Certain Size—Residential:

    (1)  No motor vehicle exceeding the following two (2) dimensions: twenty (20) feet in length and seven (7) feet in height shall be parked or left standing within twenty (20) feet of the front yard or Street side yard (on a corner lot) side of the sidewalk; provided, however, that such motor vehicles may be so parked or left standing on the driveway portion thereof, if space is not available upon the driveway of the vehicles to be parked beyond said twenty (20) feet, or if space is not available in the rear yard or side yard, or there is no reasonable access to either the rear yard or side yard; a corner lot is presumed to have reasonable access to the rear yard.

    (2)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, no part of any motor vehicle may extend over the public sidewalk.

    (c)   Non-Motorized Vehicles: Except as provided herein, no vehicle other than a motor vehicle as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 415 shall be parked or left standing upon any street, except:

    (1)  Non-motorized vehicles owned, operated, or controlled by the City, so long as such non-motorized vehicles are parked or left standing for purposes reasonably related to official City business.

    (2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, a fifth-wheel travel trailer as defined in Section 324 of the California Vehicle Code, a travel coach as defined in Section 635 of the California Vehicle Code, a vehicle designed for recreational purposes to carry persons or property on its own structure and so constructed as to be drawn by a motor vehicle, or any other trailer, whether attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, may be granted an exemption by the City Manager to park in a residence district, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 515, under the same conditions applicable to motor vehicles as set forth in subsection (a)(3), of this section.

    (d)  Parking of Commercial Vehicles—Residential:

    (1)  No vehicle having more than two (2) axles, or any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles, which exceed twenty (20) feet in length or seven (7) feet or more in height, any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles seven (7) feet or more in width, or any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more shall be parked or left standing upon any street in any Residence District as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 515, except:

    (i)   For such reasonable time in excess of two (2) hours that may be necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used for repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon a restricted street or highway; or

    (ii)  For such reasonable time in excess of two (2) hours that may be necessary when such vehicle is parked in connection with the performance of a service to or on a property in which such vehicle is parked; or

    (iii) For such reasonable time in excess of two (2) hours that may be necessary time to make emergency repairs.

    No regulations adopted in this section shall apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or licensed contract while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility.

 

6-1-435 PARKING SPACES.
    The City Manager may cause parking spaces on streets or in municipal parking lots to be marked with white lines designating such parking space. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on a street or in a municipal parking lot in any manner other than wholly within a parking space so designated.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 1137 N.S., 7/9/58; Ordinance No. 1197 N.S., 3/2/59; Ordinance No. 69-4, 1/20/69; Ordinance No. 77-27, 6/13/77; Ordinance No. 79-40, 12/17/79; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 83-08, 2/22/83; Ordinance No. 96-015, 10/21/96 (Section 6-1-430); Ordinance No. 2001-25, 11/5/01 (Section 6-1-430); Ordinance No. 2007-003, 2/20/07 (Section 430); Ordinance No. 2007-010, 5/21/07 (Section 6-1-430); Ordinance No. 2011-002, 3/21/11 (Section 6-1-430); Ordinance No. 2018-001, 3/19/18 (Section 6-1-415))

 

ARTICLE 5. NO PARKING AND LIMITED PARKING (ALL VEHICLES)
6-1-500 NO PARKING.
    (a)   General: It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, park or leave standing such vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, traffic officer, or traffic sign or signal:

    (1)  In an intersection;

    (2)  In a crosswalk;

    (3)  In such no parking or restricted parking areas as designated by the City Council by resolution;

    (4)  In such no parking or restricted parking areas as may be defined, designated or established by the City Manager;

    (5)  In violation of any provision of this Code or the San Leandro Administrative Code;

    (6)  On a sidewalk; or

    (7)  On any portion of the area extending from a roadway edge of the curb (or from the highest point of a rolled curb) to the sidewalk.

    (b)  Designated Hours and Days: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, including vehicles which are six (6) feet or more in height (including any load thereon) and are within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection, to stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours and on the days in any of the streets, or portions of streets, all as designated by the City Manager or designee.

    (c)   Designated Periods of Time: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to leave such vehicle standing for a period of time greater than the length of time and on the days and during the hours and on any of the streets or portions of streets, all as designated by the City Manager or designee.

 

6-1-505 CURB MARKINGS.
    Whenever the City Manager, or designee, designates parking prohibitions or restrictions and directs the placement of curb markings designating such prohibitions or restrictions, the following colors only shall be used, and the colors indicate as follows:

    (a)   RED indicates no stopping, standing, or parking, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or sign posted as a bus loading zone.

    (b)  YELLOW indicates no stopping, standing, or parking, except for the purpose of active loading or unloading passengers or freight, during any time in which parking is restricted or prohibited at that yellow zone. Non-commercial vehicles shall not be parked in a yellow zone in excess of a period of three (3) minutes, during which the operator must be in attendance, under any circumstances during times when parking is restricted at a yellow zone.

    (c)   WHITE indicates no stopping, standing, or parking, for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox in an expeditious manner, and in no case for more than three (3) minutes. This restriction shall be in effect during all times unless limited to specified hours and/or days by posted signs.

    (d)  GREEN indicates no stopping, standing, or parking, for a period of time greater than the specified time limit and/or days by posted signs.

    (e)   BLUE indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons, which vehicles display either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 63-005, 2/11/63; Ordinance No. 66-015, 2/28/66; Ordinance No. 66-029, 4/28/66; Ordinance No. 68-012, 3/25/68; Ordinance No. 69-025, 5/12/69; Ordinance No. 69-035, 6/23/69; Ordinance No. 69-057, 11/24/69; Ordinance No. 77-027, 6/13/77; Ordinance No. 77-030, 9/6/77; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 83-008, 2/22/83; Ordinance No. 85-017, 6/17/85; Ordinance No. 85-023, 8/5/85; Ordinance No. 90-002, 2/20/90 (Section 6-1-505); Ordinance No. 2001-011, 4/16/01 (Sections 6-1-500, 6-1-505); Ordinance No. 2018-001, 3/19/18 (Section 6-1-505))

 

ARTICLE 6. PARKING—TRUCKS
6-1-600 TRUCK NO PARKING.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck to stop, stand or park such truck, whether attended or unattended, at any location designated as a “Truck No Parking” area, except when such truck is parking in connection with the performance by such operator of a service to or on property in the immediate area in which such truck is so parked. “Truck” means a truck or trailer or combination thereof with a manufacturer’s rated capacity greater than three-quarters of a ton. The City Manager, or designee, shall designate the streets, or portions of streets, to which this section shall apply.

 

6-1-605 TRUCK NO PARKING—TRUCK ROUTES.
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor truck, as defined in Chapter 6-7, to stop, stand or park such motor truck between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon those local truck routes or through truck routes so designated by the City Manager, or designee.

 

6-1-610 MOTOR TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED.
    No motor truck other than one designated as a pick-up truck by its vehicle registration shall be parked or left standing upon any street in any residence district between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

 

6-1-615 TRUCKS OVER 25 TONS PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a gross weight in excess of twenty-five (25) tons upon any of the streets or portions of streets designated by the City Manager, or designee. The City Manager shall erect and maintain appropriate weight limit signs on such streets.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 64-041, 9/28/64; Ordinance No. 80-019, 5/12/80; Ordinance No. 80-056, 12/1/80; Ordinance No. 81-085, 1/4/82; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 2001-011, 4/16/01 (Sections 6-1-600, 6-1-605, 6-1-615))

 

ARTICLE 7. SPEED LIMITS
6-1-700 SPEED LIMITS.
    Pursuant to the procedures set forth in Division 11, Chapter 7, Article 1 (§§ 22349 et seq.) of the California Vehicle Code, the City Council shall by ordinance determine the prima facie speed limit for any streets, or portions of streets, so designated by ordinance.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 8. MISCELLANEOUS
6-1-800 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS.
    The City Manager, or designee, may prohibit, limit or restrict parking of vehicles on municipal parking lots or other City property and direct the placement of signs designating such prohibition, limitation or restriction. When such signs are in place, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended contrary to the provisions thereof.

 

6-1-805 RESERVED SPACES.
    The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish reserved parking spaces on any street or municipal parking lot and to place signs designating such reservation. When said signs are in place, no person shall stop, park or leave standing a vehicle in a space so designated except those vehicles for which such space is specifically reserved.

 

6-1-810 OBSTRUCTION OF ENFORCEMENT.
    No person shall obstruct the enforcement of this Chapter by any officer or employee of the City of San Leandro by:

    (a)   Removing, obliterating or concealing any distinguishing mark placed by any such officer or employee on any vehicle in the course of enforcing any provision of this Chapter; or

    (b)  Moving any vehicle from any parking space on any street or municipal parking lot where parking is limited as to time to any other parking space on any street or municipal parking lot where parking is limited as to time for the purpose of evading any such parking time limitation established by or pursuant to any provision of this Chapter.

    (1)  For the purpose of parking regulations other than a violation of Section 6-1-405(a) (parking prohibited for more than seventy-two (72) hours), a vehicle must be moved a minimum of one-tenth of a mile during the limited parking period; otherwise, it shall be deemed to have remained stationary.

 

6-1-815 OFF-STREET DRIVING OF MOTORCYCLES, ETC., PROHIBITED.
    No person shall drive a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or go-cart upon any property in the City of San Leandro other than a public street, except:

    (a)   When lawfully entering or leaving such property;

    (b)  When such use of property is specifically permitted pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro.

 

6-1-820 STORAGE ON STREET PROHIBITED.
    No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on a street for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours. Any police officer or any regularly employed and salaried employee of the City, who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations is authorized to remove from a City street, any vehicle which is parked or left standing in violation of this section.

 

6-1-825 PARKING AIDES.
    (a)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate regularly employed and salaried employees of the Police Department as Parking Aides.

    (b)  Parking Aides shall enforce the provisions relating to regulation of traffic and to stopping, standing and parking of vehicles contained in Title VI of the San Leandro Municipal Code of 1957, the San Leandro Traffic Code and in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

    (c)   Civilian employees of the City of San Leandro or independent contractors designated by the Chief of Police may enforce provisions of this title and the California Vehicle Code relating to the standing or parking of vehicles that legally may be enforced by persons other than peace officers.

 

6-1-830 IGNITION KEYS—REMOVAL.
    No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a commercial motor vehicle, unattended on any street, alley, used car lot, or unattended parking lot, without first stopping the engine, and removing and taking the ignition key from the vehicle; provided, however, that any violation of this section shall not mitigate the offense of stealing any such motor vehicle, nor shall this section or any violation thereof be admissible as evidence affecting recovery in any civil action for theft of such motor vehicle, or the insurance thereon, or have any other bearing in any civil action. Whenever any police officer shall find any such motor vehicle standing in violation of this section, such police officer is authorized to remove therefrom the keys left therein and deliver the same to the officer in charge of the police station.

 

6-1-835 PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
    The City Manager, or designee, may establish zones restricted to passenger loading and may place markings or signs designating the days and hours when such restriction shall be effective. When said signs or markings are in place and during the time designated thereon, no persons shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone so designated for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers in an expeditious manner, and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.

 

6-1-840 PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Title, any disabled person entitled to and using a vehicle equipped with special attachments and devices to enable such person to operate said vehicle, may park or leave standing such vehicle free of charge and overtime in any area or zone during all hours when it is otherwise lawful to park in the said area or zone, subject to the following requirements: such disabled person shall possess an identification card to be exhibited when requested by a peace officer, issued by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager certifying that he or she meets the requirements of this section and identifying the vehicle. The vehicle shall bear a small but conspicuous sticker to be approved by the Chief of Police and to be at all times displayed on the lower right hand corner of the windshield.

 

6-1-845 COUNCIL AUTHORITY.
    The City Council may adopt such other restrictions not in conflict with State law relating to vehicular or pedestrian use of the streets or private roadways or parking facilities as it deems necessary or appropriate.

 

6-1-850 GOLF COURSE PARKING LOT.
    No person, excepting patrons of the Tony Lema and Marina Golf Courses and appurtenant facilities, shall park any vehicle in the municipal parking lot located adjacent to the Tony Lema Clubhouse at 13800 Neptune Drive.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 67-43, 9/25/67; Ordinance No. 68-19, 6/3/68; Ordinance No. 69-4, 1/20/69; Ordinance No. 69-7, 2/24/69; Ordinance No. 73-65, 10/15/73; Ordinance No. 74-41, 7/22/74; Ordinance No. 77-27, 6/13/77; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 85-004, 4/1/85; Ordinance No. 90-019, 11/19/90, (Section 6-1-820); Ordinance No. 2001-011, 4/16/01 (Sections 6-1-800, 6-1-835); Ordinance No. 2018-001, 3/19/18 (Section 6-1-810); Ordinance No. 2019-002, 3/4/19 (Section 6-1-825))

 

ARTICLE 9. RESERVED

CHAPTER 6-2 PARKING METER AND TOW AWAY ZONES
ARTICLE 1. PARKING METER ZONES
6-2-100 PARKING METER ZONES.
    (a)   Parking Meter Zones: The City Council, on the recommendation of the City Manager, shall by resolution from time to time as traffic conditions require, designate parking meter zones, upon such streets or portions of streets of the City of San Leandro as are selected for the location of parking meter zones; and the City Manager shall cause parking meters to be installed and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated within parking meter zones, as hereinafter provided. The City Council, on recommendation of the City Manager, may modify or eliminate parking meter zones.

    Unless otherwise permitted by signs, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a parking meter zone between the hours designated within the parking meter zone of any day for longer than the prescribed period. For purposes of this section, the term parking meter zone means an area in which signs, parking meters or curb markings prescribe a designated period for parking of vehicles.

    (b)  Variations: When temporary special parking or traffic conditions require different hours or days of parking restrictions, the City Manager may vary the hours and days during which the restrictions in the parking meter zones shall be in effect, and, when authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle contrary to the direction or provisions of such signs.

    (c)   Off-Street Parking Meter Zones: The City Council may by resolution establish off-street parking meter zones, including any land owned, leased, or controlled by the City, as traffic and parking conditions require. Such resolution shall also establish the fees for parking in such off-street parking meter zones.

 

6-2-105 PARKING METERS.
    The City Manager shall cause parking meters to be installed in all parking meter zones upon the curb, sidewalk or other area immediately adjacent to or near each parking space.

    No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter zone, except as otherwise permitted by this Chapter, without immediately depositing payment corresponding to the parking space occupied such lawful payment as is permitted or required by such parking meter, and when required by directions on the meter setting in operation the timing mechanism thereof, unless the parking meter indicates at the time such vehicle is parked that an unexpired portion remains of the period of time for which a payment has previously been deposited.

    Each parking meter shall indicate the period of time that a vehicle may legally be stopped, parked or left standing in the regulated parking space.

    When any vehicle is parked in any space alongside of or next to a single-space parking meter which is located in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, or when any vehicle is parked in any space or zone adjacent to which a multi-space parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the operator of said vehicle shall, upon entering said parking space or zone, immediately cause to be deposited in the appropriate denomination, or otherwise immediately purchase time using an approved method of payment, according to the time interval desired within the maximum limit and the posted parking rates.

 

6-2-110 PARKING SPACES.
    The City Manager shall cause each parking space within a parking meter zone to be marked with white lines designating such parking space. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in a parking meter zone in any manner other than wholly within a parking space so designated.

 

6-2-115 DEPOSIT OF FEES.
    Any person who shall stop, park or leave standing a vehicle in a parking space in a parking meter zone shall immediately thereupon deposit fees as hereinafter prescribed in the parking meter adjacent to or near such parking space.

 

6-2-120 TIME EXPIRED.
    No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in a parking space in a parking meter zone at any time during which the parking meter signal indicates that the parking space is not legally in use except during such time as is reasonably necessary to deposit fees in such parking meter.

    No person shall purchase time from any parking meter using any method of payment for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space or zone adjacent to which said parking meter is placed.

 

6-2-125 TIME LIMIT.
    No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in a parking space in a parking meter zone for a period of time greater than that prescribed for such parking space.

    Any vehicle parked at an inoperable or broken parking meter shall be permitted to park for the maximum time period permitted for that parking meter.

 

6-2-130 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS.
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, metallic device or other substitute for United States coin.

 

6-2-135 DAMAGING METERS.
    No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.

 

6-2-140 PARKING METER FEES.
    The parking meter fees for the parking meter zones established in this Article shall be in conformance with the latest adopted City user fees and service charges.

 

6-2-145 USE OF REVENUE.
    The revenue raised by the collection of parking meter fees shall be paid into the treasury of this City, and shall be used for costs of acquisition, installation and maintenance of parking meters, municipal parking lots and traffic control devices; costs of regulation of traffic and parking; and other related costs.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 70-8, 2/2/70; Ordinance No. 78-35, 7/17/78; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 2005-007, 6/20/05 (Sections 6-2-115 and 6-2-135); Ordinance No. 2018-001, 3/19/18 (Sections 6-2-100—6-2-145))

 

ARTICLE 2. TOW AWAY ZONES
6-2-200 AUTHORITY TO TOW AWAY.
    Any duly authorized and acting police officer of the City of San Leandro is hereby authorized to remove or cause removal of a vehicle from any street within the City of San Leandro when such vehicle is left standing within any area hereinafter designated during the hours in which parking is prohibited at such location. The vehicle shall be removed to a garage or other place of safety designated or maintained by the City of San Leandro.

 

6-2-205 PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
    The owner or person having the right to possession of any vehicle removed pursuant to this Chapter shall pay all such removal, towing and storage charges before he or she shall be entitled to regain possession of such vehicle.

 

6-2-210 NOTIFICATION.
    Whenever a vehicle is removed under this Chapter, the officer authorizing such removal shall ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle or from the registration records of the Department of Motor Vehicles the name and address of the registered and legal owner thereof. If the vehicle is not claimed within twenty-four (24) hours following removal, the Police Department of the City of San Leandro shall give or cause to be given written notice to the registered and legal owner of the fact of such removal, the grounds therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed.

 

6-2-215 DESIGNATION OF TOW AWAY ZONES.
    The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall designate the streets, or portions of streets, to which this Article applies. Signs shall be posted giving notice that such streets, or portions thereof, are tow-away zones.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 2001-011, 4/16/01 (Section 6-2-215))

 

ARTICLE 3. RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM
6-2-300 SHORT TITLE.
    This Article shall be known as the “Residential Parking Permit Program.”

 

6-2-305 PURPOSE.
    Public streets in neighborhoods in the City have parking accessible to residents in those neighborhoods. Parking by non-residents causes inaccessibility to parking and congestion on neighborhood streets. Such parking by non-residents threatens the health, safety and welfare of all residents of San Leandro. In order to protect and promote the integrity of these neighborhoods, it is necessary to enact parking regulations restricting unlimited parking by non-residents, while providing the opportunity for residents to park near their homes.

 

6-2-310 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms used in the Article shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   “Designated residential parking permit area” means any contiguous area upon which the Council imposes parking limitations pursuant to the authority granted by this Article.

    (b)  “Non-residential vehicle” means a motor vehicle not eligible to be issued a residential parking permit, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Article, for the specific area in which it is parked.

    (c)   “Visitor permit” means a parking permit issued pursuant to this Article or an ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority granted herein, which shall exempt the vehicle from parking time restrictions established pursuant to this Chapter for a period of fourteen (14) days, beginning upon the date authorized.

 

6-2-315 PARKING PERMIT EXEMPTION.
    (a)   A motor vehicle that has been assigned a valid residential parking permit as provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the residential parking permit area for which the permit has been issued without being limited by time restrictions established pursuant to this Article or any resolution hereunder. Any vehicle that has not been issued a valid parking permit shall be subject to the residential parking permit regulation and consequent penalties in effect for such area.

    (b)  A residential parking permit or any other permit as designated by the Council shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated residential parking permit area.

    (c)   This Article shall not be interpreted or applied in a manner that shall abridge or alter regulations established by authority other than this Article.

 

6-2-320 DESIGNATION OF A RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    (a)   There shall be two (2) alternative processes by which the City Council can consider any area for designation as a residential parking permit area:

    (1)  Resident’s Petition: The City Council shall consider for designation as a residential parking permit area any proposed area for which a petition has been submitted that meets and satisfies both requirements and any administrative guidelines adopted by the City Council.

    (2)  The City Council or City Manager shall consider for designation as a residential parking permit area a location that satisfies both requirements and any administrative guidelines adopted by the City Council.

    (i)   The City Council or City Manager shall initiate the process for establishing the area as a residential parking permit area.

    (ii)  A notice of intent to establish permit parking shall be sent to all addresses within the proposed residential parking permit area.

    (b)  Upon receipt by the City Council of a resident’s petition with at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the residential addresses within the designated area or upon City Council or City Manager initiation as described above, the Engineering and Transportation Department shall do the following:

    (1)  Undertake or cause to be undertaken any surveys or studies which it deems necessary;

    (2)  Refer the matter to the Planning Commission for review in its capacity as the Traffic Advisory Commission; and

    (3)  Present to the City Council for consideration a resolution that would establish a residential parking permit area based upon the aforementioned proposal and studies, including all regulations and time restrictions determined by the City Council to be reasonable and necessary in such area.

    (c)   The City Council may, by resolution, modify a designated residential parking permit area in any manner consistent with this Article.

6-2-325 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
    (a)   Residential parking permits shall be issued by the Finance Department in accordance with requirements set forth in this Article. Permits will be valid in the particular residential parking permit area for which it is issued.

    (b)  The Finance Department and Engineering and Transportation Departments are authorized to issue such rules and regulations necessary to implement this Article that are consistent with it.

 

6-2-330 RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT.
    (a)   The City Manager, or designee, shall issue residential parking permits with a term not to exceed one year to residents that comply with the requirements set forth in this Article.

    (b)  A residential parking permit may be issued only to an applicant who can demonstrate that he or she is currently a resident of the area for which the permit is to be issued.

    (c)   Proof of motor vehicle ownership or vehicle use and control and valid registration shall be demonstrated in a manner determined by the City Manager or designee. Permits are not valid for non-motorized vehicles (i.e., trailers).

    (d)  The City Council may, by resolution, limit the number of permits issued to any resident or dwelling unit if such limitation would further the goals of the residential permit parking program.

 

6-2-335 VISITOR PERMITS.
    (a)   A visitor parking permit may be used on resident or nonresident vehicles. The City Council may, by resolution, authorize the issuance of visitor parking permits in any residential permit parking area. When authorized, visitor parking permits may be issued under the following conditions:

    (1)  The applicant for a visitor parking permit has not reached the limits, if any, set by the City Council.

    (2)  Such other conditions and restrictions that the City Council by resolution imposes or that the City Manager, or designee, deems appropriate.

    (b)  Visitor permits must be registered with the City and comply with permit regulations to be valid in the particular residential parking permit area for which it applies.

    (c)   A fourteen (14) day visitor permit shall, for the period of fourteen (14) days, commencing upon the date authorized, exempt the applicable vehicle from parking time restrictions established pursuant to this Article.

 

6-2-340 ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    Upon adoption by the City Council of a resolution designating a residential parking permit area, street parking in the area shall be limited for a period as determined by the Engineering and Transportation Director with input from the area residents and as may be specifically posted; provided, however, that unlimited parking shall be allowed by vehicles for which a residential or visitor’s parking permit has been obtained in accordance with requirements of the ordinance unless otherwise designated.

 

6-2-345 POSTING OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    Upon adoption by the City Council of a resolution designating a residential parking permit area and after at least sixty percent (60%) of the households have purchased permits, the Director of the Engineering and Transportation Department, or designee, shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the area, indicating prominently thereon the area prohibition or time limitation, period of its application, and conditions under which permit parking shall be exempt therefrom.

 

6-2-350 PARKING PERMIT FEES.
    The annual fee and renewal fee for residential parking permits and for visitor permits, or any other parking permit designated by the City Council, shall be established by City Council resolution.

 

6-2-355 PENALTIES, LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
    This Chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. The following acts shall constitute fraudulent use of a permit punishable by a fine to be prescribed by City Council resolution and/or revocation of any permit currently held. Violations of this Article shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

    (a)   Falsely representing oneself as eligible for a parking permit or furnishing false information in an application therefor.

    (b)  Copying, reproducing, or otherwise bringing into existence counterfeit parking permit or permits without written authorization from the Finance Director.

    (c)   Knowingly using or displaying a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking applicable in a residential parking permit area.

    (d)  Changing dates on a visitor parking permit without written authorization from the Finance Director.

    (e)   Knowingly committing any act that is prohibited by the terms of this Chapter or any ordinance or resolution enacted by authority granted by this Chapter.

 

6-2-360 REVOCATION OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    A residential parking area may be revoked by resolution of the City Council after following the same procedures for establishing a residential parking permit area as set forth in Chapter 2-320 of this Article.

    If sixty percent (60%) of the households in a residential parking area fail to purchase permits after being duly noticed, the City Manager may revoke the residential parking area upon notice to the residents without further action of the City Council.

 

6-2-365 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
    The Finance Department and the Engineering and Transportation Department are empowered to issue rules and regulations consistent with this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2003-001, 2/18/03 (Sections 6-2-300—6-2-365); Ordinance No. 2005-013, 10/6/05 (Section 6-2-360); Ordinance No. 2018-001, 3/19/18 (Sections 6-2-310—6-2-345, 6-2-355))

 

ARTICLE 4. EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM
6-2-400 SHORT TITLE.
    This Article shall be known as the “Employee Parking Permit Program.”

 

6-2-405 PURPOSE.
    Convenient public parking in San Leandro should be accessible and available to customers and visitors. Utilization of these spaces by employees can cause congestion in commercial areas, specifically in retail centers. Long-term parking by non-customers threatens the access to and success of San Leandro businesses. In order to protect and promote the integrity of these businesses, it is necessary to enact parking regulations designating certain streets as employee parking permitted areas. The Employee Parking Permit Program is intended to regulate where employees can park long-term to allow convenient parking to remain available for customers.

 

6-2-410 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms used in this Article shall have the following meanings:

    (a)   “Designated employee parking permit area” means any contiguous area upon which the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director imposes parking limitations pursuant to the authority granted by this Article.

    (b)  “Employee vehicle” means a motor vehicle that has been issued an employee parking permit, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Article, for a specific designated employee parking permit area.

 

6-2-415 PARKING PERMIT EXEMPTION.
    (a)   An employee vehicle shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the designated employee parking permit area for which the permit has been issued with limited time restrictions established pursuant to this Article or any administrative guidelines adopted hereunder. Any vehicle that has not been issued a valid employee parking permit shall be subject to the employee parking permit regulation and consequent penalties in effect for such designated employee parking permit area.

    (b)  An employee parking permit or any other permit as designated by the City Manager shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated employee parking permit area.

    (c)   This Article shall not be interpreted or applied in a manner that shall abridge or alter regulations established by authority other than this Article.

 

6-2-420 DESIGNATION OF A DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    The City Council shall establish administrative guidelines for the consideration of the designation of designated employee parking permit areas.

 

6-2-425 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
    (a)   The City Council shall establish administrative guidelines for the issuance of permits for employee vehicles to utilize designated employee parking permit areas consistent with the requirements of this Article and any resolutions adopted by the City Council.

    (b)  Employee parking permits shall be issued in accordance with any administrative guidelines established by the City Council.

 

6-2-430 EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT.
    (a)   The City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director shall issue employee parking permits, with a term not to exceed one year, for employee vehicles to employees that are eligible for an employee parking permit.

    (b)  An employee parking permit shall only be issued to an applicant who is qualified under the administrative guidelines established pursuant to this Article for an employee vehicle in a designated employee parking permit area.

    (c)   Proof of motor vehicle ownership or vehicle use and control and valid registration shall be demonstrated in a manner acceptable to the City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director. Permits are not valid for non-motorized vehicles (i.e., trailers).

    (d)  The City Manager may limit the number of permits issued to any person if such limitation would further the goals of the Employee Parking Permit Program.

 

6-2-435 ESTABLISHMENT OF DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    Upon establishment of a designated employee parking permit area, street parking in the area shall be limited for a period designated by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director; provided, however, that parking shall be allowed by employee vehicles in eligible designated employee parking permit areas.

 

6-2-440 POSTING OF DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    Upon establishment of a designated employee parking permit area, the Engineering and Transportation Director, or designee, shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the designated employee parking permit area, indicating prominently thereon the area prohibition or time limitation, period of its application, and conditions under which a vehicle shall be exempt therefrom.

 

6-2-445 PARKING PERMIT FEES.
    The annual fee and renewal fee for parking permits for employee vehicles, or any other parking permit designated by the City Council shall be established by City Council resolution.

 

6-2-450 PENALTIES, LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
    This Chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1-12 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. The following acts shall constitute fraudulent use of a permit punishable by a fine to be prescribed by City Council resolution and/or revocation of any permit currently held. Violations of this Article shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

    (a)   Falsely representing oneself as eligible for a parking permit or furnishing false information in an application therefor.

    (b)  Knowingly committing any act that is prohibited by the terms of this Chapter or any ordinance, resolution, or administrative guidelines enacted by authority granted by this Chapter.

 

6-2-455 REVOCATION OF DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT AREA.
    A designated employee parking area may be revoked by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director utilizing any administrative guidelines adopted by the City Council.

 

6-2-460 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
    The City Manager and Engineering and Transportation Department are empowered to issue rules and regulations consistent with this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2018-14, 9/4/18 (Sections 6-2-400—6-2-460))

 

ARTICLE 5. ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
6-2-500 DEFINITIONS.
    The definitions given in this section govern the construction of this Article:

    (a)   An “Electric Vehicle (EV)” shall be defined as any motor vehicle registered to operate on California public roadways and operates either partially or exclusively on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board for motive purpose. Electric vehicle includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle (BEV); (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV); (3) a neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV); (4) an electric motorcycle.

    (b)  “Charging” shall mean an electric vehicle parked at an electric vehicle charging station that is electrically connected to the charging station equipment.

    (c)   “Electric Vehicle Charging Station (EVCS)” shall mean a public parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in a plug-in electric vehicle.

 

6-2-505 PARKING AT PUBLIC ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.
    Each electric vehicle parking stall will be clearly marked with signage. When so marked, it is unlawful to park in a designated electric vehicle charging station parking stall unless the vehicle is actively charging.

 

6-2-510 FEES.
    Fees will be charged for electric vehicle charging in conformance with the latest adopted Title 6, Chapter 4, Section 6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code. In order to encourage and facilitate maximum usage of the charging station, fees will be charged in two (2) tiers. The first four (4) hours of charging will be at the initial rate, and shall be the first tier; any hour or portion of an hour beyond four (4) hours will be charged at the rate specified in the City user fees and service charges, and shall be the second tier.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2014-016, 10/6/14; Ordinance No. 2018-001, 3/19/18 (Section 6-2-405); Ordinance No. 2018-014, 9/4/18 (Sections 6-2-500—6-2-510))

CHAPTER 6-3 PEDESTRIANS
ARTICLE 1. PEDESTRIANS
6-3-100 MARKED CROSSWALKS.
    The City Manager may establish, designate, and maintain marked crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway.

 

6-3-105 NO CROSSING.
    The City Manager may install signs at, or adjacent to an intersection directing pedestrians not to cross the roadway within an unmarked crosswalk at such intersection.

 

6-3-110 PEDESTRIANS TO USE CROSSWALKS.
    It is unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any roadway within any business district except in a crosswalk.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 83-030, 10/17/83)

 

 

ARTICLE 2. LYING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS
6-3-200 PURPOSE—DEFINITION.
    The purpose of this Article is to facilitate the safe and efficient movement of pedestrians and goods on the public sidewalks and in retail and commercial areas of the City. For purposes of this Article the term “public sidewalk” shall mean and include all areas within the public right-of-way commonly and customarily used for pedestrians and for ingress and egress of business and commercial establishments fronting the public right-of-way and to public parking areas, lots and structures.

 

6-3-210 PROHIBITION.
    No person, after having been notified by a law enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition of this section, shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk, or upon a blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk in a commercial or retail zone, during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.

 

6-3-220 EXCEPTIONS.
    The prohibition in Section 6-3-210 shall not apply to any person:

    (a)   Sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to a medical emergency;

    (b)  Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker, or similar devices to move about the public sidewalk;

    (c)   Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use permit; or a person participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use or other applicable permit;

    (d)  Sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop zone while waiting for public or private transportation.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 97-014, 5/5/97 (Sections 6-3-200—6-3-220))

CHAPTER 6-4 ABATEMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
ARTICLE 1. FINDING AND DECLARATION, DEFINITIONS
6-4-100 FINDING AND DECLARATION.
    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof on private property or public property including highways as defined in the California Vehicle Code is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute attractive nuisance creating hazards to the health, safety and welfare of minors, to create harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private property or public property including highways as defined in the California Vehicle Code is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

 

6-4-105 DEFINITIONS.
    The following definitions shall govern the construction of this Chapter:

    (a)   ABANDONED VEHICLE. “Abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle which has been left on private property or public property other than highways and in which the owner has no active interest and no intent to again claim a right or interest or which has been removed for dismantling or scrapping pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 22660.

    (b)  ACCUMULATION. “Accumulation” means the gathering together of vehicles or parts of vehicles in quantities which are unreasonable in relation to uses permitted in the zoning district in which such vehicles or parts of vehicles are gathered together.

    (c)   CLASSIC VEHICLE. “Classic vehicle” means a vehicle which, because of a unique design feature, scarcity of a particular model or other special significance, is sought after by collectors and is generally recognized as having extraordinary value.

    (d)  COLLECTOR’S VEHICLE. “Collector’s vehicle” is

    (1)  a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to § 5004 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

    (2)  a motorcycle manufactured in the year 1942 or prior thereto;

    (3)  a classic vehicle.

    (e)   DISMANTLED VEHICLE. “Dismantled vehicle” means a vehicle from which an essential part of the power train, a wheel or any part of the body has been removed.

    (f)   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. “Inoperative vehicle: means a vehicle in such condition that it either physically or legally cannot be driven upon a street without:

    (1)  installation of a missing part;

    (2)  replacement of a defective part; or

    (3)  registration and licensing.

    (g)  STORAGE. “Storage” means the keeping of one or more vehicles or one or more parts of vehicles for a period of time which is unreasonable in relation to uses permitted in the zoning district in which such vehicles or parts of vehicles are kept.

    (h)  WRECKED VEHICLE. “Wrecked vehicle” means a vehicle which has suffered physical damage to the extent that it either physically or legally cannot be driven upon a street.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-010, 5/17/93)

 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-4-200 ADMINISTRATION.
    This Chapter shall be administered by the City Manager, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. The City Manager or other duly authorized person may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or part thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle or part thereof and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a public nuisance by or pursuant to this Chapter.

 

6-4-205 EXCEPTIONS.
    This Chapter shall not apply to:

    (a)   a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;

    (b)  a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or licensed junkyard;

    (c)   a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property where it is not visible from abutting streets other than freeways or from other public property;

provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this Chapter or Chapter 10 of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

 

6-4-210 STORAGE OF COLLECTORS’ VEHICLE.
    For the purpose of this Chapter:

    (a)   storage of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative collectors’ vehicle or part thereof for a period of no more than six (6) consecutive months or for combined periods totaling no more than twelve (12) months during a period of thirty-six (36) consecutive months, commencing with the first day of such storage, shall not constitute keeping such vehicle or part thereof for an unreasonable period of time or a public nuisance;

    (b)  storage of a vehicle or part thereof described in subdivision (a) for a period or periods in excess of those described in subdivision (a) shall constitute keeping such vehicle or part thereof for an unreasonable period of time and a public nuisance.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. PROCEDURE
6-4-300 NOTICE.
    (a)   A ten (10) days notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle or part thereof is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. No such notice shall be required if the property owner and the owner of the vehicle or part thereof have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Such notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle or part thereof is located and the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner of his or her option under Section 6-4-315.

    (b)  Notice of intention to abate, as provided in subsection (a), is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200) by a person specified in California Vehicle Code § 22855, and is determined by the City Manager to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. The City Manager shall not dispose of any such vehicle under California Vehicle Code § 22662 unless he or she shall have provided notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed.

 

6-4-305 PUBLIC HEARING UPON REQUEST.
    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or part thereof or the owner of the land on which such vehicle or part thereof is located, delivered to the City Manager within ten (10) days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof, a public hearing shall be held by the City Manager to determine whether the vehicle or part thereof shall be abated and removed as a public nuisance and whether the administrative costs and the costs of abatement and removal shall be assessed against the land.. A sworn written statement of the owner of the land denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or part thereof on his or her land shall be construed as a request for hearing.

 

6-4-310 NOTICE OF HEARING.
    The City Manager shall set a date for the public hearing and shall deliver notice thereof to the persons and in the manner specified in Section 6-4-300 not less than ten (10) days prior to such date.

 

6-4-315 LANDOWNER’S OPTION TO APPEAR.
    The owner of the land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or part thereof on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

 

6-4-320 NON-LIABILITY OF LANDOWNER.
    If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle or part thereof was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Manager shall not assess costs of administration or abatement and removal against the land or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner.

 

6-4-325 ABATEMENT.
    If releases have been signed pursuant to Section 6-4-300, or if a request pursuant to Section 6-4-305 is not received, or if the City Manager after hearing determines that the vehicle or part thereof constitutes a public nuisance, the City Manager or other duly authorized person shall abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof from the land in accordance with the provisions of California Vehicle Code §§ 22660 et seq., except as otherwise provided in Sections 6-4-330, 6-4-335 and 6-4-340. After a vehicle has been abated and removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to § 5004 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.

 

6-4-330 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL—PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
    The owner of the land upon which the vehicle or part thereof is located or the owner of the vehicle or part thereof may appeal the determination after hearing of the City Manager to the City Council by filing written notice thereof with the City Clerk within five (5) days after having received notice of such determination from the City Manager. If such a notice is filed, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon.

 

6-4-335 NOTICE OF APPEAL HEARING.
    The City Clerk shall set a date for the public hearing on appeal and shall deliver notice thereof to the persons and in the manner specified in Section 6-4-300 not less than five (5) days prior to such date.

 

6-4-340 HEARING DE NOVO—POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL.
    The City Council shall hold a public hearing de novo on the appeal. The City Council shall succeed to and may exercise all powers otherwise vested in the City Manager by this Chapter. The determination of the City Council shall be final.

 

6-4-345 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
    Except as provided in Section 6-4-320, the costs of administration and removal may be assessed against the land from which the vehicle or part thereof was abated and removed, to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to such assessment.

 

6-4-350 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
    Within five (5) days after abatement and removal, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof. Any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, and license plates, shall be transmitted together with such notice.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. PENAL PROVISIONS
6-4-400 STORAGE PROHIBITED.
    Any person who causes or permits the storage of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property including highways as defined in the California Vehicle Code is guilty of an infraction.

 

6-4-405 FAILURE TO OBEY PROHIBITED.
    Any person who fails or refuses to abate and remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or part thereof from private property or public property including highways as defined in the California Vehicle Code, after having received notice pursuant to Section 6-4-300, is guilty of an infraction.

 

6-4-410 REFUSAL OF ENTRY PROHIBITED.
    Any person who prevents or refuses to permit the entrance of the City Manager or other duly authorized person upon private property or public property, not including streets, to examine a vehicle or part thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle or part thereof, or to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a public nuisance by or pursuant to this Chapter is guilty of an infraction.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 77-26, 6/13/77; Ordinance No. 78-54, 11/6/78; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 93-010, 5/17/93)

CHAPTER 6-5 BICYCLES
ARTICLE 1. REGISTRATION
6-5-100 REGISTRATION.
    Every person (except persons engaged in the business of selling new bicycles as to any such new bicycles owned and held solely for sale) residing within this City who owns an unregistered bicycle shall apply to the City Manager for registration thereof, upon a form which said City Manager shall provide, within five (5) days after receiving such ownership. No fee shall be charged for any such registration.

 

6-5-105 MARKING BICYCLES.
    Upon receiving proper application therefor, the City Manager shall register said bicycle by stamping into the frame thereof the number assigned to such bicycle imprinted immediately after the letters “SLD”.

 

6-5-110 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
    Every person who sells or transfers and every person who buys or receives the ownership of a bicycle which has been altered as herein provided shall within five (5) days report such transfer to the City Manager in writing, giving the registration number and name and address of the buyer and seller of such bicycle.

 

6-5-115 CITY RECORDS.
    The City Manager shall keep a record of all bicycle registrations, and transfers thereof, including name and address of the registered owner, which record shall be indexed both by registration numbers and by owners’ names.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 72-11, 2/28/72; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82)

 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL
6-5-200 PROHIBITIONS.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person residing within this City to propel in any public street or place therein a bicycle which has not been registered as herein provided, or whose registration stamp has become illegible for any reason.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell within this City, any second-hand bicycle which has not been registered as herein provided or whose registration stamp has become illegible for any reason.

    (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying or selling second-hand bicycles within this City to have in his or her possession any second-hand bicycle which has not been registered as herein provided, or whose registration stamp has become illegible for any reason.

    (d)  It shall be unlawful for the parent of any child or the guardian of any ward knowingly to permit such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this Article.

    (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to obliterate or alter the registration stamp on any bicycle.

 

6-5-205 IMPOUNDING.
    The Police Chief is hereby authorized to impound and retain any bicycle held or operated in violation of any provisions of this Article until its owner properly registers it.

 

6-5-210 RECORDS—DEALERS.
    Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling new or used bicycles or bicycle parts in this City shall prepare at the time of purchase and keep a record of all such bicycles or bicycle parts purchased by him. Such record shall include a description of the bicycle or bicycle part purchased, the date of purchase, and the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation from whom purchased. Such record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer of this City.

 

6-5-215 BICYCLE RIDING RESTRICTIONS.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk, except for juveniles twelve (12) years of age, or under, exercising due care and giving all pedestrians the right-of-way. Juveniles of the above mentioned age may ride and operate their bicycles upon the sidewalks, in residential areas, except such sidewalks as are in front of schools, stores, or buildings used for business purposes. The rider of a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as nearly as practicable within five feet (5’) from the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when passing a standing or other vehicle, or making a left turn at an intersection.

    (b)  It shall be unlawful for pedestrians or bicyclists to use that portion of Washington Avenue roadway beneath the Western Pacific Railroad tracks.

    (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the operation or a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, path or other public property by a San Leandro police officer while engaged in the performance of his/her duties.

 

6-5-220 BICYCLE LANES.
    The City Council may by resolution establish bicycle lanes separated from any vehicular lanes upon certain streets or portions thereof, regulate the operation and use of bicycles and vehicles with respect to such bicycle lanes and direct the placement of signs or pavement markings or both designating such bicycle lanes and regulations. When such signs or pavement markings are in place, no person shall operate or use a bicycle or vehicle contrary to the provisions thereof.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 580 N.S., 579 N.S.; Ordinance No. 74-35, 6/24/74; Ordinance No. 78-27, 6/5/78; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ord. No. 94-03, 4/4/94 (6-5-215))

CHAPTER 6-6 TAXIS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2001-016 repealed and replaced Chapter 6-6 in its entirety.

 

ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
6-6-100 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, terms used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

    (a)   CITY. “City” shall mean the City of San Leandro.

    (b)  CITY MANAGER. “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City of San Leandro.

    (c)   CHIEF OF POLICE. “Chief of Police” shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of San Leandro or designee.

    (d)  DRIVER. “Driver” shall mean a person in direct and immediate possession or charge of driving or operating any taxicab for compensation.

    (e)   FINANCE DIRECTOR. “Finance Director” shall mean the Finance Director of the City of San Leandro or designee.

    (f)   OWNER. “Owner” shall mean any person who is a lessee, lien holder, or the holder of legal title to any taxicab, as herein defined.

    (g)  PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY. “Public convenience and necessity” shall mean a genuine need for additional public passenger vehicles for hire, as determined by the City Manager or designee, in order to promptly, adequately and efficiently serve the needs and convenience of the general public.

    (h)  TAXI OR TAXICAB. “Taxi” or “taxicab” shall mean an automobile or motor-propelled vehicle with maximum seating capacity of not more than eight persons, and used for the transportation of passengers who direct the route to be traveled over the streets, and not over a defined route or upon a fixed schedule, for compensation in accordance with the distance traveled and/or the time elapsed and number of passengers carried as determined by a taxi meter as herein defined, or by a flat rate schedule, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary lines of the City of San Leandro.

    (i)   TAXI METER. “Taxi meter” shall mean an instrument or device attached to the taxicab by means of which instrument the authorized charge is mechanically, electronically or otherwise calculated either on a basis of distance traveled or waiting time, or a combination thereof, which charge shall be indicated upon the taximeter by visible figures in United States dollars and cents.

    (j)   TAXI SERVICE. “Taxi service” shall mean any service involving a taxicab as defined above. Such service does not include limousines, shuttle services or rental vehicles.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance 93-06, 4/5/93; Ordinance 2001-016, 9/4/01)

 

ARTICLE 2. TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT
6-6-200 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
    (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated in the City any taxicab unless the Finance Director shall have issued a taxicab business permit for the operation of a taxicab to the owner thereof and unless such taxicab business permit shall be in full force and effect; provided, however, that no taxicab business permit shall be required for any operations for which a certificate or permit has been issued by the public utilities commission of the State or by the interstate commerce commission of the United States of America.

    (b)  Any taxicab may, however, transport a passenger or passengers from a point outside to a destination within the City or may proceed through the City while en route to a destination outside of the City without issuance of a taxicab business permit.

    (c)   A taxicab business permit granted pursuant to this chapter constitutes a privilege and does not constitute property of the permittee. No taxicab business permit issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or assignable, either expressly or by operation of law.

 

6-6-205 REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S IDENTIFICATION CARD.
    The City Manager or designee shall revoke or suspend any driver’s identification card in the event the holder thereof violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or is convicted of reckless driving (Vehicle Code Section 23103) or for the violation of any law, which violation, in the discretion of the City Manager or designee, shall be deemed sufficient evidence of the fact that said driver will not operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner. In the event of such revocation or suspension of a driver’s identification card, the holder thereof shall return the card to the City Manager. A cardholder may appeal any decision of the City Manager to revoke or suspend a driver’s identification card in accordance with the appeal procedure set forth in Article 4 of Chapter 1-12 of this Code.

 

6-6-210 PERMIT RENEWAL.
    Application for the renewal of a taxicab business permit shall be made on an annual basis to the Finance Director. The renewal procedure shall be limited to the review and updating of the taxicab business permit application information and the annual vehicle inspection certificate and will be subject to a fee as established by the City Council. The Finance Director will require the permittee to present current confirmation of the items described in Section 6-6-200 with each application for renewal of the taxicab business permit. If there are substantial changes in the owner’s information, the Finance Director may require that the owner submit a new application for review and approval.

 

6-6-215 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT FEE.
    The applicant for a taxicab business permit shall submit the application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the City Council.

 

6-6-220 INVESTIGATION AND DETERMINATION.
    The Finance Director shall conduct and complete his or her investigation of the application and the proposed operation within sixty (60) days of receiving the application. Upon completion of the investigation, the Finance Director will issue or deny the application for a taxicab business permit. If the Finance Director denies the application pursuant to Section 6-6-225, the Finance Director shall give written notice to the applicant that the application has been rejected and shall state the reason for such rejection.

 

6-6-225 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
    Grounds for denial of an application for a taxicab business permit are as follows:

    (a)   Public convenience and necessity, as defined in this chapter, do not require the proposed service;

    (b)  The application fails to contain any of the required information set forth in Section 6-6-205 above;

    (c)   Any information contained in the application is false;

    (d)  The name under which the applicant will conduct business, or the applicant’s proposed color scheme or other marking, design or insignia, will tend to confuse the identification of taxicabs which the applicant proposes to operate with those operated under existing taxicab business permits;

    (e)   Any vehicle proposed for operation is not safe, and the applicant has failed to remove such vehicle from service or to substitute a safe vehicle in its place within a reasonable time;

    (f)   The applicant has failed to comply with any term, condition or requirement in a taxicab business permit previously issued;

    (g)  An act or omission of the applicant constitutes a ground for revocation or suspension as provided in Section 6-6-250 of this Chapter;

    (h)  The applicant, within ten (10) years prior to the date of the application has been convicted of a crime, and the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a public transportation business;

 

    (i)   The applicant is on parole or probation for a crime, and the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions and duties of a public transportation business;

    (j)   The applicant, within ten (10) years prior to the date of application has committed an act involving violence, dishonesty or fraud with the intent to injure another person or to benefit the applicant or another;

    (k)  The applicant has had a taxicab business permit issued under the provisions of this chapter revoked within five (5) years of the date of the application;

    (l)   The applicant has had a taxicab business license, permit or certificate revoked by any public agency within five (5) years of the date of the application;

    (m) The applicant has failed to pay when due any applicable taxes or fees imposed by the City; and/or

    (n)  Applicant’s application for a business license to operate a taxicab business has been rejected pursuant to Section 2-2-420 of this Code.

 

6-6-230 APPEAL OF DENIAL
    The decision of the Finance Director to deny the application for a taxicab business permit may be appealed to the City Manager in the manner provided for appeal of business license denials in Section 2-2-450 of this Code.

 

6-6-235 RE-APPLICATION FOLLOWING DENIAL.
    An applicant who is denied on the basis of misstated or omitted information must wait for a period of twelve (12) calendar months before submitting a new application.

 

6-6-240 ADDITIONAL VEHICLES.
    (a)   Permission to operate vehicles in addition to those approved under the initial taxicab business permit may be obtained by filing an application amendment with the Finance Director.

    (b)  In granting or denying such applications to amend the taxicab business permit application, the Finance Director shall have the same authority as vested by this Chapter in the matter of the initial application.

    (c)   The Finance Director shall require that applications to amend a taxicab business permit application include the documentation required in Section 6-6-205 of this chapter.

    (d)  Payment of the change of records fee set in the schedule of fees approved by the City Council shall be made when the application amendment is filed.

 

6-6-245 VEHICLE SUBSTITUTION.
    The holder of a taxicab business permit may substitute a different vehicle (“new vehicle”) for a taxicab in operation under a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, by filing an application amendment with the City manager or designee in the same manner as the initial application, setting forth the following:

    (a)   Descriptions of both vehicles, including make, model, vehicle identification number, license number and year of manufacture;

    (b)  Reasons for proposed substitution;

    (c)   A sworn statement that the new vehicle is in safe operating condition, made by either the proprietor of a public garage engaged in auto repair who is licensed by the State of California, or by a mechanic licensed by the State and employed by the applicant, who has inspected the vehicle;

    (d)  A completed taxicab inspection form, showing the vehicle has successfully passed the lamp, brake, smog and meter inspections, and the inspection of the Police Department; and

    (e)   Evidence that the vehicle is covered under the insurance policies required by Section 6-6-475 of this Chapter.

 

6-6-250 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT.
    The Finance Director may revoke or suspend a taxicab business permit on any grounds stated in this Chapter or on any of the following grounds:

 

    (a)   The violation by the permit holder of any of the terms, conditions or requirements of the taxicab business permit or of this Chapter;

    (b)  Any act or omission of the permit holder of any fact or condition which, if it existed at the time the application was filed, would have warranted denial of the application;

    (c)   Cancellation or suspension of any insurance policy or coverage required of the permit holder by Section 6-6-475 of this Chapter;

    (d)  Failure of the permit holder to pay any judgment against the permit holder for personal injury or death or property damage arising out of the conduct of business under the taxicab business permit, within thirty (30) days after the judgment has become final;

    (e)   Overcharge, or attempted overcharge, of fares by permit holder in violation of Section 6-6-400 of this Chapter;

    (f)   Permit holder’s knowledge of, and failure to correct, overcharge or attempted overcharge of fares in violation of Section 6-6-400 of this Chapter by a driver operating one of the permit holder’s taxicabs;

    (g)  The violation of any of the laws of the Federal or State government, or local ordinances of the City, by the permit holder or the driver of any public transportation vehicle covered by the taxicab business permit;

    (h)  Permit holder’s failure to pay when due any applicable taxes or fees imposed by the City;

    (i)   Permit holder’s failure to act to prevent a driver whom the permit holder has reason to believe is under the influence of any controlled substance or alcohol in excess of legal limits from operating a taxicab covered by the taxicab business permit;

    (j)   Revocation of the owner’s business license for operation of a taxicab business pursuant to Section 2-2-440 of this Code.

    No refund of prepaid fees shall be made upon revocation or suspension of any taxicab business permit pursuant to this section.

 

6-6-255 PROCESS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
    Whenever the Finance Director shall determine that there may be grounds for revoking or suspending a taxicab business permit pursuant to Section 6-6-250 above, the Finance Director shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice of the deficiency to the permit holder. The written notice shall require the permit holder to show cause, at a time and place specified in such notice, why the taxicab business permit should not be revoked or suspended. Should the permit holder fail to present evidence at such hearing which establishes that the permit should not be revoked or suspended, the Finance Director shall revoke or suspend the taxicab business permit, taking in consideration the public convenience and necessity, the gravity of the violation, any relevant federal, state and local laws and the potential for harm to the public. The Finance Director shall give written notice of a suspension or revocation to the permit holder. Within five (5) days of the mailing of the notice of revocation or the notice of suspension, the permit holder shall cease operation of the taxicab business.

 

6-6-260 APPEAL OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
    The decision of the Finance Director to revoke or suspend the taxicab business permit may be appealed in the manner provided for appeal of business license revocations in Section 2-2-450 of this Code.

 

6-6-265 ISSUANCE PRIOR TO AMENDMENT.
    All taxicab business permits issued prior to the effective date of this amendment to this Chapter shall be deemed issued pursuant to this Chapter as amended and shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Chapter as amended. All current permit holders shall be responsible for meeting all requirements of this Chapter prior to the anniversary date of the issuance of their current permit, or such later date as the Finance Director may allow.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance 93-06, 4/5/93; Ordinance 2001-016, 9/4/01; Ordinance 2002-032, 12/9/02 (Section 6-6-205); Ordinance No. 2011-006, 4/4/11 (Section 6-6-205))

 

 

ARTICLE 3. TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT
6-6-300 TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT—REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
    (a)   No person shall operate or drive in the City any taxicab unless that person shall have been issued by the Chief of Police a taxicab driver’s permit and such permit shall be in full force and effect; provided that no permit shall be required for any operations for which a certificate or permit has been issued by the Public Utilities Commission of the State or by the Interstate Commerce Commission of the United States of America.

    (b)  Any driver may, however, transport a passenger or passengers from a point outside to a destination within the City or may proceed through the City while en route to a destination outside of the City without issuance of a taxicab driver’s permit.

 

6-6-305 TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT—APPLICATION.
    Any person, upon payment of the application fee established by fee resolution of the City Council, may apply to the City for a taxicab driver’s permit to operate a taxicab by filing with the Chief of Police in such form as may be prescribed, an application containing the following information:

    (a)   The name, age and residence address of the applicant;

    (b)  The number of years of experience the applicant has operating a taxicab;

    (c)   The names and business addresses of the applicant’s employers during the preceding three (3) years;

    (d)  Social security number of the applicant;

    (e)   A statement as to whether any license, permit or certificate issued to the applicant has been denied, revoked or suspended by any public authority. The circumstances of said denial, revocation or suspension shall be fully explained;

    (f)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance or state law (other than minor traffic and parking offenses), the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed for the offense;

    (g)  The name and business address of the taxicab company by whom the applicant will be employed or engaged under contract as a taxicab driver;

    (h)  The endorsement by the owner employing the applicant or engaging the applicant under contract as a taxicab driver that the applicant has acquired proficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the State of California and the City, and of the streets of the City, as well as the ability to read and understand the English language, and to safely operate a taxicab in the City;

    (i)   Proof of compliance with federal and state controlled substance and alcohol testing requirements, including proof that driver has tested negative for controlled substances and for alcohol as required by Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3);

    (j)   Fingerprint records in a manner provided by the Chief of Police and two (2) passport size photographs of the applicant; and

    (k)  Such additional information as may be required by the Chief of Police or designee in support of the public health, safety and welfare.

 

6-6-310 PERMIT FEE.
    The applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit shall submit a non-refundable application fee as set forth in the general fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council:

 

6-6-315 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
    The chief of police may deny an application for a taxicab driver’s permit filed by any person for any of the following reasons:

    (a)   The applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age;

    (b)  The applicant is not in possession of a valid driver’s license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles for the type of vehicle the applicant proposes to use as a taxicab in the City;

    (c)   The applicant has received a positive result in any random test for controlled substances and alcohol within the prior twelve (12) calendar months;

    (d)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required for the permit application;

    (e)   Information required on the application was misstated or omitted;

    (f)   The applicant has been convicted of an offense which requires registration pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290;

    (g)  Applicant has been convicted, within a ten (10) year period prior to the application date, of an offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, 11058, 11351, 11352, 11358 through 11363 or 11378 through 11380 of the California Health and Safety Code, or equivalent offenses under the laws of another jurisdiction, even if expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4;

    (h)  Applicant has been convicted, within a ten (10) year period prior to the application date, of any offense involving the use of force or violence upon another person;

    (i)   Applicant has been convicted of any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or adults;    (j)   The applicant has engaged in any conduct which would constitute an offense as described in subsections (g) or (h) of this section, during the ten (10) year period prior to the application date;

    (k)  The applicant has been arrested or convicted, during the ten (10) year period prior to the application date, of reckless driving or driving under the influence of any drug or intoxicating liquor, regardless of whether the incident resulted in bodily injury or death;

    (l)   The applicant is on parole or probation for a crime, and the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a taxicab driver;

    (m) Applicant has had a taxicab driver’s permit or driver’s identification card issued pursuant to this chapter, or issued by another jurisdiction, revoked within the past three (3) years; or

    (n)  The Chief of Police determines that granting of a taxicab driver’s permit would be in violation of any law or would endanger the public health, peace or safety.

 

6-6-320 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND RENEWAL.
    (a)   Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall issue a taxicab driver’s permit to the applicant, if it is determined that no grounds exist for denial of the permit.

    (b)  The duration of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year from the date of issuance.

    (c)   Renewal of a taxicab driver’s permit shall require a renewal fee, a background check, and proof that the permit holder has tested negative for controlled substances and for alcohol as required by Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3).

 

6-6-325 PERMIT CONTENT.
Each taxicab driver’s permit shall be numbered and signed by the Chief of Police and shall contain the following information:

    (a)   The date of expiration of the permit;

    (b)  The driver’s name and the driver’s license number;

    (c)   A description of the driver including date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair;

    (d)  The name of the owner by whom the driver is employed or engaged under contract;

    (e)   The driver’s photograph; and

    (f)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.

 

6-6-330 PERMIT DISPLAY.
    A taxicab driver’s permit must be displayed in clear view of the passenger of any taxicab operated by the driver. The permit must be so displayed whenever the taxicab is available for hire or carrying passengers within the City. The City may require the display of the permit to be visible from the outside of the taxicab.

 

6-6-335 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT OR CONTRACT.
    (a)   The taxicab driver’s permit shall be automatically revoked upon the termination of the driver’s employment or contract with the owner who endorsed the permit application as required by Section 6-6-305(h) above.

    (b)  Within ten (10) days of such termination of employment or contract, the owner-of the taxicab company shall notify the City in writing of such termination.

    (c)   Within ten (10) days of such termination of employment or contract, the driver shall surrender his or her taxicab driver’s permit to the San Leandro Police Department.

 

6-6-340 RE-ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
    (a)   The Chief of Police may approve re-issuance of a taxicab driver’s permit to an applicant without requiring the applicant’s photograph and fingerprints and the permit fee, if an application endorsed by another owner is filed within six (6) months after the applicant’s prior employment or contract with a taxicab business as a driver was terminated. The permit fee shall be waived for only one re-issuance; any subsequent re-issuance may be approved upon payment of a processing fee.

    (b)  This section does not apply to an applicant whose employment or contract with a taxicab business as a driver was terminated for reasons which constitute any of the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a taxicab driver’s permit set forth in Section 2-2-345 below.

 

6-6-345 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF A TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT.
    The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend or revoke a taxicab driver’s permit issued under this chapter, on any grounds stated in this chapter or on any of the following grounds:

    (a)   Suspension, revocation or expiration of the driver’s privilege granted by the California Department of Motor Vehicles to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways of the state;

    (b)  The violation by the driver of any terms, conditions or requirements of the taxicab driver’s permit or of this chapter;

    (c)   Any act or omission of the driver or any fact or condition which, if it existed at the time the application for a taxicab driver’s permit was filed, would have warranted the denial of the application;

    (d)  Failure of the driver to pay any judgment against the driver for personal injury or death, or property damage arising out of the driver’s operation of a taxicab, within thirty (30) days after the judgment has become final;

    (e)   Driver’s consumption of drugs or alcohol while on duty, or provision of taxi service while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or conviction of a crime relating to drugs or alcohol; or

    (f)   Driver’s overcharge of, or the attempt to overcharge, taxicab fares, as prohibited by Section 6-6-400 of this Chapter.

No refund of prepaid fees shall be made upon revocation or suspension of any taxicab driver’s permit pursuant to this section.

 

6-6-350 PROCESS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
    Whenever the Chief of Police shall determine that there may be grounds for revoking or suspending a taxicab driver’s permit pursuant to Section 6-6-345 above, the Chief of Police shall give not less than five (5) days written notice of the deficiency to the permit holder. The written notice shall require the permit holder to show cause, at a time and place specified in such notice, why the permit should not be revoked or suspended. Should the permit holder fail to present evidence at such hearing which establishes that the permit should not be revoked or suspended, the Chief of Police shall revoke or suspend the permit, taking in consideration the public convenience and necessity, the gravity of the violation, any relevant federal, state and local laws and the potential for harm to the public. The Chief of Police shall give written notice of a suspension or revocation to the permit holder. Within five (5) days of the mailing of a notice of revocation or a notice of suspension, the driver shall cease providing taxicab service within the City. Within five (5) days of the mailing of a notice of revocation, the permit holder shall return the permit to the San Leandro Police Department.

 

6-6-355 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
    (a)   The Chief of Police may issue an order summarily suspending a taxicab driver’s permit for a period not to exceed ten (10) calendar days without having conducted a hearing therefor, if the Chief of Police determines that the continued use of the permit will cause immediate hazard to the public safety, health or welfare. Testing positive for controlled substances or alcohol shall constitute such an immediate hazard to the public safety, health or welfare. The order of suspension shall be personally served to the permit holder.

    (b)  Ordering an emergency permit suspension pursuant to subsection (a) above shall not prevent the Chief of Police from simultaneously pursuing a suspension or revocation of the taxicab driver’s permit pursuant to Section 6-6-355 above.

 

6-6-360 APPEAL.
    An applicant whose permit is denied or a permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the City Manager as provided in Title 1, Section 9 of this Code.

 

6-6-365 ISSUANCE PRIOR TO AMENDMENT.
    All taxicab driver’s permits issued prior to the effective date of this amendment to this chapter shall be deemed issued pursuant to this chapter as amended and shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this chapter as amended. All current permit holders shall be responsible for meeting all requirements of this chapter prior to the anniversary date of the issuance of their current permit or such later date as the Chief of Police may allow.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance 93-06, 4/5/93; Ordinance 2001-016, 9/4/01)

 

ARTICLE 4. GENERAL
6-6-400 TAXICAB FARES.
    (a)   No owner or driver shall charge or receive any rates or fares for use of a taxicab greater than those established by resolution of the City Council. Such charges shall be applicable to all portions of the passenger’s travel, both inside and outside the City.

    (b)  Bona fide tips are not prohibited by this section.

    (c)   Rates and fares for the use of taxicabs permitted under this Chapter shall be adopted by resolution after a public hearing. The City Council may, upon its own motion, or upon application of a holder of a taxicab business permit, adjust such rates and fares to reflect the prevailing rates and fares charged by taxicab businesses in the neighboring cities.

 

6-6-405 DISPLAY OF RATE SCHEDULE, TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT, OUT OF SERVICE SIGN.
    (a)   No driver shall operate any taxicab permitted under a taxicab business permit unless a schedule of rates and fares for the use of the vehicle is posted in a conspicuous place and in a permanent and secure manner in the passenger compartment. Rates and fares should be printed in text no less than two (2) inches in height.

    (b)  Each taxicab permitted under a taxicab business permit shall have affixed to the upper right side of the vehicles rear window and the lower left side of the front windshield, the taxicab business permit decal.

    (c)   No driver shall operate any taxicab permitted under a taxicab business permit without placing a copy of his or her taxicab driver’s permit in view of the passengers therein as provided in Section 6-6-330 above.

    (d)  Each taxicab permitted under a taxicab business permit shall be equipped with an “Out of Service” sign; this sign must use bold type face letters of no less than a two (2) inches height and shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the vehicle any time the taxicab is not available for hire.

 

6-6-410 EXCESSIVE CHARGES.
    (a)   No owner, operator or driver of any taxicab, shall in connection with any trip originating or reaching its destination in the City, charge, collect, demand, receive or arrange for any rate for such trip in excess of the amount authorized in accordance with the schedule of rates as posted pursuant to Sections 6-6-400 and 6-6-405 above.

    (b)  It shall constitute a ground for revocation or suspension of a taxicab business permit and/or a taxi driver’s permit for any owner or driver to charge a greater fare than has been set by resolution of the City Council.

    (c)   The owner or driver who overcharges a taxicab fare shall be liable to the person who hires the vehicle for the difference between the amount of the fare actually charged and the amount of the fare filed in accordance with this chapter

    (d)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies, and are not intended to be exclusive.

 

6-6-415 SIGNS AND TAXICAB IDENTIFICATION.
    (a)   Every taxicab used for carrying passengers for hire shall display on the rear of the driver’s seat in the passenger’s compartment and in full view of the passenger, or passengers, a card not smaller than six (6) inches by four (4) inches (or such other standard specified by the City Manager or designee), which shall have printed thereon the owner’s name or the fictitious business name under which he or she operates and the business address and the telephone number of such owner. In addition printed on the card shall be the telephone number of the Police Department where passengers can file complaints regarding the rates charged or services rendered by the taxicab driver.

    (b)  On the upper right side of the vehicle’s rear window and on the lower left side of the front windshield of every taxicab approved under a taxicab business permit there shall be placed the permit decal issued to the taxicab owner.

 

6-6-420 PERMANENTLY-AFFIXED INSIGNIA.
    The vehicles of every owner operating in the City shall be of a color scheme and bear the owner’s trade name, monogram or insignia which are distinguishable from the color scheme, owner’s trademark, monogram or insignia used on the vehicles of any other owner already operating pursuant to this chapter. Such trade name, monogram or insignia shall be clearly readable from a distance of fifty (50) feet, and shall be permanently affixed to each vehicle operated under a taxicab business permit issued pursuant to this chapter. It is unlawful for any person soliciting patronage from any vehicle described in this chapter to represent by mark, sign or insignia that the vehicle for which said person is soliciting such patronage is a vehicle operated by other than the actual owner.

 

6-6-425 EXCLUSIVE USE OF TAXICABS.
    (a)   Any person who hires a taxicab shall have the exclusive right to use the taxicab. There shall not be additional charges for any of the person’s companions or personal belongings.

    (b)  No owner or driver shall carry or solicit, or permit to be carried or solicited, any additional passengers unless the person first hiring the taxicab consents to the acceptance of such additional passenger.

 

6-6-430 DUTY TO PROVIDE SERVICES.
    (a)   No owner or driver of any taxicab shall refuse to provide taxicab service to a person who requests to be taken to a destination within the City, and no fare will be denied on the basis of race, gender, color, religion, national origin, disability or sexual orientation.

    (b)  The owner or driver may refuse to provide taxicab service only when:

    (1)  The person requesting such service poses a threat to the driver, other passengers or the public safety;

    (2)  The service is requested for an unlawful purpose;

    (3)  The taxicab has already been hired; or

    (4)  The taxicab is not available for hire and the driver has so indicated by posting an “Out of Service” sign as provided by subsection 6-6-405(d) above.

 

6-6-435 DIRECT ROUTE.
    Unless otherwise directed by the passenger hiring the taxicab, the driver of such taxicab shall take the most direct, expeditious and safe route from the starting point to the destination point.

 

6-6-440 TAXI METER REQUIRED.
    (a)   All taxicabs shall be equipped with a taxi meter in working order, and shall be of a type and design approved by the Chief of Police. The taxi meter shall be arranged and illuminated so that any passenger may conveniently observe it and the amount of fare registered thereon, and shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Chief of Police.

    (b)  All taxi meters must be certified by the Alameda County Office of Weights and Measures on a yearly basis. The owner will provide the Chief of Police a copy of the inspection certificate with the annual application for renewal of the taxicab business permit.

    (c)   The Chief of Police shall compel the owner to discontinue the operation of any taxicab in which the taxi meter is found to calculate incorrectly until the taxi meter is repaired or replaced with one in proper working order, and the meter has passed the inspection of the Alameda County Office of Weights and Measures.

    (d)  Every driver shall at all times maintain the flag attached to the taxi meter in a position to correctly denote whether the vehicle is or is not employed, and shall at all times place the flag of the taxi meter in a non-recording position at the termination of each and every service.

 

6-6-445 FAILURE TO PAY FARE UNLAWFUL.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same, and any person who shall hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

6-6-450 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
    Each taxicab operated under a taxicab business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times have all equipment required by the California Vehicle Code including, but not limited to the following:

    (a)   One operable safety belt for each passenger carried;

    (b)  A spare tire, capable of being used on any of the wheels of the vehicle;

    (c)   A set of tools for changing tires;

    (d)  A hydraulic and emergency braking system in proper operating order;

    (e)   Safety or shatterproof glass in windshield, windows and doors;

    (f)   Interior and exterior rearview mirrors;

    (g)  A fully charged, working fire extinguisher; and

    (h)  Waybills or trip sheets upon which to record passenger names, time of beginning of trip, time of end of trip, location where passenger was picked up and location where passenger was delivered.

 

6-6-455 TAXICAB MAINTENANCE.
    Each taxicab operated under the taxicab business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in such condition so that:

    (a)   All doors, windows, hood and trunk will open and close securely;

    (b)  The inside of the taxicab and the luggage compartment is free of litter and trash, and does not soil, rip or otherwise damage the passenger’s clothing or effects; and

    (c)   The exterior of the vehicle is clean and in good repair, and does not have any peeling paint, paint primer, dents, rust or missing components which are discernable from five (5) feet of the vehicle.

 

6-6-460 TAXICAB INSPECTIONS.
    (a)   All taxicabs shall be inspected annually for safety and mechanical fitness in the manner provided for by Section 6-6-2050 )-(l) above. The inspection shall be complete prior to the renewal of the taxicab business permit.

    (b)  The driver of a taxicab shall inspect the taxicab and its equipment at least once each day.

    (c)   The registered owner of a taxicab shall be responsible for the safety of each cab. The registered owner shall make diligent efforts to ensure that his or her taxicabs are in safe working order, including routine inspections and daily written documentation of the safety of all taxicabs. The registered owner shall not permit any taxicab to be used when the registered owner, lessee or operator has reason to believe that a taxicab is in an unsafe condition.

    (d)  Any officer of the City’s Police Department may at any time inspect any vehicle being operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to insure that it complies with the California Vehicle Code as well as all requirements of this chapter and is in good mechanical order and does not endanger the safety of passengers.

 

6-6-465 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
    (a)   Each holder of a taxicab business permit shall report any accident involving a taxicab of which he or she is the owner and resulting in property damage exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) or personal injury of any kind to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days of the accident.

    (b)  Each taxicab driver shall report to the Chief of Police any driving accident in which he or she is involved resulting in property damage exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) or personal injury of any kind within ten days after the accident.

 

6-6-470 OWNER’S RECORDS.
    (a)   The owner shall maintain at all times complete and accurate records of the following:

    (1)  The names, addresses and dates of commencement and termination of employment or engagement under contract of all drivers;

    (2)  A description of the taxicab driven by each driver, including make, model, vehicle identification number and license number;

    (3)  The hours during which each driver is on duty and the number of trips taken by each driver; and

    (4)  All dispatch calls received and made by the owner, including starting and destination points and times.

    (b)  The owner shall maintain such records for a minimum period of five (5) years and shall make them available for inspection upon request by any authorized City officer or employee.

    (c)   The owner shall provide a list of current taxicab drivers to the Chief of Police once per calendar quarter.

    (d)  The owner’s duty to maintain accurate and complete records applies for all taxicabs operated under a taxicab business permit, regardless whether the taxicab is operated by an employee driver, a lessee driver or person operating the vehicle under another legal arrangement.

 

6-6-475 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
    No owner shall operate a taxicab, or permit the operation of any taxicab for which he or she holds a taxicab business permit issued pursuant to this chapter, in the City unless such taxicab and its driver shall be insured against personal injury, property damage and general liability in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000). The City shall be named as an additional insured. Written evidence of such insurance must be filed with the Finance Director designee in the same manner as the initial application and be maintained concurrently with all taxicab operations. All insurance certificates shall include a complete list of the vehicles covered and shall include vehicle identification numbers and vehicle license plate numbers. All policies are subject to verification by the Finance Director.

 

6-6-480 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE AND ALCOHOL POLICY REQUIRED.
    All taxicab business permittees must have a written controlled substance and alcohol policy for their company and must maintain a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to Part 40 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations for all drivers of vehicles that will be operated under the permit. A copy of the controlled substance and alcohol policy must be submitted with the owner’s taxicab business permit application described in Section 6-6-205.

 

6-6-485 PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
    No taxicab operated under the provisions of this chapter shall be parked on a City residential street or on residential property within view of the street for a period of time longer than one hour.

6-6-490 SEVERABILITY.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance 93-06, 4/5/93; Ordinance 2001-016, 9/4/01)

CHAPTER 6-7 TRUCK ROUTES
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
6-7-100 MOTOR TRUCK AND TRUCKING COMBINATIONS.
    For the purpose of this Title, a motor truck is a motor vehicle over twenty (20) feet in length or exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four and one-half (4 1/2) tons designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property; and a “trucking combination” is any combination of vehicles designed, used, or maintained for the transportation of property coupled together exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four and one-half (4 1/2) tons or a total length of twenty (20) feet.

 

6-7-105 THROUGH MOTOR TRUCK OR TRUCKING COMBINATION.
    A through motor truck or trucking combination is any motor truck or trucking combination as hereinbefore defined, entering this City from any point outside of the City and destined for any other point located outside the City of San Leandro.

 

6-7-110 LOCAL MOTOR TRUCK OR TRUCKING COMBINATION.
    A local motor truck or trucking combination is any motor truck or trucking combination as hereinabove defined which is not a through motor truck or trucking combination as hereinabove defined.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. TRUCK ROUTES
6-7-200 THROUGH TRUCK ROUTES—DESIGNATED.
    The through truck routes shall be as designated by the City Council by ordinance, which routes shall be included in the Traffic Code..

 

6-7-205 LOCAL TRUCK ROUTES—DESIGNATED.
    The local truck routes shall be as designated by the City Council by ordinance, which routes shall be included in the Traffic Code.

 

6-7-210 THROUGH AND LOCAL TRUCKS—RESTRICTIONS.
    (a)   Through Trucks: When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a through motor truck or trucking combination to operator stop, stand or park such through motor truck or trucking combination on any streets or highways in this City other than those streets or highways listed in this title or the Traffic Code as Through Truck Routes.

    (b)  Local Trucks: When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a local motor truck or trucking combination, excepting therefrom garbage or refuse collection vehicles owned by the City of San Leandro or operated pursuant to franchise granted by the City of San Leandro, to operate, stop, stand or park on any streets or highways in this City other than the streets or highways listed in the Traffic Code as Local Truck Routes.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 66-85, 12/19/66; Ordinance No. 82-084, 11/1/82; Ordinance No. 85-045, 12/16/85; Ordinance No. 88-026, 10/24/88)

CHAPTER 6-8 TRANSPORTATION PERMITS
6-8-100 DELEGATION TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
    All the powers granted to the City by Article 6 of Chapter 5 of Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code pertaining to the issuance of special permits for loads exceeding the maximum sizes and/or weights, and for administering the rules and regulations pertaining thereto, are hereby delegated to the Chief of Police or designee.

 

6-8-105 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Single Trip Transportation Permit” means a permit that will allow the movement of a specific vehicle or load, exceeding statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code, to operate on a single trip from a single point of origin to a single destination in one direction of travel. This permit is valid for one laden and unladen round-trip, and is limited to the approved width, length, height and weight.

    (b)  “Repetitive Trip Transportation Permit” means a permit that will allow the movement of a specific vehicle or load, exceeding statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code, along a specific route to a specific destination for an unlimited number of trips in a defined period of time. This permit is valid for laden and unladen round-trips, and is limited to the approved width, length, height and weight.

    (c)   “Annual Transportation Permit” means a permit that will allow the movement of a vehicle or load, exceeding statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code, to operate an unlimited number of trips during specified dates. This permit is valid for laden and unladen round-trips, and is limited to the approved width, length, height and weight.

    (d)  “Transportation Permit” means a Single Trip Permit, a Repetitive Trip Permit, or an Annual Permit issued by the Chief of Police or designee pursuant to this Chapter.

    (e)   “Permit Holder” means an individual moving or transporting a specific vehicle or load, exceeding statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code pursuant to a Transportation Permit.

    (f)   “Applicant” means persons, firms or agencies that obtain a Transportation Permit pursuant to this Chapter.

 

6-8-110 PERMITS.
    (a)   Application for Transportation Permit(s): All persons, firms or agencies desiring to move any vehicle or load across or upon streets and highways within the City, which exceeds statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code shall obtain a Transportation Permit from the Chief of Police or designee. The Transportation Permit shall specify the streets upon which the move is authorized and the date and time of the move. The permit holder shall be knowledgeable of and in compliance with all applicable California and City of San Leandro conditions, requirements, and laws for the use of the highway system and movement of vehicles or loads, exceeding statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code.

 

    (b)  Possession of Permit: The Transportation Permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it has been issued at all times while the vehicle is within the City limits.

    (c)   Void Permits: Transportation Permits shall be declared null and void if:

    (1)  Any portion, part or section is illegible;

    (2)  It is used before or after the times and date(s) indicated;

    (3)  Any portion, part or section has been altered or if any attempt to alter is apparent;

    (4)  It is used to represent proper authority for carrying a load and/or moving a vehicle which is not specifically described on the face of the Transportation Permit;

    (5)  It is used to represent proper authority for carrying a load and/or moving a vehicle by any person, firm, or agency not specifically named on the Transportation Permit;

    (6)  It is presented without the attachments specifically named on the face of the Transportation Permit firmly affixed;

    (7)  The permit holder fails to report an accident, damage to property, or the death and/or injury to persons incurred while operating under a Transportation Permit, as provided for in this Chapter.

 

6-8-115 FEES.
    A fee for issuance of the Transportation Permit, as established pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 35795(b), and set by the California Department of Transportation, shall be paid by the applicant prior to issuance of a Transportation Permit.

 

6-8-120 LIABILITY.
    (a)   Injury, Death of Person, Damage to Property: The permit holder is responsible for all liability to/or death of person(s), to/or damage to property that may occur through any act or omission of either the permit holder or the City arising from the issuance of the Transportation Permit. In the event any claim, suit or action is brought against the City, its officers, employees or agents thereof, by reason of, or in connection with any such act or omission, the permit holder shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees or agents from such claim, suit or action.

    (b)  Repair of Damage: The permit holder shall be liable for all damages to any street, highway, bridge, or appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, guardrails, signs, traffic signals, street lights, street trees and similar facilities, resulting from the operation, driving or moving of any vehicle which exceeds any of the limitations imposed by Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code. The permit holder agrees to repair at his or her own expense, and to the satisfaction of the Engineering and Transportation Director or designee, any damage resulting from travel pursuant to the Transportation Permit.

    (c)   Modification To and/or Relocation of Structures: If, in the judgment of the Engineering and Transportation Director or designee, it is determined necessary to strengthen any structure over which a vehicle or load, which exceeds statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code, must pass, or to perform any other work in order to insure the safe passage of the vehicle or load upon City streets, the applicant will be required to pay the full cost of such work. The applicant will also be required to reimburse the City for any cost necessitated by the temporary relocation of traffic signals, streetlights or other appurtenances in order to permit the safe passage of the vehicle or load which exceeds statutory limitations on the size, weight and loading of vehicles contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code.

 

6-8-125 DAMAGE AND ACCIDENT REPORTING.
    (a)   Damage to Property: In the event of damage, caused by the movement of a vehicle or load pursuant to a Transportation Permit issued under this Chapter, to highway facilities such as bridges, traffic signals, light standards and other appurtenances, a written report must be filed with the San Leandro Police Department within seventy-two (72) hours after such damage is incurred.

    (b)  Accidents Involving Persons and/or Property: Accidents occurring while operating a vehicle or load pursuant to a Transportation Permit issued under this Chapter, and requiring a report to the Department of Motor Vehicles under California Vehicle Code Section 16000, shall also be reported to the City. A copy of the Transportation Permit and accident report shall be mailed to the SLPD Commercial Enforcement Unit, 901 E. 14th St. San Leandro, CA 94577 within thirty (30) days of the date of the accident.

 

6-8-130 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.
    (a)   Permit holders moving or transporting a vehicle or load over twelve (12) feet in width and/or over one hundred twenty (120) feet in length and/or over sixteen (16) feet in height, shall be escorted by a single pilot vehicle. Two (2) pilot cars are required on any vehicles and/or loads over fourteen (14) feet wide and/or one hundred thirty-five (135) feet in length.

    (b)  Appropriate flags and/or lamps by all permit holders as required by California Vehicle Code Sections 24604, 25103 and 25104 shall be utilized.

    (c)   Permit holders shall display warning signs on vehicles or loads. Signs shall be posted on the front and rear of the vehicle or load and must conform to the specifications of the California Department of Transportation.

    (d)  Special Weight Limits: Permit holders moving or transporting a vehicle or load over twenty-five (25) tons are prohibited on the following streets within the City limits:

    (1)  Estudillo Avenue;

    (2)  Dutton Avenue.

    (e)   Authorized Route: The Engineering and Transportation Director or designee shall determine the authorized route for vehicles or loads moved or transported with a Transportation Permit pursuant to this Chapter. The authorized route shall designate a specific route comprised of existing truck routes as much as possible to access the destination. When deviating from the truck route, the recommended route shall be along major streets. The City of San Leandro truck route map should be used as a guide when determining a route. Permit holders will not be routed on Fairway Drive over Interstate 880.

    (f)   Curfew: Permit holders cannot move/transport a vehicle or load over ten (10) feet in width within the City Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.

 

6-8-135 POLICE ESCORT.
    The Chief of Police or designee may require a San Leandro Police Department escort for certain applicants. The determination to assign an escort and the number of officers required to safely perform the escort of a vehicle or load will be made by the Chief of Police or designee. The determination may be based on the overall vehicle dimensions, type of load, location of the move, or any other reason the Chief of Police has determined may be a hazard to the public or property. The applicant shall pay the associated costs of the police escort.

 

6-8-140 PERMIT REVOCATION.
    (a)   The Chief of Police or designee may revoke a Transportation Permit issued to an applicant, if the applicant, the applicant’s employee or agent violates any provisions of this Chapter. The Transportation Permit may be revoked for up to ninety (90) days. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed as limiting the power of a peace officer to issue a citation for or otherwise enforce violations of law with respect to operation of a vehicle pursuant to a Transportation Permit upon designated City streets.

    (b)  Any applicant who has had a Transportation Permit revoked pursuant to subsection (a) may file with the City Manager a written appeal within ten (10) days of such revocation, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the applicant’s appeal. The City Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer who shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of the filing. The Hearing Officer shall make a ruling on appeal within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing. The Hearing Officer’s determination shall be final.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2015-002, 3/2/15)

CHAPTER 6-9 OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES
6-9-100 DELEGATION TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
    All the powers granted to the City by Article 6 of Chapter 5 of Division 15 of the State of California Vehicle Code, pertaining to issuance of permits for loads exceeding the maximum sizes and/or weights, and for administering the rules and regulations pertaining thereto, are hereby delegated to the Chief of Police or designee.

 

6-9-105 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   “Designated Streets” means those city streets or portions thereof that have been designated by the Engineering and Transportation Director or designee as being open to travel by overweight vehicles pursuant to an Overweight Vehicle Permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter.

    (b)  “Overweight Vehicle” means a vehicle or combination of vehicles used to haul intermodal shipping containers exceeding the maximum weight specified in the California Vehicle Code. Intermodal shipping containers under the seal of United States Customs shall not be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

    (c)   “Overweight Vehicle Permit” means a permit issued by the Chief of Police or designee to permit overweight vehicles to travel on designated streets throughout the City.

    (d)  “Commercial Vehicle Safety Inspection Report” means a report issued by the Chief of Police or designee following an annual inspection of overweight vehicles used to travel on designated streets throughout the City.

    (e)   “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, public corporation, political subdivision or any department or agency thereof.

    (f)   “Residential Street” means a public or private right-of-way or portion thereof providing access to one or more dwellings, as identified in the Transportation Element of the General Plan.

    (g)  “Intermodal” means a type of international freight system that permits trans-shipping among sea, highway, rail, and air modes of transportation.

    (h)  “Intermodal Shipping Container” means a reusable transport and storage unit, typically having four (4) sides, a top and bottom, used for moving products and raw material.

 

6-9-110 OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE PERMIT AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE INSPECTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
    (a)   No person shall operate or move an overweight vehicle upon City streets without an Overweight Vehicle Permit issued under or pursuant to this Chapter. An Overweight Vehicle Permit shall be required for each overweight vehicle moved or operated on City streets.

    (b)  No person shall operate or move an overweight vehicle upon City streets without a current Commercial Vehicle Safety Inspection Report issued pursuant to this Chapter. A Commercial Vehicle Safety Inspection Report shall be required for each overweight vehicle moved or operated on City streets.

6-9-115 DESIGNATED STREETS.
    (a)   An Overweight Vehicle Permit will be issued for operation or movement of an overweight vehicle only upon designated streets. The Engineering and Transportation Director may impose special conditions regarding the use of streets and highways by an overweight vehicle when designating a street or highway pursuant to this Chapter or at any time thereafter. The Engineering and Transportation Director shall determine that special conditions are necessary to assure against undue damage to road foundations, surfaces, bridges or other structures. To the extent designated streets were previously approved by the Engineering and Transportation Director, such designated streets shall be provided to Overweight Vehicle Permit applicants on a City maintained route map.

    (b)  If a proposed route is not on a designated street, then the applicant must submit a route report prepared, signed, and stamped by a registered engineer from the State of California. The route report shall review the condition of the road structure, bridges, underground piping or other structures and indicate whether it is safe for the travel of an overweight vehicle. All calculations and review material shall be included in the report. If the report indicates that any facility is unsafe for an overweight vehicle, the applicant may submit a report for a revised route or submit plans for improvement of the identified facilities.

    (c)   All costs for the review by the Engineering and Transportation Director of the applicant’s proposed route shall be borne by the applicant.

 

6-9-120 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE SPECIAL PERMIT.
    (a)   The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to issue an Overweight Vehicle Permit under this Chapter on an annual basis for continuous operations. The Chief of Police or designee may issue or withhold an Overweight Vehicle Permit in his or her discretion or may issue an Overweight Vehicle Permit conditioned upon any or all of the following:

    (1)  An undertaking or other security as may be deemed necessary to protect the City’s streets and bridges from damage.

    (2)  Required proof of financial responsibility in an amount required for compliance with California Vehicle Code Section 16500.5.

    (3)  Such conditions of operation of the overweight vehicle as may be necessary to assure against undue damage to City road foundations, surfaces, bridges or other structures.

    (4)  Potential negative safety or environmental impacts in the opinion of the Engineering and Transportation Director, the Fire Marshal, or the Chief of Police.

 

6-9-125 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
    (a)   An Overweight Vehicle Permit will be issued only upon receipt of a signed and verified application which provides the company name and a vehicle description. Each Overweight Vehicle Permit application shall be accompanied with a fee as determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Council.

    (b)  A Commercial Vehicle Safety Inspection Report will be completed only upon receipt of a signed and verified application that provides the company name and a vehicle description.

 

6-9-130 OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE PERMIT CONDITIONS.
    (a)   Every Overweight Vehicle Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall provide the following:

    (1)  The maximum allowable gross weight as determined by the capacities of the axle groups, according to the table of gross weights per axle group in Section 35551(a) of the California Vehicle Code. The maximum weight permitted by a truck tractor/semi-trailer combination is the sum of the capacities of the front steering axle (twenty thousand (20,000) pounds max.), the drive axle group and the rear tri-axle group (chassis), up to the limit of ninety-five thousand (95,000) pounds.

    (2)  Overweight Vehicle Permits shall be issued for the movement of intermodal shipping containers only.

    (3)  Each person issued an Overweight Vehicle Permit shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers from any loss, liability, damage, claims, expenses or cost resulting from or arising out of the issuance of an Overweight Vehicle Permit and the use of City streets whether designated or non-designated. Each such person shall further agree to be responsible for all injuries or death of persons and for all damages to property of every kind caused by or resulting from or arising out of the issuance of an Overweight Vehicle Permit and the use of City roadways, whether designated or non-designated.

    (4)  No detour from a designated route may be made without prior permission of the Chief of Police or designee. No route shall be on a residential street.

    (5)  Every overweight vehicle permitted under this Chapter and each Overweight Vehicle Permit issued pursuant hereto shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or designee and any peace officer at any time it is on a City street for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of the Overweight Vehicle Permit.

    (6)  The Overweight Vehicle Permit applicant shall furnish the Chief of Police or designee with evidence that each driver of an overweight vehicle has completed training in the operation of an overweight vehicle.

    (7)  The person issued an Overweight Vehicle Permit shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the Chief of Police or designee that the overweight vehicle has undergone a safety inspection by a governmental agency having jurisdiction within ninety (90) days preceding the issuance of the Overweight Vehicle Permit and at least once each ninety (90) days during the period when the Overweight Vehicle Permit is valid.

    (8)  Each person to whom an Overweight Vehicle Permit is issued shall at all times comply with all laws, ordinances, conditions, rules and regulations of all Federal, State and local governmental authorities having jurisdiction over the operation and maintenance of the overweight vehicle.

 

6-9-135 PERMIT REVOCATION.
    (a)   The Chief of Police or designee may revoke an Overweight Vehicle Permit issued to a person, if the person, the person’s employee or agent violates any Overweight Vehicle Permit conditions or any provisions of this Chapter. The Overweight Vehicle Permit may be revoked for up to ninety (90) days. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed as limiting the power of a peace officer to issue a citation for or otherwise enforce violations of law with respect to operation of an overweight vehicle upon designated City streets following discovery of a violation of an Overweight Vehicle Permit condition.

    (b)  Any person who has had an Overweight Vehicle Permit revoked pursuant to subsection (a) may file with the City Manager a written appeal within ten (10) days of such revocation, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the person’s appeal. The City Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer who shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of the filing. The Hearing Officer shall make a ruling on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing. The Hearing Officer’s determination shall be final.

 

6-9-140 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
    The Chief of Police or designee may adopt, repeal, amend and modify administrative regulations implementing the provisions of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, operating requirements, trailer requirements, driver requirements, and any other matter deemed necessary for the effective administration of this Chapter.

 

6-9-145 DISPLAY AND SPECIAL PERMIT.
    No overweight vehicle shall be operated or moved upon any designated City street without displaying a placard approved by the Chief of Police or designee identifying the overweight vehicle as one for which an Overweight Vehicle Permit has been issued pursuant to this Chapter. A copy of the Overweight Vehicle Permit shall be kept in the overweight vehicle at all times and shall be presented to any peace officer upon demand.

 

6-9-150 OTHER PERMITS.
    (a)   An Overweight Vehicle Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be in addition to, and obtained prior to, applying for any other permit that may be required by law for the operation or movement of an overweight vehicle upon public streets.

    (b)  A Commercial Vehicle Safety Inspection Report shall be completed by the Chief of Police or designee following an inspection to ensure the safe operation or movement of an overweight vehicle upon public streets. Commercial Vehicle Safety Inspection Reports shall be issued annually.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2015-003, 3/2/15)

TITLE 7 MAPS, BUILDINGS, AND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 7-1 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 7-2 RESERVED
CHAPTER 7-3 STREET NUMBERING
CHAPTER 7-4 HOUSE NUMBERS
CHAPTER 7-5 BUILDING CODE
CHAPTER 7-6 CITY DATUM
CHAPTER 7-7 RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES
CHAPTER 7-8 GRANT AND IMPROVEMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 7-9 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 7-10 GEOLOGIC HAZARD ZONES
CHAPTER 7-11 DEVELOPMENT FEE FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS ON NEW DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
CHAPTER 7-12 GRADING, EXCAVATIONS AND FILLS
CHAPTER 7-13 PARK FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE

CHAPTER 7-1 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-1-100 CITATION AND AUTHORITY.
    This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410, et seq., of the Government Code, and may be cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro”.

 

7-1-105 PURPOSE.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and control the division of land within the City of San Leandro and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions; the form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act; and the procedure to be followed in securing approval thereof. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation and to provide for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services.

 

7-1-110 APPLICATION.
    The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions or parts thereof within the City of San Leandro and to the preparation of subdivision maps thereof and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each such subdivision and each part thereof lying within the City of San Leandro shall be made and each such map shall be prepared and presented for approval as hereafter provided for and required.

 

7-1-115 CERTAIN SUBDIVISIONS EXEMPT.
    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the regulations set forth in this Chapter shall not apply to subdivisions of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square feet.

 

7-1-120 ADVISORY AGENCIES.
    (a)   The Planning Commission is hereby designated the Advisory Agency for tentative maps.

    (b)  The City Engineer is hereby designated the Advisory Agency for parcel maps.

 

7-1-125 APPEAL BOARD AND APPEALS.
    The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Appeal Board to hear and make determinations upon appeals from any action or decision of an administrative official excepting when such official is acting as the advisory agency under the provisions of this chapter. Any decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal must be in writing and filed in duplicate with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the action appealed.

 

7-1-130 CONDOMINIUMS AND COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECTS.
    Maps for condominium, community apartment projects and stock cooperatives constituting subdivisions shall not be approved unless conditional use approval has been obtained for such project pursuant to Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance. The design and location of buildings shown on such maps shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and applicable building regulations.

 

7-1-135 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   Design: Shall mean “design” as provided by Section 66418 of the Government Code.

    (b)  Final Map: A map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act of this chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act designed to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

    (c)   Improvement: Shall mean “improvement” as provided in Section 66419 of the Government Code.

    (d)  Lot: A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease, financing or separate use.

    (e)   Lot Line Adjustment: A shift of an existing lot line or other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, as approved by the City Engineer or authorized representative. A lot line adjustment may be used to effect a merger of not more than three parcels under one ownership into one parcel.

    (f)   Merger: The joining of two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land with a common lot line and under one ownership into one parcel.

    (g)  Map Act: The Subdivision Map Act of the State of California.

    (h)  Parcel Map: A map showing a division of land of four or less parcels as required by this ordinance, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Map Act, or a map required pursuant to Section 7-1-205.

    (i)   Peripheral Street: An existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to the exterior boundary of the subdivision,

    (j)   Remainder: That portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the subdivided land. The remainder is not considered as part of the subdivision but must be shown on the required maps as part of the area surrounding the subdivision.

    (k)  Secretary: Shall mean the secretary for the Planning Commission.

    (l)   Subdivider: Shall mean “subdivider” as provided in Section 66423 of the Government Code.

    (m) Subdivision: Shall mean “subdivision” as provided in Section 66424 of the Government Code.

    (n)  Tentative Map: Shall mean “tentative map” as provided in Section 66424.5 of the Government Code.

    (o)  Zoning Ordinance: Shall mean Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro, or any similar ordinance enacted under general police power authority.

 

7-1-140 REPORTS—RECOMMENDATIONS.
    Any reports and recommendations of the City Engineer or Secretary of the Planning Commission to the Planning Commission or City Council on any tentative parcel or final map shall be submitted to the subdivider prior to action by the Planning Commission or City Council on such reports. Notice of the time and place at which the Planning Commission or City Council shall consider any such reports and map shall be mailed to the subdivider together with copies of said reports not less than five (5) days prior to the date on which the same shall be considered. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall mail the notice and reports regarding Planning Commission consideration of the map and the City Clerk shall mail the notice and reports regarding City Council consideration of the map.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. MAPS REQUIRED
7-1-200 GENERAL.
    The necessity for tentative, final, and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.

 

7-1-205 DIVISION OF LAND—FIVE OR MORE PARCELS.
    A tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the State Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where:

    (a)   The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body, or

    (b)  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway, or

    (c)   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths, or

    (d)  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

    A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d), except as provided in Section 7-1-550.

 

7-1-210 DIVISION OF LAND—FOUR OR LESS PARCELS.
A parcel map shall be required for all divisions of lands which create four or less parcels except for:

    (a)   Divisions of land created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days notice in writing) of a portion of an operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, provided, however, that upon a showing made to the City Engineer based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply.

    (b)  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel map.

    (c)   When a lot line adjustment is approved by the City Engineer, as provided by Section 7-1-560.

    (d)  When the parcel map is waived by the City Engineer as provided by Section 7-1-550.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS (FIVE OR MORE PARCELS)
7-1-300 GENERAL.
    The form and content, accompanying data, filing and approval of the tentative map shall conform to the provisions of this Article and Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

7-1-305 FORM AND CONTENT.
    The tentative map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall legibly show the information required by the City Engineer and in Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

7-1-310 FILING.
    An application for approval of a tentative map, including a reproducible tracing of the tentative map and prints thereof, in a number as set forth in Chapter 3 of Title 12 or the San Leandro Administrative Code shall be filed with the Secretary. A fee and/or deposit in the amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid in accordance with said resolution. The Secretary shall forward copies of the map in a number as set forth in Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code to the City Engineer for examination.

 

7-1-315 EXAMINATION.
    The City Engineer shall examine the tentative map to determine whether it complies with the requirements of this Chapter and applicable state laws. If the City Engineer finds that the map complies with all local and state regulations, he or she shall submit a written report to the Planning Commission containing his or her findings and recommendations. If the map does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter and applicable state regulations, the map and a report of the deficiencies shall be returned to the Secretary, who shall return the map to the subdivider with said report.

 

7-1-320 PLANNING COMMISSION—EXAMINATION.
    The Secretary shall examine the tentative map in relation to existing zoning, type and location of streets and improvements, utilities, proposed size and location of lots, requirements for dedications, landscaping and planting of trees, and like considerations. After he or she has examined the tentative map, and upon receipt of the engineer s report, the Secretary shall submit his or her report to the Planning Commission, together with that of the City Engineer and set the matter for action by the Planning Commission. If the Secretary determines that approval of a tentative map may result in a potential deprivation of the property rights of other landowners, he or she may set the matter for public hearing. At least five (5) calendar days before the public hearing, he or she shall cause notice to be given of the time, date and place of said hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. The requirement to hold a public hearing may be satisfied by the holding of a public hearing for the issuance of zoning approval or for a specific plan for the project that is the subject of the tentative map.

 

7-1-325 PLANNING COMMISSION—ACTION.
    The Planning Commission shall act upon said map within the time prescribed by the Map Act. The action of the Planning Commission on all maps except those relating to condominium conversions shall be advisory and the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval or shall deny the map. In the case of maps for condominium conversions, the action of the Planning Commission shall be final unless the condominium conversion is forwarded to the City Council with recommendation for approval or conditional approval. In approving or conditionally approving said map, the Planning Commission shall find that the proposed subdivision together with provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable General or Specific plans adopted by the City of San Leandro. If no action is taken by the Planning Commission within the time limit as specified, the tentative map shall be deemed to be denied.

 

7-1-330 DENIAL.
    The Tentative Subdivision Map may be denied by the Planning Commission for any reason provided by City ordinance, resolution or the Map Act.

    The Planning Commission shall deny approval of the Tentative Map if it makes any of the following findings as set forth in Section 66474 of the Map Act:

    (a)   That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable General and Specific plans as specified in § 65451 of the Government Code.

    (b)  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable General and Specific plans.

    (c)   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development.

    (d)  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.

    (e)   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

    (f)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems.

    (g)  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.

 

7-1-335 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW.
    When a tentative map is approved or conditionally approved, the Secretary shall make a written report to the City Council. Within 10 days, or at its next succeeding regular meeting after receipt of said report the Council shall review the map and the conditions imposed by the Planning Commission. The Council shall conduct its review of the tentative map by public hearing, if the Planning Commission had conducted a public hearing on its examination of the tentative map. The Council may add, modify or delete conditions when the Council determines that such changes are necessary to insure that the tentative map conforms to zoning conditions imposed upon the property, applicable City ordinance, and the Map Act. The City Council may deny the tentative map on any of the grounds contained in Section 7-1-330. If the Council does not act within the time limits set forth in this article, the tentative map shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as set forth in the Planning Commission’s report.

 

7-1-340 EXTENSION OF TIME FOR PLANNING COMMISSION OR CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
    The time limits set forth above for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission or the City Council.

 

7-1-345 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION.
    Within 24 months after approval or conditional approval of the tentative map for a subdivision, or within any extension not exceeding 18 months granted by the City Council, the subdivider may record a final map following approval of said final map by the City Council. Any failure to record a final map within said period shall terminate all proceedings, and thereafter a new tentative map shall be submitted.

 

7-1-350 AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP—MINOR.
    Minor changes in the tentative map may be approved by the City Engineer upon application by the subdivider or on his or her own initiative, provided:

    (a)   No lots, units or building sites are added.

    (b)  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval.

    (c)   There are no resulting violations of the San Leandro Municipal Code or of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

    The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the City Engineer.

 

7-1-355 AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP—OTHER THAN MINOR.
    Amendments of the tentative map other than minor shall be presented to the Planning Commission for approval.

 

7-1-360 ALTERATION OF EXPIRATION DATE.
    Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. FINAL MAPS
7-1-400 GENERAL.
    The form, content, accompanying data, filing and approval of the final map shall conform to the provisions of this article, Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code and the Map Act.

 

7-1-405 FORM AND CONTENT.
    The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall legibly show the information required by the City Engineer, Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code and the Map Act.

 

7-1-410 FILING.
    A proposed final map including a number of copies acceptable to the City Engineer and accompanying data in a detail acceptable to the City Engineer shall be filed with the City Engineer.

 

7-1-415 SUBMITTAL BY UNITS.
    Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map, if (a) the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the Secretary of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map; or (b) after filing the tentative map, the Secretary and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. In providing such notice the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. Upon filing the first final map, the subdivider shall define the number and configuration of the proposed multiple maps, the sequence of which shall be subject to City Council approval at the time of approval of the said first final map. The sequence of map approvals may be later amended by the City Council upon request of the subdivider or the City Engineer. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement to be executed by the Subdivider shall provide for the construction of such improvements as may be required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision by units.

 

7-1-420 EXAMINATION.
    The City Engineer shall examine the final map to determine whether it conforms to the tentative map and complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this Chapter, and appropriate zoning approvals and whether all certificates which appear thereon, except for that of the City Engineer, City Clerk, County Recorder and County Clerk have been signed. If the map meets these requirements, and if all improvements have been completed or the subdivider has entered in an agreement with the City to complete all required improvements, secured by a good and sufficient improvement security, the City Engineer shall so certify and shall file the map with the City Clerk.

 

7-1-425 APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL.
    The City Council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.

 

7-1-430 DENIAL BY CITY COUNCIL.
    The City Council shall deny approval of the final map upon making any of the findings contained in Section 7-1-330 of this Chapter. The City Council shall not deny approval of the final map if it has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if it finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map.

 

7-1-435 FILING WITH THE COUNTY RECORDER.
    Upon approval of the final map by the City Council and receipt of the improvement security by the City Engineer, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the Clerk of the County Board of Supervisors for transmittal to the County Recorder. Approval shall not be final until the final map is recorded.

 

7-1-440 MODIFICATION BY CERTIFICATE OF CORRECTION.
    In addition to the amendment authorized by Section 66469 of the Map Act, after a final map is recorded, it may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map if the City Council finds, after a public hearing on the modification as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Map Act, that:

    (a)   There are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such map no longer appropriate or necessary; and

    (b)  The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property; and

    (c)   The modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and

    (d)  The map as modified conforms to the provisions of Section 66474 of the Map Act.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 5. PARCEL MAPS
7-1-500 GENERAL.
    The form and content, accompanying data, filing and approval of the parcel map, shall conform with the provisions of this Article, Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code and the Map Act.

 

7-1-505 FORM AND CONTENT.
    The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall legibly show the information required by the City Engineer, Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code, and the Map Act.

 

7-1-510 FILING.
    A reproducible tracing of the proposed parcel map, a number of prints thereof acceptable to the City Engineer, and accompanying data in detail acceptable to the City Engineer shall be filed with the City Engineer. An examination fee and/or deposit shall be paid in the amount and in accordance with resolution of the City Council. The City Engineer shall forward a copy of the Map to the City Planner for his or her examination.

 

7-1-515 REVIEW—CITY PLANNER.
    The City Planner shall examine the Parcel Map in relation to existing zoning, proposed size and location of lots, requirements of the General Plan, applicable specific plans, landscaping and planting of trees, and like considerations and shall transmit his or her findings to the City Engineer.

 

7-1-520 REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION—CITY ENGINEER.
    The City Engineer shall examine the parcel map to determine whether it complies with the requirements of this Chapter and applicable local and state laws. If the City Engineer finds that the Map complies with such requirements and after receipt of the City Planner’s report, he or she shall prepare a written report for the City Council containing his or her findings and recommendations. If the Map does not comply with such requirements, the Map and a report of the deficiencies shall be returned to the subdivider with said report. The Map may be denied for any reason provided by City ordinance, resolution, or the Subdivision Map Act.

 

7-1-525 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
    In approving the Parcel Map, the City Council may impose as conditions of filing a Parcel Map any or all (but not limited to) the following requirements:

    (a)   Frontage Improvements

    (b)  On-site Improvements

    (c) Off-site Improvements

    (d) Dedications

    (e) Applicable Fees

    (f)   A Soils and/or Engineering Geology Report

    These requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The subdivider or the engineer shall be notified in writing of all the conditions imposed.

 

7-1-530 FAILURE TO FILE COMPLETED MAP.
    If the subdivider fails to file a completed map, including any agreements, and security required, in an acceptable form to the City Engineer within twelve (12) months from the initial filing of the application, the application shall be considered withdrawn and a new application shall be required for proceedings to commence. This time period may be extended by the City Engineer upon written request of the subdivider for an additional period of up to twelve (12) months.

 

7-1-535 ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
    The City Council shall act upon said Map within sixty (60) days of the filing of a completed Map acceptable to the City Engineer unless a later time is otherwise agreed to by the City Engineer and the subdivider. The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the Map. Approval shall not be final until the Parcel Map is recorded. The Map may be denied by the City Council for any reasons provided by City ordinance, resolution or the Map Act. The City Council shall deny approval of the Map if it makes any of the findings as set forth in Section 7-1-330, herein.

 

7-1-540 FILING WITH THE COUNTY RECORDER.
    Upon approval of the parcel map by the City Council and receipt of the improvement security by the City Engineer, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map to the County Recorder.

 

7-1-545 AMENDMENTS TO THE APPROVED PARCEL MAP.
    Amendments to the approved Map or conditions of approval thereof, prior to recordation, may be approved by the City Engineer upon application by the subdivider or on the City Engineer’s initiative; provided:

    (a)   No lots, units, or building sites are added.

    (b)  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original Map approval.

    (c)   There are no resulting violations of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

    The revision shall be denoted on the approved Map and in writing to the subdivider, if appropriate. Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved Map. The City Engineer may require a new Parcel Map application in lieu of the above procedure when, in his or her opinion, requested changes are substantial enough to warrant refiling and reprocessing.

 

7-1-550 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS.
    The City Engineer may waive the Parcel Map for the following:

    (a)   Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

    (b)  A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land, or interest therein, to or from a public agency for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights of way for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.; or

    (c)   Upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this Chapter, local ordinance, and the Map Act.

    Upon waiving the Parcel Map requirement, the City Engineer shall cause to be filed with the County Recorder a “Parcel Map Waiver” for the land to be divided. A Parcel Map waived by the City Engineer may be conditioned to provide for payment of parkland, drainage, and other fees by a method approved by the City Engineer.

 

7-1-555 MODIFICATION BY CERTIFICATE OF CORRECTION.
    In addition to the amendment authorized by Section 66469 of the Map Act, after a parcel map is recorded, it may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map if the City Council finds, after a public hearing on the modification as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Map Act, that:

    (a)   There are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such map no longer appropriate or necessary; and

    (b)  The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property; and

    (c) The modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and

    (d)  The map as modified conforms to the provisions of Section 66474 of the Map Act.

 

7-1-560 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
    The City Engineer may approve a lot line adjustment, provided:

    (a)   No additional parcels or building sites have been created.

    (b)  The adjustment does not create the potential to further divide the parcels into more parcels than would have been otherwise possible.

    (c)   There are no resulting violations of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 6. SOIL REPORT
7-1-600 SOIL REPORT.
    Prior to submission of a final map for a subdivision, and prior to the approval of a Parcel Map for a division of land regulated by this Chapter, the subdivider shall file with the City Engineer a preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer registered by the State of California, based upon adequate test borings or excavations. The preliminary report may be waived if the City Engineer shall determine that, due to knowledge of the Public Works Department of the soil qualities of the subdivision, a preliminary analysis is unnecessary. Such determination shall be in writing and clearly state that the determination shall not be considered to be a warranty, express or implied, of the soils condition, insofar as subsequent bona fide purchasers or encumbrances of value are concerned.

 

7-1-605 SOIL INVESTIGATION.
    If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation applicable to those lots in the subdivision deemed necessary by the City Engineer shall be required. A report of such soil investigation shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered by the State of California, and shall be filed with the City Engineer. Such report shall recommend corrective action to prevent structural damage to buildings proposed to be constructed.

 

7-1-610 ACCEPTANCE.
    The City Engineer shall accept the soil investigation report if he or she determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to buildings proposed to be constructed. The accepted corrective action shall be incorporated in the construction of such buildings as a condition of the building permit.

 

7-1-615 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
    Subsequent to acceptance or waiver of a preliminary soil report, the City Engineer may require test borings, excavations, a soil and geologic investigation and report, or any of them, whenever in his or her opinion the same are necessary to determine the adequacy and class of a soil, or necessary to determine the safety of any proposed construction.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 7. UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
7-1-700 UNDERGROUNDING REQUIRED.
    All utility distribution facilities (including but not limited to electric, communication and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be placed underground, except the following:

    (a)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, concealed ducts, substations and facilities used to carry voltages exceeding thirty-five thousand (35,000) volts.

    (b)  Metal poles supporting only high voltage wires, street lights, and poles or standards for public emergency communication and alarms.

 

7-1-705 WAIVER.
    The subdivider or a public utility company may request that the requirements of Section 7-1-700 be waived by submitting to the Planning Commission at the time the tentative map is filed, or within ten (10) days thereafter, a written statement of the reasons in support of the waiver requested.

 

7-1-710 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
    If, at the time the Planning Commission considers a tentative map, evidence presented establishes that because of topography, soil, location or other conditions, a strict application of the requirements of Section 7-1-700 would be unreasonable or result in undue hardship to the subdivider, and that the waiver of the requirement for undergrounding, under the circumstances of the particular case, will not be detrimental to the public welfare, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that the requirement of Section 7-1-700 be waived. The recommendation of the Planning Commission, together with such conditions as the Planning Commission shall deem appropriate in connection therewith, shall be forwarded to the City Council with its report on the tentative map.

 

7-1-715 CITY ENGINEER ACTION.
    If, at the time the City Engineer considers a parcel map, evidence presented establishes that because of topography, soil, location or other conditions, a strict application of the requirements of Section 7-1-700 would be unreasonable or result in undue hardship to the subdivider, and that the waiver of the requirement for undergrounding, under the circumstances of the particular case, will not be detrimental to the public welfare, the City Engineer may recommend to the City Council that the requirement of Section 7-1-700 be waived. The recommendation of the City Engineer, together with such conditions as the City Engineer shall deem appropriate in connection therewith, shall be forwarded to the City Council with its report on the parcel map.

 

7-1-720 COMPLIANCE.
    The subdivider is responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility company involved for installation of the said facilities in compliance with the requirements of Section 7-1-700.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 8. DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
7-1-800 DEDICATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR EASEMENTS.
    As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are determined to be needed by the City Council for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; drainage; public greenways; scenic easements; public utility easements; solar easements; and other public easements; bicycle paths; and local transit facilities. In addition, as a condition of approval of a parcel map or final map, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; drainage; public utility easements; solar easements and other public easements.

    Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter.

 

7-1-805 PARK LAND DEDICATION—GENERAL.
    The park and recreational facilities for which an offer of dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this Article shall be in accordance with the General Plan or Specific Plans of the City of San Leandro.

 

7-1-810 REQUIREMENTS.
    As a condition of approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the City, for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes, according to the standards and formula contained in this Article.

 

7-1-815 GENERAL STANDARD.
    As of the effective date of this ordinance, the City devotes approximately 4.86 acres of property for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within the City, to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes. It is hereby found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that 4.86 acres per one thousand (1,000) persons is required to be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes and that this requirement shall be applied to future subdivisions.

 

7-1-820 STANDARDS AND FORMULA FOR DEDICATION OF LAND.
    Where a neighborhood and community park or recreational facility has been designated in the General Plan or in any Specific Plan adopted for a particular area of the City, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate land or, if no such designation, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of the above, in accordance with Sections 7-1-825 through 7-1-860, for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula:

    The following table based on the figure set forth in Section 7-1-815 is to be followed:

 

General Plan Density and Description

Average Persons/ d.u.

Acreage Requirement

 

 

 

Population*

1,000

X  4.86

A

1 unit/5,000 sq. ft. of land area

3.4

 

 

 

A-2

1 unit/3,500 sq. ft. of land area

3.0

 

 

 

B

1 unit/2,500 sq. ft. of land area

2.7

 

 

 

C

1 unit/1,500 sq. ft. of land area

2.3

 

 

 

D

1 unit/1,000 sq. ft. of land area

2.0

 

 

 

E

1 unit/500 sq. ft. of land area

1.6

 

  *Population = Average Persons Per Dwelling Unit multiplied by the number of dwelling units.

 

    A credit against the amount of land to be provided shall be given for any dwelling units existing within the proposed subdivision within two (2) years prior to the submittal of the tentative map. Such credit shall be determined using the above standards and formula.

 

7-1-825 FEES IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION.
    (a)   If there is no neighborhood or community park or recreational facility designated in the General Plan or any Specific Plan adopted for a particular area, to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-1-835 hereof.

    (b)  When only a portion of the land indicated in the General Plan or Specific Plan adopted for the particular area as the site for a neighborhood or community park, is within the land to be subdivided, such portion shall be dedicated for neighborhood or community park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-1-835 hereof shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 7-1-820.

 

7-1-830 SUBDIVISIONS OF 50 LOTS OR LESS.
    Section 7-1-825 to the contrary notwithstanding, if the proposed subdivision contains 50 lots or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the value of the land as prescribed for dedication in Section 7-1-820 hereof and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-1-835 hereof.

 

7-1-835 AMOUNT OF FEE IN LIEU OF PARK LAND DEDICATION/USE OF INTEREST EARNED.
    (a)   When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of park land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be equal to the value of the land which would otherwise be required less the credit given pursuant to this article. The value of land to be used in determining the amount of such fee shall be based upon the average estimated fair market value of the land being subdivided.

    The fair market value shall be the current value as determined by the City Engineer at the time of tentative map or parcel map approval. If the subdivider objects to the fair market value determination, the subdivider may request the City to obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser mutually agreed upon by the City and the subdivider, which appraisal will be considered by the City in determining the fair market value. All costs required to obtain such appraisal shall be borne by the subdivider.

    (b)  The amount of the fee in lieu of land dedication prior to application of appropriate credits, shall in no case exceed seventy-five one hundredths percent (.75%) of the total sale price of the improved lots or condominium units within the subdivision.

    (c)   The City may use the interest earned on the accumulated in-lieu fees required pursuant to this Article for the maintenance of any existing park within the City.

 

7-1-840 DETERMINATION OF LAND OR FEE.
    Whether the City accepts an offer of land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the hollowing:

    (a)   The City’s General Plan or any Specific Plan adopted for a particular area;

    (b)  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

    (c)   Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

    (d) Feasibility of dedication;

    (e) Availability of previously acquired park property.

    The determination of the City as to whether land shall be offered for dedication, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

 

7-1-845 CREDIT FOR PRIVATE RECREATION OR OPEN SPACE.
    Where a private park and/or recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, credit may be given against all or part of the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the City Council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met:

    (a)   That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space;

    (b)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions;

    (c)   That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City;

    (d)  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location;

    (e)   That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the General Plan or any Specific Plan adopted for the particular area.

 

7-1-850 CREDIT FOR PARK AND RECREATIONAL IMPROVEMENTS.
    Where a subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to dedicated land, to existing park or recreational facilities or land, or to private park or recreational areas within the subdivision as determined from the standards set forth in Section 7-1-845, the value of such improvements together with any equipment located thereon may be credited against the required dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof.

 

7-1-855 PROCEDURE.
    At the time of approval of the tentative map, the City Council shall determine, pursuant to Section 7-1-840 hereof whether land is to be dedicated or in-lieu fees are to be paid by the subdivider or any combination of land and fees.

    The action of the City Council shall include the following determinations:

    (a)   The amount of land required; or

    (b)  That a fee be charged in lieu of land; or

    (c)   That land and a fee be required; and/or

    (d)  That a stated amount of credit be given for private park or recreation areas as determined from the standards set forth in Section 7-1-845; for public or private park and recreation facilities; and/or for unique natural and special features relating to the subdivision;

    (e)   The location of the park land to be dedicated or proposed use of in-lieu fees;

    (f)   The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

    At the time of the filing of the final or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the City, provided, however, that at the option of the subdivider, the subdivider may defer the payment of fees and make incremental payment thereof at the time of the close of escrow on the sale of each dwelling unit, in an amount not less than seventy-five one hundredths percent (.75%) of the sale price of the unit. In any event, the total amount of the fee in lieu of land dedication must be paid within two (2) years of the recordation date of the final or parcel map.

    Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the City prior to approval of the final or parcel map and shall be recorded at the same time as the final or parcel map.

 

7-1-860 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
    As an alternative procedure for determining whether land is to be dedicated or in-lieu fees are to be paid by a subdivider, or any combination thereof as authorized by this Article, the City may enter into an agreement with a prospective subdivider specifying the determinations set forth in Section 7-1-855, above. The amount of land required to be offered for dedication or in-lieu fees to be charged pursuant to such agreement need not comply with the standards and formulae set forth in this Article if the City Council first makes the following findings:

    (a) The amount of land to be offered for dedication or the amount of fees to be charged or any combination thereof, is consistent with the City’s General Plan or any Specific Plan adopted for the area.

    (b)  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances relating to the proposed subdivision or the development proposed therefor that justify noncompliance with said standards and formulae.

    (c)   That the amount of land to be offered for dedication or the fees to be charged or any combination thereof, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision.

 

7-1-865 COMMENCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT.
    At the time of approval of the final map, the City shall specify when development of the park or recreational facilities shall be commenced.

 

7-1-870 USE OF MONEY.
    The money collected hereunder shall be used only for the purpose of providing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision by way of the purchase of necessary land or, if the City Council deems that there is sufficient land available for the subdivision, for developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities.

 

7-1-875 NON-APPLICABLE SUBDIVISIONS.
    The provisions of Sections 7-1-805 through 7-1-865 do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions, or to condominium projects and stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five (5) years old when no new dwelling units are added.

 

7-1-880 SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
    As a condition of approval of a final map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within a school district shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the City Council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service.

 

7-1-885 PROCEDURE.
    The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty (30) days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the City, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to sixty (60) days after the filing of the final map on any portion of the subdivision.

 

7-1-890 PAYMENTS TO SUBDIVIDER FOR SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
    The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

    (a)   The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

    (b)  The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

    (c)   Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

 

7-1-895 EXEMPTIONS.
    The provisions in Sections 7-1-880 through 890 shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten (10) years prior to the filing of the tentative maps.

 

7-1-896 RESERVATIONS.
    In addition to any requirement for dedication as set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the subdivider shall as a condition of approval of a final map, reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in Section 7-1-897.

 

7-1-897 STANDARDS FOR RESERVATION OF LAND.
    Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, public street, sewage and drainage facility, bicycle paths, transit facility, bridge necessary to provide access for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or other public use is shown on an adopted Specific Plan or adopted General Plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and parks element and/or a public building element, the subdivider may be required by the City to reserve sites as so determined by the City in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the above Specific Plan or General Plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted Specific Plan or General Plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

 

7-1-898 PROCEDURE.
    (a)   The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two (2) years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

    (b)  The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map or parcel map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.

    (c)   If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate.

 

7-1-899 WAIVER OF DIRECT STREET ACCESS.
    The City may require as a condition of approval of any subdivision the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets from any property within the subdivision and abutting thereon. Any such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions and shall be contained in the owners certificate of the final map or parcel map.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2000-08, 6/5/00 (Sections 7-1-815, 7-1-820))

 

ARTICLE 9. SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
7-1-900 IMPROVEMENTS—STANDARDS.
    Required public and private improvements shall be constructed or installed in accordance with the current compilation of documents entitled “City of San Leandro Subdivision Improvement Standards,” three copies of which have been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk or such other improvement standards deemed applicable by the City Council, and plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. Said Subdivision Improvement Standards are incorporated herein by this reference. The City Engineer is authorized and shall maintain said compilation in a current state by the removal therefrom of obsolete documents and the insertion therein of current documents, all in accordance with the best construction practices.

 

7-1-905 MAP PRESENTATION.
    No final map or parcel map shall be presented to the Council for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the City agreeing to do such work.

 

7-1-910 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
    The City Council may require as conditions of approval of the tentative or parcel map, the improvement on site and off site, of such public or private streets, highways, ways, or easements, or portions thereof, schools, parks, fire stations or other facilities as it shall deem necessary for traffic, drainage and sanitary needs and general welfare and safety; the installation and construction of railroad crossings and protection devices, sewage and storm drainage facilities, water supply, utilities (including gas, electricity, telephone and cable television, bicycle paths and transit facilities, bridges necessary to provide access for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, undergrounding of utilities, landscaping and planting of trees.

 

7-1-915 PARCEL MAPS—IMPROVEMENTS.
    Requirements for construction of onsite and offsite improvements for subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the Parcel Map.

 

7-1-920 REMAINDERS.
    Where remainders are made part of a final map or parcel map, the City may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a Remainder parcel. Said improvements shall be at the developer’s expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of the public health and safety, or the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

 

7-1-925 DESIGN.
    (a) The design and layout of all required improvements both on and offsite, private and public, shall conform to generally acceptable engineering standards and to City of San Leandro Subdivision Improvement Standards,

    (b)  The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.

    Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure and landscaping design. Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.

    In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed.

    The requirements of this section, excluding landscape design, do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added.

    For the purposes of this section, “feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

 

7-1-930 ACCESS.
    The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public or private street. Street layout shall be designed so as not to impose undue hardship upon property adjoining the subdivision. Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the City when required.

 

7-1-935 IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
    Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a Registered Civil Engineer licensed by the State of California. Improvement plans shall include but not be limited to grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities.

    (a)   Contents: The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private (including common areas). Public and private improvements shall be shown on separate plans, unless otherwise approved by City Engineer.

    Reference may be made to the City of San Leandro, Alameda County or State Standard Plans in lieu of duplicating the drawings thereon.

    (b)  Supplementary Plans and Calculations: Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the City Engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a Registered Civil Engineer licensed by the State of California and in a form as approved by the City Engineer.

    (c)   Review by the City Engineer: The subdivider shall submit improvement plans and computations to the City Engineer for review. The number of sets of copies shall be as set forth in Chapter 3 of Title 12 of the San Leandro Administrative Code. Upon completion of his or her review, one set of the preliminary plans, with the required revisions indicated thereon, will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer.

    (d)  Acceptance by the City Engineer: After completing all required revisions, the subdivider’s engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the City Engineer for his or her signature. Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable City ordinances, design review requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the City Engineer shall sign and date the public improvement plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer. Acceptance of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of any facilities under the jurisdiction of another agency.

    Acceptance by the City Engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or his or her engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design thereof or from any required conditions of approval for the tentative map.

    (e)   Revisions to Approved Plans by Subdivider: Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the City Engineer. Construction of any proposed revision shall not commence until revisions are accepted by the City Engineer.

    (f)   Revisions to Approved Plans—By City Engineer: When revisions are deemed necessary by the City Engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider and his or her engineer. The subdivider’s engineer shall revise the plans and transmit them to the City Engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the City Engineer until revised drawings have been submitted.

    The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the City Engineer to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within two (2) working days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

 

7-1-940 PLAN CHECKING AND INSPECTION COSTS FOR REVISIONS.
    Costs incurred by the City for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost.

 

7-1-945 IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT.
    Prior to the approval by the City Council of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the City, specifying the period within which he or she shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and providing that if he or she shall fail to complete such work within such period, the City may complete the same and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. The agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the City Engineer. Such agreement may also provide:

    (a)   For the construction of the improvements in subunits.

    (b)  For extension of time under conditions therein specified.

    (c)   For the financing and construction of any or all of such improvements under appropriate special assessment act proceedings, within such time as may be prescribed by the City Council.

    (d)  For deferring the construction of any improvement required and either providing for the subdivider’s payment of his or her share of the costs of such future improvements to the City or for the subdivider’s filing security in accordance with Section 7-1-950.

    (e)   For subdivider submitting to the City public liability and property damage insurance naming the City as an additional insured and in an amount deemed appropriate by the City and containing standard endorsements as required by the City.

    All utilities and public services facilities which may be the subject of the above agreement will be warranted by the subdivider for a period of one year after the acceptance of these facilities by the City Council. The repair and correction of any defects or deficiencies due to workmanship or materials which are discovered within one year from date of acceptance by the City shall be performed by the subdivider at no cost to the City.

 

7-1-950 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
    The subdivider shall also file with the improvement agreement, security in an amount deemed sufficient by the City Engineer to cover the cost of the improvements. An additional security in an amount required by law to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor and materials or equipment shall also be required.

    Such security shall be in a form acceptable to the City and of a type set forth in any of the forms of security set forth in the Map Act at the option of and subject to the approval of the City.

 

7-1-955 WARRANTY SECURITY.
    Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the City Council, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the City Engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the warranty period. The amount of the warranty security shall be as determined by the City Engineer.

 

7-1-960 REDUCTION IN PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
    The City Engineer may, upon application of the subdivider, authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses. The amount of reduction of the security shall be as determined by the City Engineer; however, an no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by this ordinance, the Map Act, or the improvement agreement.

 

7-1-965 RELEASE OF IMPROVEMENT SECURITIES.
    (a)   The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the City Council and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the City Engineer.

    (b)  Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Div. 3 of the Civil Code and after acceptance or the work, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of Which notice has been given to the City Council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given.

 

7-1-970 RELEASE OF WARRANTY SECURITY.
    The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided:

    (a)   All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected.

    (b)  Not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the City Council.

 

7-1-975 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
    When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and “as built” improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the City for acceptance. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use.

 

7-1-980 NOTICE OF COMPLETION.
    If the subdivision has been accepted by the City the City Clerk shall cause to be filed with the County Recorder a Notice of Completion.

 

7-1-985 ACCEPTANCE OF A PORTION OF THE IMPROVEMENTS.
    When requested by the subdivider in writing, the City may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the City Engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the City only if it finds that it is in the public interest. Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the Developer from any other requirements imposed by this Article.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 10. REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
7-1-1000 GENERAL.
    Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of this Article and the Map Act. This Article shall apply to final maps and parcel maps.

 

7-1-1005 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY OWNERS.
    Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the City Engineer. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 7-1-1015 and such other information as required by the City Engineer.

 

7-1-1010 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY CITY COUNCIL.
    The City Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The City Council shall direct the City Engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings.

 

7-1-1015 DATA FOR REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE.
    Petitioners shall file the following:

    (a)   Evidence of title to the real property; and

    (b)  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest(s) in the property; or

    (c)   Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two (2) years from the date the final map or Parcel Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

    (d)  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five (5) years from the date such final or Parcel Map was filed for record.

    (e)   A tentative map in the form prescribed by Section 7-1-305 or this Chapter.

    (f)   A final or parcel map in the form prescribed by Section 7-1-400 or Section 7-1-505 of this Chapter which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion.

    (g)  A fee and/or deposit in the amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid in accordance with said resolution.

 

7-1-1020 SUBMITTAL OF PETITION TO THE CITY ENGINEER.
    The final map or parcel map for the reversion together with all other data as required by this Article shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her review.

    Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this Article and the Map Act, the City Engineer shall submit the final map or parcel map, together with his or her report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the City Council for its consideration.

 

7-1-1025 CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
    A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all petitions for initiation of proceedings for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Government Code. The City Engineer may give such other notice that he or she deems necessary or advisable. The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records in writing that:

    (a)   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes and

    (b)  Either:

    (1)  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversions; or

    (2)  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two (2) years from the date the final or Parcel Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

    (3)  No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five (5) years from the date such map was filed for record.

 

7-1-1030 CONDITIONS OF REVERSION.
    The City Council may require as conditions of the reversion:

    (a)   The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements.

    (b)  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this Chapter.

 

7-1-1035 DELIVERY OF MAP.
    After the hearing before the City Council and approval of the reversion, the final or parcel map shall be delivered to the County Recorder.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 11. PARCEL MERGERS
7-1-1100 MERGERS NOT REQUIRED.
    Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of this chapter or the Map Act shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels are held by the same ownership. No further proceedings under this Chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, except as provided by this Article.

 

7-1-1105 MERGERS REQUIRED.
    If any one of two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to existing zoning regulations so as not to permit its development and at least one parcel or unit has not been developed with a building for which a building permit is required, then such parcels shall be considered as merged for the purpose of this Chapter.

 

7-1-1110 NOTICE OF MERGER.
    Whenever the City Engineer or an authorized representative has knowledge that real property has merged pursuant to this Article, they shall cause to be filed with the County Recorder a Notice of Merger. At least thirty (30) days prior to recording of notice, the owner of the parcels or units shall be advised in writing of the intention to record such notice. The notification to the owner shall specify a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence as to why the Notice of Merger should not be recorded.

    The Notice of Merger to be recorded shall specify the names of the record owners and describing the property to be merged.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 84-06, 2/21/84)

 

ARTICLE 12. VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
7-1-1200 CITATION AND AUTHORITY.
    This Article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with § 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance.

 

7-1-1205 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    It is the purpose of this Article to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this Article, the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro shall apply to the Vesting Tentative Map ordinance. To accomplish this purpose the regulations outlined in this Article are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development.

 

7-1-1210 CONSISTENCY.
    No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the City’s General Plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the San Leandro Zoning Code or applicable provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

7-1-1215 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT or RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. “Residential development” or “residential subdivision” shall mean a subdivision for construction of residences.

    (b)  VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A “Vesting Tentative Map” shall mean a “tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as defined in the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 7-1-1225, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

 

7-1-1220 APPLICATION—RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
    (a)   This Article shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof.

    (b)  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.

 

7-1-1225 FILING AND PROCESSING.
    A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:

    (a)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map”.

    (b)  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information:

    (1)  The information required under the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro for a tentative subdivision map;

    (2)  The information required under Section 7-3-644.3 of the San Leandro Zoning Code for a planned unit development;

    (3)  Complete public improvement plans, acceptable to the City Engineer, for all required work in the public right-of-way;

    (4)  Site plans, acceptable to the City Engineer, showing roadway details, sidewalk details, lighting, storm and sanitary sewers, etc.;

    (5)  Detailed grading plans; and

    (6)  Necessary geological studies.

 

7-1-1230 FILING FEES.
    Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the City Council for the filing and processing of a vesting tentative map.

 

7-1-1235 EXPIRATION OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map.

 

7-1-1240 VESTING OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS.
    (a)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code § 66474.2. However, if § 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect in the City of San Leandro at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

    (b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

    (1)  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

    (2)  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

    (c) The rights referred to in subsection (a) shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 7-1-1235. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

    (1)  An initial time period of one year beyond the date of recordation of the final map.

    Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

    (2)  The initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed.

    (3)  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) expires. If the extension as denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within fifteen (15) days.

    (4)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(3), the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.

 

7-1-1245 DEVELOPMENT INCONSISTENT WITH ZONING—CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
    (a)   Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map.

    The City shall deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or designee, obtaining the necessary change in the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the Zoning Code is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 7-1-1240(a) confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the Zoning Code and the map, as approved.

    (b)  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 7-1-1240(c).

 

7-1-1250 APPLICATIONS INCONSISTENT WITH CURRENT POLICIES.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Article, a property owner or designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in the Section 7-1-1240(a) and Section 7-1-1245 and the City may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 85-046, 12/16/85)

 

ARTICLE 13. REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
7-1-1300 SUPPLEMENTAL SIZING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
    The subdivider of any parcel or parcels of property shall construct improvements containing supplemental size, capacity, number, and length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision when determined to be necessary by the City Engineer. Such improvements shall be dedicated to the public. This Article is adopted pursuant to Government Code, Sections 66485 through 66487, inclusive.

 

7-1-1305 REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT UPON APPROVAL.
    When a subdivider is required to provide improvements of supplemental size, capacity, number or length that are in excess of the improvements necessary for the subdivision, and when such supplemental improvements benefit property not within the subdivision, then the City may, upon approval of the City Council, enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider pursuant to this Article.

 

7-1-1310 REPORT FROM CITY ENGINEER.
    Prior to the execution of a reimbursement agreement pursuant to this Article, the City Engineer shall prepare and submit to the City Council a report describing in detail the property outside the subdivision which is benefited by the supplemental improvements required by the City, and recommending apportionment of the costs of such improvements based upon the benefit to such property outside the subdivision. The recommended apportionment of costs shall be made on the basis of frontage upon such improvements, acreage served by such improvements, or any other formula rationally related to actual benefit.

 

7-1-1315 NOTICE OF APPORTIONMENT OF COSTS.
    The City shall provide notice of the Engineer’s report and recommend apportionment of costs as follows:

    (a)   Notice shall be provided to the owners of all property identified in the Engineer’s report as benefiting from the supplemental improvements, as determined on the last equalized assessment roll.

    (b)  Said notice shall state:

    (1)  That the owner’s property has been identified as benefiting from the supplemental improvements;

    (2)  The amount of costs apportioned to that owner’s property by the Engineer’s report;

    (3)  That the City may collect from the owner the amount of costs finally apportioned to the owner’s property;

    (4)  That, unless the consent of all property owners identified as benefiting from the supplemental improvements is filed with the City, a public hearing will be held to determine the final apportionment of costs;

    (5)  The time, date, and location of said hearing.

    (c)   If all affected property owners file consent to the Engineer’s apportionment of costs, no hearing shall be held and the apportionment of costs contained in the Engineer’s report shall be final.

 

7-1-1320 HEARING TO APPORTION COSTS.
    Prior to the execution of a reimbursement agreement, the City Council shall, unless consent of all affected property owners is filed with the City, hold a public hearing to determine benefits and apportion costs to each parcel of property outside the subdivision which benefits from the supplemental improvements. At said hearing, the City Council shall consider the Engineer’s report, and may adopt the report’s apportionment of benefits and costs, or the Council may adopt its own final apportionment of benefits and costs so long as said apportionment is rationally related to the benefits received by the benefiting properties.

 

7-1-1325 TERMS OF REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT.
    Any reimbursement agreement entered into pursuant to this Article shall include the following provisions:

    (a)   The City shall make reimbursement to the subdivider in an amount to be determined by the City. Said reimbursement shall be measured by the difference between the cost of improvements constructed for the subdivision developed by subdivider and the total cost of improvements constructed by subdivider.

    (b)  City shall be obligated to make reimbursements to subdivider only when and as City obtains funds from benefiting property owners as such benefiting property owners improve their property.

    (c)   Any funds paid by benefiting property owners to the City need not be paid by City to the subdivider until the limitations period has expired and no legal action has been filed for legal action to seek a refund of such funds paid under protest. In the event such court action is instituted, City shall not pay such funds to the subdivider until the court action is finally decided and the authority of the City to collect such charges has been sustained.

    (d)  The City shall have the right to turn over to the subdivider the defense of any action by a benefiting property owner seeking refund of amounts paid under protest. If the subdivider fails to undertake the defense of the action at subdivider’s own expense, the City may stipulate to a return of the funds to said benefiting property owner, and the City shall not be further obligated to subdivider as to any such funds so refunded. In the event a court action is maintained to prevent the City from collecting funds from benefiting property owners, the City shall have the right to turn over to subdivider the defense of that action, and subdivider shall agree to hold the City harmless from any and all liability thereunder. In the event the subdivider fails to undertake defense of the action at subdivider’s sole expense, the City may stipulate to cease collecting such funds, or enter into any other settlement of the litigation acceptable to the City, and subdivider shall lose any right to reimbursement under the reimbursement agreement.

    (e)   The reimbursement agreement shall provide for reimbursement of all funds without interest, unless the Council otherwise determines. Under no circumstances shall the City be deemed liable for any funds not collected from benefiting property owners.

 

7-1-1330 METHODS OF PAYING COSTS.
    In order to pay the costs provided for in the reimbursement agreement, the City may:

    (a)   Collect from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use.

    (b)  Contribute to the subdivider that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision, upon a determination by the City that it is in the public interest so to do. The City shall thereafter levy a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse itself for such cost, together with interest thereon, paid to the subdivider.

    (c)   Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge of costs from the property benefited.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 91-013, 9/3/91 (Sections 7-1-1300—7-1-1330))

CHAPTER 7-2 RESERVED

CHAPTER 7-3 STREET NUMBERING
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
7-3-100 UNIFORM NUMBERING PLAN.
    The public interest, safety, welfare, and convenience require the establishment of a numbering system of street and road addresses, in a uniform plan for the City of San Leandro, said plan shall be in agreement with the Alameda County Property Numbering system adopted by Ordinance No. 288 N.S. of the County of Alameda on the 11th day of July, 1957, and being Chapter 4 of Title 5 of the Alameda County Ordinance Code.

 

7-3-105 SAN LEANDRO PORTION—ALAMEDA COUNTY PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM.
    The City Council of the City of San Leandro, hereby establishes a numbering system of street and road addresses for this City in accordance with the Alameda County Property Numbering System which shall be known as the San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Numbering System, which shall be effective within the City of San Leandro.

 

7-3-110 BASE LINES—SAN LEANDRO PORTION—ALAMEDA COUNTY PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM.
    The San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Numbering System shall consist of base lines, lying either within or without the limits of this City, from which property numbers shall be established, said property numbers to progress in an increasing magnitude in easterly and westerly and southerly directions generally in accordance with the distance from the base lines.

 

7-3-115 MAPS—SAN LEANDRO PORTION—ALAMEDA COUNTY PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM.
    The San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Numbering System shall consist of a map of said City or portion thereof adopted under Section 7-3-150 upon which map said base lines may be shown or designated and by index lines indicate the principal locations at which major units of the numbering system shall commence, and such other maps shall be prepared and maintained as shall be necessary to designate the numbers and locations of numbers assigned to particular buildings and lands under said System. All maps constituting any portion of the San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Numbering System shall have a legend endorsed thereon stating that said maps constitute a portion of said System.

 

7-3-120 MAINTENANCE OF NUMBERING SYSTEM.
    Upon the establishment of said System or portions thereof, said System shall be continued, enforced, operated, and maintained within this City by the office, persons, or department designated by resolution of this Council, and property numbers assigned within the City shall be done in accordance with said System.

 

7-3-125 DETERMINATION OF PROPER NUMBERS.
    For purposes of determining the proper number of a particular location, said number shall be proportional to the distances between the numbers next adjacent to the location on either side or the major unit line or lines if no numbers have been previously established on adjoining properties. For purposes of determining whether a number shall be odd or even, it is determined that odd numbers shall be on the right hand side of the street or road, and even numbers on the left hand side of the street or road in the direction of increasing magnitude of numbers. Where existing numbers have been established prior to this ordinance and the odd and even numbers exist in a reverse order on the sides of the street or road, said reversed order of odd and even number location shall remain as it presently exists unless changed according to law and shall continue for any extension of the street or road.

 

7-3-130 DESIGNATION OF “STREETS” OR “ROADS”.
    No street or road crossing any of said base lines of said System, where the numbering along said street or road shall originate from the intersected base line, shall be known by the same name on both sides of said base line unless said street or road shall be adequately designated by a prefix or suffix indicating a principal compass direction to denote the position of the street or road in relation to the base line (i.e., West Avenue 100, East Avenue 100, Northwest 200th Street, Southeast 200th Street). From and after the effective date of this ordinance any public street, road, or way established, or any of same offered in dedication for public use or any private street or roadway established shall be named in accordance with the following:

    All streets, roads, and ways running generally northerly and southerly (i.e., roughly parallel to the shores of San Francisco Bay) to be known as “streets” or roads”.

    All streets, roads and ways running generally easterly and westerly (i.e., roughly at right angles to the shores of San Francisco Bay) shall be known as “avenues” or “ways”.

    All streets, roads, and ways running in a variable, curving or winding directions shall be known as “drives” or “lanes”.

    All cul-de-sac or dead ends, not a continuation of any of the above shall be known as “courts” or “places”.

    Major arterial routes through the City may be known as “boulevards, parkways, freeways or throughways”.

    All streets, roads and ways shall be known by the same name for its entire length and whether a street, road or way shall change direction by ninety degrees (90°) or a lesser angle, each direction shall be known by a different name, provided that where such exists on the effective date of this ordinance such name may continue to exist provided there shall be no further extension of said street, road or way.

 

7-3-135 DISPLAY OF NUMBERS.
    The office, persons, or department designated to establish, continue, operate and maintain said Numbering System shall give notice to the occupants or owners of land or building which are assigned or reassigned numbers under said System, which notice shall contain the old number, the new number, or the number reassigned to a particular building or parcel of land, and the date on which the new number shall become effective. Within ten (10) days of the effective date of said notice of number assigned or reassigned, the occupants or owners of said property or buildings shall cause the number to be displayed upon the building or land in such manner as to be visible from the street or road upon which the land or building fronts, and shall remove or obscure from public view any old or previous number not in accordance with said System, provided that in rural areas where buildings are removed a considerable distance from any public street or road, or where rural free delivery of mail is provided, said number may be displayed upon receptacles designed for the delivery of mail. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the display of a property number in accordance with said System upon any road or driveway leading to buildings removed a substantial distance from the public road or street upon. which the subject site abuts.

 

7-3-140 CHANGE OF STREET NUMBERS.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the person owning or occupying any premises the street number of which has been changed in accordance with law, shall publicly display both the old street number and the new street number of a period of ninety (90) days from and after the effective date of any such change.

 

7-3-145 ADOPTION OF NUMBERING SYSTEM.
    The adoption of the San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Numbering System shall in no way affect the legal description of property by lot and block numbers or by metes and bounds.

 

7-3-150 BASE AND INDEX LINE REFERENCE.
    The base and index lines hereinbefore mentioned in Section 7-3-115 hereof are delineated upon the map entitled “GENERAL PLAN of the City of San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Numbering System,” filed in the office of the City Clerk on the 7th day of October, 1957 and the map entitled, “Amendment to the GENERAL PLAN of the San Leandro Portion of the Alameda County Property Number System” filed in the office of the City Clerk on the 26th day of November, 1957, which maps and all notations and other information thereon are hereby made a part of this Chapter by reference.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance 1087 N.S. 10/15/57; Ordinance No. 1104 N.S., 12/16/57; Ordinance No. 1177 N.S., 12/8/58; Ordinance No. 78-54, 11/6/78)

CHAPTER 7-4 HOUSE NUMBERS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
7-4-100 GENERAL.
    All entrances from public streets of the City of San Leandro to buildings shall be numbered as hereinafter provided. Each figure of said numbers shall be at least three (3) inches in height and of corresponding width and shall be so placed as to be visible from the street. The appropriate number of any entrance to any building shall be placed thereon within ten (10) days after the receipt by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or sub-tenant of such building of a notice from the Public Works Director of the number or numbers designated for such building; and all numbers other than the number provided for in this Chapter for the respective entrances shall be removed from every building by the owners, occupants, lessees, tenants, or sub-tenants thereof within ten (10) days from the service of said notice designating the appropriate numbers to be placed thereon. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to designate the respective numbers for buildings fronting on streets heretofore laid out or hereafter to be laid out or extended.

 

7-4-105 SYSTEM OF NUMBERING.
    The system or numbering shall be the one shown upon that certain map entitled, “Map of the City of San Leandro, California House Numbers” which said map is hereby adopted.

 

7-4-110 DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS.
    Upon the completion of a building or buildings or alterations thereto changing entrances, it shall be unlawful for the owners, agents, occupants, tenants, lessees, or sub-lessees to assign or place any number thereon unless the same shall have been officially designated by the Public Works Director for such designation of numbers.

 

7-4-115 INCORRECT NUMBERS.
    In cases wherein incorrect numbers have been placed and remain or shall hereafter be placed on any house or building, the owner, agent, occupant, lessees, tenants, or sub-tenants shall, upon notification by the Public Works Director, correct the number within ten (10) days after official notification.

 

7-4-120 UNNUMBERED HOUSES.
    In cases where a house remains unnumbered or where a house may have been numbered and the number since lost or destroyed or defaced as to be unidentifiable, the owner, agent, etc., shall cause said house to be numbered in accordance with the official notification of the Public Works Director within ten (10) days.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 369 N.S.)

CHAPTER 7-5 BUILDING CODE
ARTICLE 1. BUILDING CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 1, Building Code, derived from Ordinance Nos. 85-027, 8/19/85; 89-027, 1/2/90; 90-012, 6/18/90; 92-019, 9/8/92; 92-020, 9/8/92; 94-028, 12/19/94; 95-023, 11/6/95; 99-010, 6/21/99; 2002-011, 9/16/02; 2003-016, 11/17/03; 2004-002, 2/17/04; 2007-002, 11/5/07; 2010-013, 11/15/10 and 2013-009, 11/18/13, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2016-014, 12/5/16.

 

7-5-100 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the “2016 California Building Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, as published by the International Council Commission, is hereby adopted as the “Building Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Building Standards Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Residential Building Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

 

7-5-105 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

    Chapter 1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended and adopted, and shall be known as the “City of San Leandro Building Code,” as follows:

 

CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION

 

SECTION 101 GENERAL

 

101.1 Title.

 

 

 

These regulations shall be known as the City of San Leandro Building Code, hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”

 

101.2 Scope.

 

The provisions of this Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances or systems connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

 

101.2.1 Appendices.

 

Provisions in the appendices can be approved for use by the Building Official.

 

101.3 Purpose and Intent.

 

The purpose of this Code is to establish minimum standards to safeguard public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating the design, structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, construction, installation, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location, energy conservation and maintenance of all buildings, structures, and certain equipment as specifically set forth herein and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. Consistent with this purpose, the provisions of this Code are intended and always have been intended to confer a benefit on the community as a whole and are not intended to establish a duty of care toward any particular person.

 

This Code shall not be construed to hold the City of San Leandro or any officer, employee or agent thereof responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection authorized herein or by reason of the issuance or non-issuance of any permit authorized herein, and/or for any action or omission in connection with the application and/or enforcement of this Code. By adopting the provisions of this Code, the City does not intend to impose on itself, its employees or agents any mandatory duties of care toward persons and property within its jurisdiction so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages.

 

This Section is declaratory of existing law and is not to be construed as suggesting that such was not the purpose and intent of previous Code adoptions.

 

101.4 Referenced Codes.

 

The other Codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7 and referenced elsewhere in this Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

 

101.4.1 Electrical.

 

The provisions of the San Leandro Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.

 

101.4.2 Gas.

 

The provisions of the San Leandro Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.

 

101.4.3 Mechanical.

 

The provisions of the San Leandro Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.

 

101.4.4 Plumbing.

 

The provisions of the San Leandro Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system.

 

101.4.5 Property maintenance.

 

The provisions of the San Leandro Property Maintenance Code shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.

 

101.4.6 Fire prevention.

 

The provisions of the San Leandro Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, automatic sprinkler systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

 

101.4.7 Energy.

 

The provisions of the California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

 

101.4.8 California Green Building Code.

 

The provisions of the California Green Building Code (CGBC) as published by the California Building Standards Commission shall apply to matters affecting or relating to planning, design, operation, construction, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure. The purpose of which is to encourage sustainable construction practices in the following categories: planning and design, energy efficiency, water efficiency and conservation, material conservation and resource efficiency and environmental quality. A copy of the CGBC shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk.

 

SECTION 102

APPLICABILITY

 

102.1 General.

 

Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.

 

102.2 Other laws.

 

The provisions of this Code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.

 

 

102.3 Application of references.

 

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this Code.

 

102.4 Referenced codes and standards.

 

The Codes and Standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and referenced Codes and Standards, the provisions of this Code shall apply.

 

102.5 Partial invalidity.

 

In the event that any part or provision of this Code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.

 

102.6 Existing structures.

 

The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this Code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this Code, the San Leandro Existing Building Code or the San Leandro Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the Building Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.

 

SECTION 103

DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SAFETY

 

103.1 Creation of enforcement agency.

 

The Division of Building and Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.

 

 

103.2 Appointment.

 

The Building Official shall be appointed by the City Manager.

 

103.3 Deputies.

 

In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Building Official shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Building Official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the Building Official.

 

SECTION 104

DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL

 

104.1 General.

 

The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. The Building Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code.

 

104.2 Applications and permits.

 

In order to verify compliance with any applicable laws the Building Official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this Code.

 

When an application for demolition of a structure is applied for and the Building Official has cause to believe that the structure may have historical significance, the application may be referred to the Library-Historical Commission for a determination of eligibility.

 

For the purpose of determining historical significance, any structure built prior to 1940 is presumed to be potentially significant.

 

An application for a demolition permit may be denied by the Building Official if the issuance of the permit would result in the destruction in whole or part of a historical resource.

 

104.3 Notices and orders.

 

The Building Official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Code.

 

104.4 Inspections.

 

The Building Official shall make all of the required inspections, or the Building Official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Building Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.

 

104.5 Identification.

 

The Building Official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Code.

 

104.6 Right of entry.

 

Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Code, or where the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this Code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

 

104.6.1 Right of entry, exigent circumstances emergency procedures.

 

If the Building Official or an authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that the conditions constitute an immediate hazard to human life or the public welfare the Building Official shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, the Building Official shall first present credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection.

 

“Authorized representative” shall include the officers named in Subsection 103.3 and their authorized inspection personnel.

 

No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made upon such person as provided in this subsection, to promptly permit the Building Official or an authorized representative to make any inspection provided for by this section. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

104.7 Department records.

 

The Building Official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records.

 

104.8 Liability.

 

The Building Official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this Code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Code shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code.

 

104.9 Approved materials and equipment.

 

Materials, equipment and devices approved by the Building Official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

 

104.9.1 Used materials and equipment.

 

The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this Code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the Building Official.

 

104.10 Modifications.

 

Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Code, the Building Official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the Building Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Division of Building and Safety Services.

 

104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

 

The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this Code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

 

104.11.1 Research reports.

 

Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this Code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.

104.11.2 Tests.

 

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this Code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Building Official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this Code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the Building Official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Building Official for the period required for retention of public records.

 

SECTION 105

PERMITS

 

105.1 Required.

 

Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit.

 

105.1.1 Unpermitted Structures.

 

No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any “Unpermitted Structure.”

 

For the purposes of this Code, “Unpermitted Structure” shall be defined as any structure, or portion thereof, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, converted, demolished, or equipped, at any point in time, without the required permit(s) and approvals having first been obtained from the Building Official.

 

105.2 Work exempt from permit.

 

Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

 

Building:

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11 m2).

2.     Fences not over 7 feet (2.13m) high when located in the rear yard setback area as defined in the Zoning Code.

3.     Oil derricks.

4.     Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1.22 m) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

6.     Sidewalks, platforms and driveways not more than 30 inches (0.76 m) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route.

7.     Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, counter tops and similar finish work in R-3 occupancies.

8.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (0.61 m) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.

10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.

13.   Non fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1.75 m) in height.

14.   A tree house provided that:

 

It does not exceed 64 square feet (5.95 m2) in area or more than 15 ft. (4.57 m) in height and is accessory to a detached one- or two-family dwelling.

 

The structure does not encroach into the setback requirements established by the City of San Leandro Zoning Code Section 2-546.

 

105.3 Application for permit.

 

To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the Division of Building and Safety for that purpose. Such application shall:

1.     Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

2.     Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

3.     Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

4.     Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in Section 107.

5.     State the valuation of the proposed work.

6.     Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.

7.     Give such other data and information as required by the Building Official.

 

105.3.1 Action on application.

 

The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Building Official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

 

105.3.2 Time limitation of application.

 

An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the Building Official may extend the time for action based on petition by the applicant detailing circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which have prevented action from being taken. Additional extensions for periods not exceeding 180 days may be authorized. Extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

 

105.4 Validity of permit.

 

The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The Building Official is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this Code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. The Building Official may grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

105.5 Expiration.

 

Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Building Official may grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee and permit fee.

 

105.6 Suspension or revocation.

 

The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code.

 

105.7 Placement of permit.

 

The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project.

 

SECTION 106

RESERVED

 

SECTION 107

CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

 

107.1 Submittal documents.

 

Construction documents, statement of special inspections and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

 

Exception: The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Code.

 

107.1.1 Information on construction documents.

 

Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the Building Official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the Building Official.

 

107.1.1.1 Fire protection system shop drawings.

 

Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this Code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.

 

107.1.2 Means of egress.

 

The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this Code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

 

107.1.3 Exterior wall envelope.

 

Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this Code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.

 

The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.

 

107.2 Site plan.

 

The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The Building Official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

 

107.3 Examination of documents.

 

The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this Code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.

 

107.3.1 Approval of construction documents.

 

When the Building Official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be marked, in writing or by stamp, with “REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE.” These are the official plans reviewed by the City of San Leandro for building permit purposes. They are required to be on the job, available to the Building Official or duly authorized representative at all times. One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the Building Official.

 

107.3.2 Previous approvals.

 

This Code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this Code and has not been abandoned.

 

 

107.3.3 Phased approval.

 

The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this Code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.

 

107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.

 

107.3.4.1 General.

 

When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the Building Official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The Building Official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.

 

The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.

 

Where structural observation is required by Section 1704, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1705).

 

107.3.4.2 Deferred submittals.

 

For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the Building Official within a specified period.

 

Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the Building Official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the Building Official.

 

Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the Building Official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the Building Official.

 

107.4 Amended construction documents.

 

Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.

 

107.5 Retention of construction documents.

 

One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.

 

SECTION 108

TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES

 

108.1 General.

 

The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The Building Official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

 

108.2 Conformance.

 

Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this Code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare.

 

108.3 Temporary power.

 

The Building Official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the Electrical Code.

 

108.4 Termination of approval.

 

The Building Official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

 

 

SECTION 109

FEES

 

109.1 Payment of fees.

 

A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.

 

Fees shall be assessed for permits and associated plan review in accordance with the fee schedule established by the San Leandro City Council as set forth in Chapter 4 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

109.2 Permit fees.

1.     General: Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

2.     Permit Fees: The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in this section. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment.

3.     Plan Review Fees: When submittal documents are required by Section 107.1, a plan review shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be eighty percent (80%) of the building permit fee as set forth in the applicable fee schedule resolution adopted by the City Council.

        The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 108.2(b) and are in addition to the permit fees.

        When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.2, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in the fee schedule.

4.     Expiration of Plan Review: Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The Building Official may grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

        In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

5.     Investigation Fees—Work Without a Permit:

(a)    Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation may, in the sole discretion of the Building Official be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

(b)    Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the building permit fee required by this Code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth by the City Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code or from any penalty prescribed by law.

(c)    Penalty. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Article has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, the Building Official may impose a penalty for said action in an amount equal to three (3) times the amount of the building permit fee as set forth in the applicable fee schedule resolution adopted by the City Council. Payment of any penalty imposed shall be a condition precedent to issuance of a building permit.

6.    Fee Refunds:

(a)    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

(b)    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.

(c)    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.

(d)    The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment.

 

SECTION 110

INSPECTIONS

 

110.1 General.

 

Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the City. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the City shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Building Official nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

 

110.2 Preliminary inspection.

 

Before issuing a permit, the Building Official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed.

 

110.3 Required inspections.

 

The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.10.

 

110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection.

 

Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms and flood vent openings shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job.

 

110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.

 

Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

 

110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation.

 

In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the Building Official.

 

110.3.4 Frame inspection.

 

Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing including plumbing for residential fire sprinklers, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved.

 

110.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection.

 

Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

 

110.3.6 Fire-resistant penetrations.

 

Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

 

110.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections.

 

Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Title 24, Part 6 and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency, and by outside inspection agencies for required HERS testing.

 

110.3.8 Other inspections.

 

In addition to the inspections specified above, the Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and other laws that are enforced by the division of building and safety services.

 

110.3.9 Special inspections.

 

For special inspections, see Section 1704.

 

110.3.9.1 Residential fire sprinkler final inspection.

 

Inspection shall be made to determine compliance with the San Leandro Residential Code 2016 Edition Section R313.3 or NFPA 13D 2016 Edition “Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes.”

 

110.3.10 Final inspection.

 

The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed.

 

110.4 Inspection agencies.

 

The Building Official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.

 

110.5 Inspection requests.

 

It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the Building Official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this Code.

 

110.6 Approval required.

 

Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Building Official. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building Official.

 

SECTION 111

CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

 

111.1 Use and occupancy.

 

No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.

 

111.2 Certificate issued.

 

After the Building Official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this Code or other laws that are enforced by the Division of Building and Safety, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

1.     The building permit number.

2.     The address of the structure.

3.     The name and address of the owner.

4.     A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

5.     A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this Code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

6.     The name of the Building Official.

7.     The edition of the Code under which the permit was issued.

8.     The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.

9.     The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.

10.   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required.

11.   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.

12.   The design occupant load.

 

111.3 Temporary occupancy.

 

The Building Official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The Building Official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.

 

111.4 Revocation.

 

The Building Official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this Code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code.

 

SECTION 112

SERVICE UTILITIES

 

112.1 Connection of service utilities.

 

No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this Code for which a permit is required, until released by the Building Official.

 

 

112.2 Temporary connection.

 

The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power.

 

112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities.

 

The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this Code and the Codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.

 

SECTION 113

BOARDS OF APPEALS

 

113.1 General.

 

In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Building Board of Appeals.

 

The Board shall consist of three members, each of whom shall be qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, and shall include an Architect, a Civil Engineer and a licensed General Contractor, as well as two alternates who shall be Architects or Civil Engineers.

 

The Building Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to the Board. The members of the Building Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The Building Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business.

 

113.2 Scope of authority.

 

Except as provided below, the Building Board of Appeals shall have the authority to hear appeals regarding any action of the Building Official.

 

The Building Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative portions of this Code, other than Section 116, nor shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of this Code. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.

 

The Building Board of Appeals shall document all decisions and findings in writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the applicant.

 

113.3 Accessibility Appeals Board.

 

In order to conduct the hearings on written appeals regarding action taken by the Building Official and to ratify certain exempting actions of the Building Official in enforcing the accessibility requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations for privately-funded construction, to serve as an advisor to the Building Official on disabled access matters, there shall be an Accessibility Appeals Board as established and provided for in Section 19957.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. The Accessibility Appeals Board shall consist of five members. Two members of the appeals board shall be physically disabled persons; the remaining three members shall be the members of the Building Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to the Board.

The Appeals Board may approve or disapprove interpretations and enforcement actions taken by the Building Official. All such approvals or disapprovals shall be final and conclusive as to the Building Official in the absence of fraud or prejudicial abuse of discretion. The Board shall adopt regulations establishing procedural rules and criteria for the carrying out of its duties.

 

113.4 Housing Rehabilitation Appeals Board.

 

There shall be a Housing Rehabilitation Appeals Board as defined by Section 19957.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. The Housing Rehabilitation Appeals Board shall be comprised of the same members as the Building Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex officio nonvoting member and act as Secretary.

 

113.5 Building Code Enforcement Appeals Board.

 

In order to conduct the hearings provided for in Government Code Section 54988, there shall be a Building Code Enforcement Appeals Board. The Building Code Enforcement Appeals Board shall be comprised of the same members as the Building Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex officio nonvoting member and act as Secretary.

 

113.6 Fees.

 

A fee as set forth in Chapter 4 of the San Leandro Administrative Code shall be paid to the Building Official whenever a person requests a hearing before the appeals boards provided for in this Section.

 

Exception: No fee shall be required for a hearing requested pursuant to Section 116.

 

 

SECTION 114

VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

 

114.1 Compliance with Code.

 

It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, connect, convert, demolish, equip, or perform any other work on any building or structure or portion thereof, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this Code.

 

114.2 Violation.

 

It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this Code.

 

114.3 Notice of violation.

 

The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the property owner for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

 

114.3.1 Service.

 

The notice shall be served upon the record owner, in the manner hereinafter stated, and posted conspicuously on the property. The failure of the Building Official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceeding hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person or any duty or obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this section.

Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of the mailing.

 

114.4 Penalty.

 

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, (one thousand dollars) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this Section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions, penalties or costs which are or may be imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this Code.

 

114.5 Recordation of Violation.

 

114.5.1 General.

 

The Building Official may record a notice with the County Clerk Recorder’s Office that a property, building, or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of this Code provided that the provisions of this Section are complied with. The remedy provided by this Section is cumulative to any other enforcement actions permitted by this Code.

 

114.6 Recordation.

 

If:

(1)    The Building Official determines that any property, building, or structure, or any part thereof is in violation of any provision of this Code; and if

(2)    The Building Official gives written notice as specified below of said violation; the Building Official may have sole discretion to, at any time thereafter, record with the County Clerk Recorder’s Office a notice that the property and/or any building or structure located thereon is in violation of this Code.

 

114.7 Notice.

 

The written notice given pursuant to this Section shall indicate:

1.     The nature of the violation(s); and

2.     That if the violation is not remedied to the satisfaction of the Building Official, the Building Official may, at any time thereafter, record with the County Clerk Recorder’s Office a notice that the property and or any building or structure located thereon is in violation of this Code. The notice shall be posted on the property and shall be mailed to the owner of the property as shown on the most current County Assessment roll. The mailed notice may be by registered certified or first-class mail.

 

114.8 Appeals.

 

Any person served a notice or interested parties under Section 114.3.1 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the Building Official by filing a written appeal therefrom at the office of the Building Official within ten (10) days from the date of service of such notice and order. The written appeal request shall include, at a minimum, the names and addresses of all appellants, a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the land or building involved in the notice and order, a brief statement of the specific order protested and a brief statement of the relief sought and the reasons therefor.

 

On receipt of such appeal, the Building Official shall set the matter for hearing before the Building Board of Appeals. Notice of the date, hour and place of hearing shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing in the manner and upon the person specified in Section 114.3.1. The notice of hearing shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard to appear and show just cause, why the building or portion thereof involved in the proceedings should not be repaired, vacated or demolished.

 

114.9 Rescission.

 

Any person who desires to have recorded a notice rescinding the notice of violation must first obtain the necessary approvals and permit(s) to correct the violation. Once the Building Official determines that the work covered by such permit(s) has been satisfactorily completed, the Building Official may record a notice rescinding the prior notice of violation.

 

Following the recordation of the notice of violation the Building Official is not required to make any inspection or review of the premises to determine the continued existence of the cited violation. It is the responsibility of the property owner, occupant or other similarly interested private party to comply with the above provisions.

 

114.10 Costs.

 

Any person that violates any provision of this Code shall be responsible for the costs of any and all Building Code enforcement actions taken by the Building Official in response to such violations. These costs shall be based on the amounts specified in the San Leandro Administrative Code, Title 6 Chapter 4, including but not limited to any attorneys’ fees and costs.

 

SECTION 115

STOP WORK ORDER

 

115.1 Authority.

 

Whenever the Building Official finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Building Official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

 

115.2 Issuance.

 

The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.

 

115.3 Unlawful continuance.

 

Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

 

SECTION 116

UNSAFE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, EQUIPMENT AND UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS

 

116.1 Scope.

 

This section contains special processes and appeal procedures to be followed for buildings, structures, equipment and unoccupied buildings that are considered to be unsafe. All unsafe conditions constitute a hazard to the health, safety and public welfare of the community.

 

116.2 Definitions.

 

116.3 Unsafe Building and Structures.

 

All buildings or structures which are structurally unsound or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster damage, or abandonment as specified in this Code or any other effective ordinance, are, for the purposes of this chapter, unsafe buildings.

 

116.3.1 Unoccupied Building.

 

Unoccupied Building as used in this chapter shall be a building or structure that is not properly secured, locked or closed and is accessible to juveniles and transients and is a health, fire or safety hazard to the adjacent community.

 

116.3.2 Structures and Equipment.

 

Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the Building Official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.

 

116.3.3 Property owner.

 

Property owner as used in this Chapter shall be the last person shown on the most current County assessment roll.

 

116.3.3.1 Person in Charge.

 

Person in charge as used in this Chapter shall be the person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved.

 

 

116.3.4 Abandonment.

 

Abandonment as used in this chapter shall be the cessation of use and maintenance.

 

116.3.5 Declaration of an unsafe building.

 

Whenever the Building Official determines by inspection that a building or structure, whether structurally damaged or not, is dangerous to human life by reason of being located in an area which is unsafe due to hazard from landslide, settlement, or slippage or any other cause, such building shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, be considered an unsafe building.

 

No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any unsafe building.

 

All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In addition to instituting any appropriate action to prevent, restrain or correct a violation of this section, the Building Official may abate an unsafe condition by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.

 

116.4 Notice of Unsafe Building.

 

The Building Official may examine or cause to be examined any building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and if, in the Building Official’s opinion, such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this Chapter, the Building Official shall give to the property owner written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises to immediately commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof and all such work shall be completed within a specified time or date stipulated by the Building Official. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements be completed, inspected and approved by the Building Official.

 

The Building Official shall serve or cause to be served either in the manner required by law for the service of summons or by first class mail, postage prepaid or by posting a copy, the notice of hearing upon the property owner.

 

In the event the Building Official, after reasonable effort, is unable to serve the notice as specified above, proper service shall be by posting on the structure a copy of the notice.

 

The designated period within which the owner or person in charge is required to comply with such notice shall begin as of the date the owner or person in charge receives such notice by personal service or registered or certified mail. If such notice is by posting, the designated period shall begin ten days following the date of posting.

 

The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.

 

A person notified to vacate an unsafe building by the Building Official shall vacate within the time specified in the order.

 

The Building Official may file with the County Clerk Recorder’s Office a declaration that the building described has been inspected and found to be an unsafe building, as defined in this Chapter, and that the owner thereof has been so notified. After all required work has been completed; the Building Official shall file with the County Clerk Recorder’s Office a properly executed form terminating the above declaration.

 

116.5 Order to secure buildings or structures.

 

When the Building Official determines that any unoccupied building or structure is not properly secured, locked, or closed and is accessible to juveniles and transients, and is a health, fire, or safety hazard to the adjacent community, the Building Official shall be authorized to serve the property owner with an order to secure or close the same forthwith so as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto.

 

116.6 Posting of Signs.

 

The Building Official shall cause to be posted on buildings required to be vacated or remain unoccupied a notice to read substantially as follows: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. Building Official, City of San Leandro.” Such notice shall be posted at the main entrance and shall be visible to persons approaching the building or structure from a street. Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the Building Official and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolition of the building.

 

116.7 Unsafe Buildings, Structures, Equipment and Unoccupied Buildings: Hearing.

 

116.7.1 Right of hearing.

 

The property owner or the Building Official may request a hearing before the Building Board of Appeals. The request by the property owner shall be made in writing to the Building Official within 10 days of the date of the notice. The Building Official shall request a hearing prior to demolition, repair or securing of an unsafe building by the City except when such demolition, repair or securing is done under the emergency procedure set forth in this Chapter. Interested parties who desire to be heard may appear before the Building Board of Appeals to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered repaired, vacated, secured or demolished.

 

 

116.7.2 Notice of hearing.

 

Not less than ten days prior to the hearing, the Building Official shall serve or cause to be served either in the manner required by law for the service of summons or by first class mail, postage prepaid or by posting as per Section 116.7.4 a copy of the notice of hearing upon the property owner.

 

116.7.3 Form and contents of notice.

 

The notice of hearing shall state:

1.     The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building or structure is located.

2.     The conditions upon which the Building Official believes that the building, structure, equipment or unoccupied building is unsafe.

3.     The date, hour and place of the hearing.

 

116.7.4 Posting of notice.

 

The Building Official shall post one copy of the notice of hearing in a conspicuous place on the unsafe building, structure, equipment or unoccupied building involved, not less than ten days prior to the hearing.

 

116.7.6 Hearing by Building Board of Appeals.

 

The Building Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing and consider all competent evidence offered by any person pertaining to the matters set forth in the report of the Building Official.

 

The Building Board of Appeals shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the building or structure is an unsafe building as defined in this Chapter.

 

 

116.7.7 Order.

 

If the Building Board of Appeals finds that the building, structure, equipment or unoccupied building is an unsafe building, it shall make an order based on its finding that:

1.     The building, structure, equipment or unoccupied building is unsafe and directing that repairs be made and specifying such repairs, or

2.     The building, structure, equipment or unoccupied building is unsafe and directing that it be vacated and that specified repairs be made, or

3.     The building, structure, equipment or unoccupied building is unsafe and directing that it shall be vacated and demolished.

 

The order shall state the time within which the work required must be commenced after the service of the order. The order shall state a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. The Building Official for good cause, may extend the time for completion in writing.

 

The order shall be served upon the same parties and in the same manner as required by Section 116.7.2 for the notice of hearing. It shall also be conspicuously posted on or about the building or structure.

 

116.7.8 Work by the City: Unsafe Buildings, Structures, Equipment and Unoccupied Buildings: Demolition or Repair and Securing.

 

If the repairs, securing or demolition actions necessary to remove the unsafe condition as set forth in the Notice of Unsafe Building are not made within the designated period and a hearing has not been requested by the property owner, the Building Official shall request that a hearing be held regarding the unsafe condition.

 

If the findings of the Building Board of Appeals are not complied with in the period designated by the Board, the Building Official may then demolish, secure or repair such portions of the structure, or may cause such work to be done, to the extent necessary to eliminate the hazard determined to exist by the Building Board of Appeals. The costs of demolition, security, repair, or any work to the extent necessary to eliminate the hazard shall be charged to and a responsibility of the property owner. Failure to make payment shall subject the property to lien for the costs unpaid.

 

116.7.8.1 Emergency procedure.

 

Whenever any portion of a structure constitutes an immediate hazard to life or property, and in the opinion of the Building Official, the conditions are such that repairs, securing or demolition must be undertaken within less than the designated period, the Building Official may make such alterations or repairs, secure or demolish such portions of the structures as are necessary to protect life or property, or both, after giving such notice to the property owner as the circumstances will permit or without any notice whatever when, in the Building Official’s opinion, immediate action is necessary.

 

116.7.8.2 Costs.

 

The costs involved in Sections 116.7.8 and 116.7.8.1 of such demolition, securing or repair, including the entire cost of the services rendered by the City, shall be subject to lien for nonpayment after reasonable demands for payment against the property upon which the structure stands. The Building Official shall notify, in writing, the property owner of the amount of the costs resulting from such work. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such notice, the property owner may file with the Building Official a written request for a hearing.

 

The Building Board of Appeals thereupon shall set the matter for hearing; give such property owner notice thereof as provided in Section 116.7.2; hold such hearing and determine the reasonableness or correctness of the assessment, or both; and if requested, determine the necessity of the demolition or repairs. The Building Board of Appeals, in writing, shall notify the property owner of its decision.

 

116.7.8.3 Recordation of costs.

 

If the total costs determined as provided for in this section are not paid in full within 45 days after receipt of such notice from the Building Official or the Building Board of Appeals, as the case may be, the Building Official shall record in the office of the Clerk Recorder a statement of the total balance still due and a legal description of the property. From the date of such recording, such balance due shall be a lien against the parcel.

 

The lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary County taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary County taxes. All the laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of County taxes shall be applicable to such lien.

 

116.7.8.4 Interference prohibited.

 

A person shall not obstruct, impede, or interfere with the Building Official or any representative of the Building Official, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any unsafe building which has been ordered by the Building Board of Appeals to be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished or removed, whenever the Building Official or such owner is engaged in repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such unsafe building pursuant to this Chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant hereto.

 

 

116.7.8.5 Prosecution.

 

In case the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove said building or structure or portion thereof, the Building Official shall cause the owner of the building to be prosecuted as a violator of this Code.

 

7-5-110 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-115 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-130 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS OVER PUBLIC PROPERTY.
    Pedestrian walkways over public property shall be subject to the approval of the City. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, sidewalk arcades on public property in an established redevelopment project area need not be considered as adjacent buildings for the provisions of this Chapter, provided that the arcades are of not less than one hour fire resistive construction or are constructed entirely of noncombustible materials, fire retardant treated wood or heavy timber construction with two-inch (2″) nominal sheathing, or a combination of the above materials.

 

7-5-135 RESERVED.
 

7-5-140 TABLE R602.10.3(3) BRACING REQUIREMENTS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY OF CRC CHAPTER 6 (WALL CONSTRUCTION).
    Table R602.10.3(3) Bracing Requirements Based on Seismic Design Category) of CRC Chapter 6 (Wall Construction) is amended as follows:

    Add a new “f” footnote notation to the end of CRC Table R602.10.3(3). To read:

 

f.      In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2, Method GB is not permitted and the use of Method PCP is limited to one-story single-family dwellings and accessory structures.

 

    Add the “f” footnote notation in the title of Table R602.10.3(3) to read:

 

        TABLE R602.10.3(3)f

 

    Subsection R602.10.4.4, to read:

 

R602.10.4.4 Limits on methods GB and PCP. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2, Method GB is not permitted for use as intermittent braced wall panels, but gypsum board is permitted to be installed when required by this Section to be placed on the opposite side of the studs from other types of braced wall panel sheathing. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2, the use of Method PCP is limited to one-story single-family dwellings and accessory structures.

 

7-5-145 MULTIPLE HAZARDS: OUTDOOR STORAGE.
    (a)   When a hazardous material has multiple hazards, all hazards shall be addressed and controlled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. When overhead noncombustible construction is provided for sheltering exterior hazardous material storage areas, such storage shall not be considered indoor storage when all of the following conditions are met:

    (1)  Supports shall be of noncombustible construction.

    (2)  Supports and walls shall not obstruct more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the perimeter of the storage area.

    (3)  The distance to buildings, property lines, streets, alleys, public ways or exits to a public way shall not be less than the distance required for an exterior hazardous material storage area without weather protection.

 

7-5-150 SIDEWALK ARCADES IN REDEVELOPMENT AREA.
    In an established Redevelopment Project Area, the Redevelopment Agency may approve the installation of sidewalk arcades on public property. Except for vertical columns, such arcades shall be not less than eight feet (8′) above the pavement below.

 

7-5-155 NONCOMBUSTIBLE CONSTRUCTION.
    Section 414.6.1.3 of the Code is added to read as follows:

 

414.6.1.3 Non-combustible construction. The overhead structure shall be of approved noncombustible construction with a maximum area of 3,000 square feet (140m2).

 

7-5-160 MODIFICATIONS TO 2016 CBC AND ASCE 7.
    Section 1612.3 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows.

 

1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for City of Leandro, California,” revision dated August 9, 2009, as amended, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this Section.

 

    Section 1613.6 is added to read as follows:

    1613.6 ASCE 7, 12.2.3.1, Exception 3. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.2.3.1 Exception 3 to read as follows:

 

3.     Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height of light frame construction.

 

7-5-165 CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION.
    Section 1705.3 of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition is amended as follows:

 

1705.3 Concrete Construction. The special inspections and tests of concrete construction shall be performed by this section and Table 1705.3.

 

Exception: Special inspection shall not be required for:

1.     Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less in height that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 MPa).

2.     Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock where:

2.1.  The footings support walls of light-frame construction;

2.2.  The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7; or

2.3.  The structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 MPa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the approved construction documents or used in the footing construction.

3.     Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground, including pre-stressed slabs on grade, where the effective pre-stress in the concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 MPa).

4.     Concrete foundation walls constructed in accordance with Table 1807.1.6.2.

5.     Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.

 

7-5-170 STRUCTURAL OBSERVATIONS FOR SEISMIC RESISTANCE.
    Section 1704.6.1 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code is amended by adding new item 6 and exception to read as follows:

 

6.     Structural observations of the lateral system shall be provided for all new commercial, industrial, and multifamily buildings and all new single-family dwelling on hillsides.

 

Exception: Structural observations of the lateral system may be waived for one- and two-story wood residential structures when such structures are in full compliance with conventional light frame construction of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code or the California Residential Code.

 

7-5-175 SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS.
    Sections 1803.8, 1803.9 and 1803.10 are added to the 2016 California Building Code to read:

 

1803.8 Review. Before issuing a permit for a building where soil and foundation investigation is required, the Geotechnical Engineer or Civil Engineer in responsible charge of the soil investigation shall state in writing (must be signed and stamped):

1.     The plans and specifications substantially conform to the recommendations in the soil investigation.

2.     The Geotechnical Engineer or Civil Engineer in responsible charge of the soil investigation has been retained to provide soil site observation and provide periodic and final reports to the city.

 

1803.9 Field Report. Before requesting a foundation inspection from the City, the Geotechnical Engineer or Civil Engineer in responsible charge of the soil investigation shall provide a written field report stating:

1.     The building pad was prepared and compacted in accordance with the soil report and specification.

2.     The foundation or pier excavation, depth, backfill materials, and drainage (if applicable), substantially conforms with the soil report and approved plans.

      

1803.10 Final Report. Before final inspection for any building or structure, the Geotechnical Engineer or Civil Engineer in responsible charge of the soil investigation shall issue a final report stating the completed pad, foundation, finish grading, drainage, and associated site work substantially conforms to the approved plans, specifications, and investigation.

 

7-5-180 CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS.
    Section 1807.1.6 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

 

7-5-185 MODIFICATIONS TO ACI 318.
    Section 1905.1 is amended to read as shown below and Sections 1905.1.9 through 1905.1.11 is added to Chapter 19 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code:

 

The last paragraph of Section 1905.1.2 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

All special moment frames and special structural walls shall also satisfy 18.2.4 through 18.2.8. Concrete tilt-up wall panels classified as intermediate precast structural wall system shall satisfy 18.10.1 in addition to 18.5.2.1 and 18.5.2.2 for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

 

    1905.1.7 ACI 318, Section 14.1.4 Delete ACI 318, Section 14.1.4 and replace with the following:

 

14.1.4 – Plain concrete in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.

 

14.1.4.1 – Structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:

(a)    Isolated footing of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.

        Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height, the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported member is permitted to exceed the following thickness.

(b)    Plain concrete footing supporting walls are permitted, provided the footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars shall not be smaller than No.4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. A minimum of one bar shall be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement shall be provided at corners and intersections.

 

    Sections 1905.1.9 through 1905.1.11 are added as follows:

    1905.1.9 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.7.5, by adding Section 18.7.5.8 and 18.7.5.9 as follows:

 

18.7.5.8 Where the calculated point of contra-flexure is not within the middle half of the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1, Items (a) through (c), over the full height of the member.

 

18.7.5.9 At any section where the design strength, φPn, of the column is less than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318 Sections 18.6.5.1 and 18.7.6.1.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level under consideration, transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite sides of the column, the moment components are permitted to be assumed to be of opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, φPn, of the column, these moments are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the frame in any one principal axis.

 

    1905.1.10 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.10.4, by adding Section 18.10.4.6 to read as follows:

 

18.10.4.6 – Walls and portions of walls with Pu > 0.35Po shall not be considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the requirements of ACI 318 Section 18.14.

 

    1905.1.11 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.12.6.2, as follows:

 

18.12.6.2 Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) or 6 db in thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the topping slab.

 

7-5-190 CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION.
    Section 4.3.4 of SDPWS 2015 Edition is amended as follows:

    Delete rows 5 and 6 of Table 4.3.4.

    Section 2306.3 of the California Building Code, 2016 is amended as follows:

 

2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall be permitted. The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC SDPWS. Shear walls sheathed with Portland cement plaster, gypsum lath, gypsum sheathing or gypsum board shall not be used to resist seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic design Category D, E or F.

 

    Section 2308.6.8.1 of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition is amended as follows:

 

2308.6.8.1 Foundation Requirements. Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations.

 

Exceptions:

1.     One-story buildings with maximum plan dimension not exceeding 50 feet (15240 mm), may have continuous foundations located at exterior braced wall lines only.

2.     Two-story buildings with a maximum plan dimension not exceeding 50 feet (15240 mm) may have braced wall lines supported on continuous foundations at the exterior walls only, provided:

a.     Cripple walls do not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm) in height.

b.     Where the first story is supported on a raised wood framed floor, the interior braced wall panels are directly supported by either doubled joists, continuous 4x blocking or minimum 4x floor beams.

 

7-5-195 REPAIRS.
    Title 24, California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Section 404 is amended as follows

    Sections 404.2.4 through 404.2.4.2 and Tables 404.2.4.1 and 404.2.4.2 are added as follows:

 

404.2.4 Seismic Evaluation and Design Procedures for Repairs. The seismic evaluation and design shall be based on the procedures specified in the California Building Code, ASCE 31 Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings (for evaluation only) or ASCE 41 Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings. The procedures contained in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code shall be permitted to be used as specified in Section 3405.5.1.1.3.

 

404.2.4.1 Compliance with CBC level seismic forces. Where compliance with the seismic design provisions of the California Building Code is required, the procedures shall be in accordance with one of the following:

1.     One-hundred percent of the values in the California Building Code. Where the existing seismic force-resisting system is a type that can be designated as “Ordinary,” the values of R, Ωo, and Cd used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the California Building Code shall be those specified for structural systems classified as “Ordinary” in accordance with Table 12.2-1 of ASCE 7, unless it is demonstrated that the structural system will provide performance equivalent to that of a “Detailed,” “Intermediate” or “Special” system.

2.     Compliance with ASCE 41 using both BSE-1 and BSE-2 earthquake hazard levels and the corresponding performance levels in Table 404.2.4.1.

 

TABLE 404.2.4.1 - Please see attachment A

 

PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR CBC LEVEL SEISMIC FORCES

 

404.2.4.2 Compliance with reduced CBC level seismic forces. Where seismic evaluation and design is permitted to meet reduced California Building Code seismic force levels, the procedures used shall be in accordance with one of the following:

1.     The California Building Code using 75 percent of the prescribed forces. Values of R, Ωo, and Cd used for analysis shall be as specified in Section 3405.2.4.1 Item 1.

2.     Structures or portions of structures that comply with the requirements of the applicable chapter in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code as specified in Items 2.1 through 2.5 below shall be deemed to comply with this section.

2.1.  The seismic evaluation and design of unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A1.

2.2.  Seismic evaluation and design of the wall anchorage system in reinforced concrete and reinforced masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A2.

2.3.  Seismic evaluation and design of cripple walls and sill plate anchorage in residential buildings of light-frame wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A3.

2.4.  Seismic evaluation and design of soft, weak, or open-front wall conditions in multiunit residential buildings of wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A4.

2.5.  Seismic evaluation and design of concrete buildings in all Occupancy Categories are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A5.

3.     Compliance with ASCE 31 based on the applicable performance level as shown in Table 404.2.4.2. It shall be permitted to use the BSE-1 earthquake hazard level as defined in ASCE 41 and subject to the limitations in item 4 below.

4.     Compliance with ASCE 41 using the BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level defined in ASCE 41 and the performance level as shown in Table 404.2.4.2. The design spectral response acceleration parameters Sxs and Sx1 specified in ASCE 41shall not be taken less than 75 percent of the respective design spectral response acceleration parameters SDS and SD1 defined by the California Building Code and its reference standards.

 

TABLE 404.2.4.2 - Please see attachment B

 

PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR REDUCED CBC LEVEL SEISMIC FORCES

 

404.3.1 Referenced Standards

 

Standard Reference Number

Title

Referenced In Code Section Number

ASCE 31-03

Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings

404.2.4.1, TABLE 404.2.4.1, 404.2.4.2, TABLE 404.2.4.2

ASCE 41-06

Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings

404.2.4.1, Including Supplement No. 1 TABLE 404.2.4.1, 404.2.4.2, TABLE 404.2.4.2

 

    404.3.1 Lateral force-resisting elements are hereby deleted.

 

7-5-200 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY: SEISMIC.
    Section 407 is amended as follows.

 

407.1 Conformance. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any building unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the California Building Code for the use or occupancy. Changes in use or occupancy in a building or portion thereof shall be such that the existing building is no less complying with the provisions of this code than the existing building or structure was prior to the change. Subject to the approval of the building official, the use or occupancy of existing buildings shall be permitted to be changed and the building is allowed to be occupied for purposes in other groups without conforming to all of the requirements of this code for those groups, provided the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use.

 

407.1.1 Change in the character of use. A change in occupancy with no change of occupancy classification shall not be made to any structure that will subject the structure to any special provisions of the applicable California Codes, without approval of the building official. Compliance shall be only as necessary to meet the specific provisions and is not intended to require the entire building be brought into compliance.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-014, 12/5/16)

 

ARTICLE 2. EXPEDITED STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
7-5-205 DEFINITIONS.
    (a)   A “solar energy system” means either of the following:

    (1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

    (2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

    (b)  A “small residential rooftop solar energy system” means a solar energy system which meets all of the following criteria:

    (1)  Is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

    (2)  Conforms to all applicable State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, and all State and City health and safety standards.

    (3)  Is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

    (4)  Contains a solar panel or module array that does not exceed the City’s maximum legal building height.

    (c)   “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    (1)  Email;

    (2)  The Internet;

    (3)  Facsimile.

    (d)  “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

    (e)   “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

    (f)   “Significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

    (1)  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an increase in the cost of the system as originally proposed exceeding the lesser of ten percent (10%) or One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or a decrease in the efficiency of the solar energy system as originally proposed by more than ten percent (10%).

    (2)  For photovoltaic systems: an increase in the cost of the system as originally proposed exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or a decrease in system efficiency exceeding ten percent (10%).

 

7-5-210 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of the Article is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems that complies with the requirements of State law.

 

7-5-215 APPLICABILITY.
    (a)   This Article applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City.

    (b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article are not subject to the requirements of this Article unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.

 

7-5-220 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
    (a)   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the State and the City.

    (b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

    (c)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

 

7-5-225 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
    (a)   All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the City’s publicly accessible website.

    (b)  Applicants may submit the required permit application and documents in person at the City’s permit center or via electronic submittal.

    (c)   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

    (d)  The City’s Building Official shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

    (e)   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

    (f)   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951.

 

7-5-230 PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
    (a)   The City’s Building Official shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The Building Official shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit as soon as practical upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the Building Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

    (b)  The Building Official’s review of the application shall be limited to review of whether the application meets all local, State, and Federal health and safety requirements.

    (c)   If a use permit is required, the Building Official may deny an application for the use permit only if the Building Official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

    (d)  Any condition imposed on an application by the Building Official shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

    (e)   A “feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City, on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The City shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation does not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

    (f)   If an application is deemed incomplete, the Building Official shall send the applicant a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

    (g)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building and Safety Services Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

    (h)  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. To the extent possible, an inspection shall be scheduled within five (5) business days of a request and provide a two (2) hour inspection window.

    (i)   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized and the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this Article.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2015-013, 10/19/15 (Sections 7-5-205—7-5-230))

 

ARTICLE 3. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 3, Uniform Housing Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 85-027, 8/19/85; 89-027, 1/2/90; 92-021, 9/8/92; 95-025, 11/6/95; 99-012, 6/21/99; 2002-13, 9/16/02; 2007-025, 11/5/07 and 2013-011, 11/18/13, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2016-015, 12/5/16.

 

7-5-300 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the “California Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition” is amended and that certain document entitled “2015 International Property Maintenance Code,” published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the “Property Maintenance Code of the City of San Leandro.” However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the International Property Maintenance Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

7-5-305 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-310 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-315 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-320 FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

7-5-325 SUBSTANDARD BUILDING—CONDITIONS.
    Any building or portion thereof including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall have deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building:

    (a)   Inadequate sanitation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    (1)  Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, or bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit.

    (2)  Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel.

    (3)  Lack of, or improper kitchen sink.

    (4)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.

    (5)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit.

    (6)  Lack of adequate heating.

    (7)  Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment.

    (8)  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this Code.

    (9)  Room and space dimensions less than required by this Code.

    (10) Lack of required electrical lighting.

    (11) Dampness of habitable rooms.

    (12) Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents as determined by the Health Officer.

    (13) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.

    (14) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.

    (15) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the Health Officer.

    (b)  Structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    (1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.

    (2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.

    (3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

    (4)  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical support that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

    (5)  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

    (6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceilings and roof supports, or other horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

    (7)  Members of ceiling, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

    (8)  Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration.

    (9)  Fireplaces or chimneys that are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety.

    (c)   Any nuisance.

    (d)  All wiring, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation if it is currently in good and safe condition and working properly.

    (e)   All plumbing, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and that has been maintained in good condition, or that may not have conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation but is currently in good and safe condition and working properly, and which is free of cross connections and siphonage between fixtures.

    (f)   All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition, or which may not have conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation but is currently in good and safe condition and working properly.

    (g)  Faulty weather protection, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    (1)  Deteriorated, crumbling, or loose plaster.

    (2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors.

    (3)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering.

    (4)  Broken, rotted, split, or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.

    (h)  Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which, in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department or deputy, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause.

    (i)   All materials of construction, except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this Code, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.

    (j)   Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rodent harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health, or safety hazards.

    (k)  Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building due to inadequate maintenance, in accordance with the Building Code.

    (l)   All buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this code, except those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy.

    When an unsafe condition exists through lack of, or improper location of, exits, additional exits may be required to be installed.

    (m) All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this Code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy.

    (n)  All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking, or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies.

    (o)  Inadequate structural resistance to horizontal forces.

    However, a condition which would require displacement of sound walls or ceilings to meet height, length, or width requirements for ceilings, rooms, and dwelling units shall not by itself be considered sufficient existence of dangerous conditions making a building a substandard building, unless the building was constructed, altered, or converted in violation of such requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration, or conversion.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2016-015, 12/5/16)

 

ARTICLE 4. MECHANICAL CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 4, Mechanical Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 85-027, 8/19/85; 89-027, 1/2/90; 90-012, 6/18/90; 92-022; 95-026, 11/6/95; 99-013, 6-21/99; 2002-14, 9/16/02; 2007-026, 11/5/07, 2010-015, 11/15/10, 2013-012, 11/18/13 and 2016-016, 12/5/16, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-400 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the 2016 “California Mechanical Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4 as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials is hereby adopted as the “Mechanical Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Mechanical Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Mechanical Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

7-5-405 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-410 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-415 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-420 FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

ARTICLE 5. ELECTRICAL CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 5, National Electrical Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 85-027, 8/19/85; 89-027, 1/2/90; 92-023, 9/8/92; 95-027, 11/6/95; 99-014, 6/21/99; 2002-15, 9/16/02; 2005-018, 10/17/05; 2007-027, 11/5/07, 2010-016, 11/15/10, 2013-013, 11/18/13 and 2016-017, 12/5/16, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-500 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the 2016 “California Electrical Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3 as published by BNI Publications, Inc., is hereby adopted as the “Electrical Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Electrical Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Electrical Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

7-5-505 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-510 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-515 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-520 FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

ARTICLE 6. GREEN BUILDING CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 6, Electrical—General Provisions, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 85-027, 8/19/85; 92-024, 9/8/92; 95-028, 11/6/95; 99-015, 6/21/99; 2002-16, 9/16/02; 2005-019, 10/17/05; 2007-028, 11/5/07, 2010-017, 11/15/10, 2013-014, 11/18/13 and 2016-018, 12/5/16, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-600 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the “California Green Building Standards Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, as published by the International Council Commission, is hereby adopted as the “Green Building Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Green Building Standards Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Green Building Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

7-5-605 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-610 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-615 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-620 FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

ARTICLE 7. ENERGY CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 7, Electrical—Procedure, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 92-025, 9/8/92; 95-029, 11/6/95; 99-016, 6/21/99; 2002-17, 9/16/02; 2005-020, 10/17/05, 2007-029, 11/5/07, 2013-015, 11/18/13 and 2016-019, 12/5/16. , was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-700 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the 2016 “California Energy Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6 as published by the International Council Commission, is hereby adopted as the “Energy Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Energy Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Energy Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

7-5-705 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-710 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-715 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-720 FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

ARTICLE 8. FIRE CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 8, Building Conservation Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 99-017, 6/21/99; 2002-18, 9/16/02; 2007-030, 11/5/07, 2010-018, 11/15/10, 2013-016, 11/18/13, and 2019-017, 11/4/19 was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-018, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-800 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereafter specifically set forth, the “California Fire Code https://codes.iccsafe.org/content/CAFC2019/cover, 2019Edition,” published by the International Code Council with Sections 101, 103, 104.6, 108, 109.4, 112, and Appendix Chapter D is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code http://qcode.us/codes/othercode.php?state=ca&code=gov, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code https://www.dgs.ca.gov/BSC/Codes results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code http://qcode.us/codes/othercode.php?state=ca&code=heasaf Section 17958.7, express findings that modification to the California Building Standards Code http://qcode.us/codes/othercode.php?state=ca&code=calbuista are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Fire Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk fifteen (15) days prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Fire Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the City of San Leandro City Clerk.

 

7-5-810 AMENDMENTS.
101.1 Title–Amended.

 

These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of San Leandro, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

103.2 Appointment–Amended.

 

The fire code official shall be appointed by the fire chief serving the City of San Leandro.

 

104.6 Official records–Amended.

 

The City of San Leandro shall keep official records as required by Sections 104.6.1, 104.6.2, and 104.6.4. Such official records shall be retained for not less than five years or for as long as the structure or activity to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided by other regulations.

 

104.6.1 Approvals.

 

A record of approvals shall be maintained by the City of San Leandro Building Department and shall be available for public inspection during business hours in accordance with applicable laws.

 

104.6.2 Inspections.

 

The City of San Leandro Building Department shall keep a record of each inspection made, including notices and orders issued, showing the findings and disposition of each.

 

104.6.3 Fire records.

 

The fire department shall keep a record of fires occurring within the City of San Leandro and of facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby.

 

105.1.2 Types of permits–Amended.

 

There shall be two types of permits as follows:

1.     Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section 105.6 until said permit is revoked by the fire department.

2.     Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by Section 105.7.

 

106.2 Schedule of permit fees–Amended.

 

Fees shall be assessed for permits and associated plan review in accordance with the fee schedule established by the City of San Leandro City Council as set forth in Title 6 of Chapter 4 of the City of San Leandro Administrative Code.

106.5 Refunds–Amended.

 

Shall be in accordance with the provisions in Section 109 of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

109.4.1 Abatement of violation.

 

In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy or a structure on or about any premises.

 

110.4 Violation penalties–Amended.

 

Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

 

903.2.1.1 Group A-1–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-1 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.     The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.     The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

4.     The Fire area contains a multi-theater complex.

5.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

903.2.1.2 Group A-2-Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-2 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2).

2.     The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.

3.     The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

4.     The structure exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2), contains more than one fire area containing a Group A-2 occupancy, and is separated into two or more buildings by fire walls of less than 4-hour fire –resistance rating without openings.

5.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

903.2.1.3 Group A-3–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas contain Group A-3 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.     The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.     The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

4.     The structure exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2), contains more than one fire area containing exhibition and display rooms, and is separated into two or more buildings by fire walls of less than 4-hour fire-resistance rating without openings.

 

903.2.1.4 Group A-4–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-4 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.     The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.     The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exist discharge serving such occupancies.

4.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

903.2.3 Group E–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows:

1.     Throughout all Group E fire areas greater than 7,500 square feet (697 m2) in area.

2.     Throughout every portion of educational buildings below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that portion of the building.

Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not required in any area below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that area where every classroom throughout the building has not fewer than one exterior exit door at ground level.

3.     In rooms or areas with special hazards such as laboratories, vocational shops and other areas where hazardous materials in quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable quantity are used or stored.

4.     Throughout any Group E structure greater than 7,500 square feet (69 m2) in area, which contains more than one fire area, and which is separated into two or more buildings by fire walls of less than 4-hour fire-resistance rating without openings.

5.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

6.     For public school state-funded construction projects see Section 903.19.

 

903.2.4 Group F-1–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.     A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above the grade plane.

3.     The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 7500 square feet (697 m2).

4.     A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2).

5.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet in area (232 m2) that generate finely divided combustible waste or use finely divided combustible materials. [SFM] A fire wall of less than 4-hour fire-resistance rating without openings, or any fire wall with openings, shall not be used to establish separate fire areas.

 

903.2.7 Group M–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     A Group M fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.     A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.

3.     The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

4.     A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2).

5.     [SFM] The structure exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2), contains more than one fire area containing a Group M occupancy, and is separated into two or more buildings by fire walls of less than 4-hour fire-resistance rating without openings.

6.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

903.2.7.1 High-piled storage–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as required in Chapter 32 in all buildings of Group M where storage of merchandise is in high-piled or rack storage arrays.

 

903.2.9 Group S-1–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.     A Group S-1 Fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.

3.     The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet (2230 m2).

4.     A Group S-1 Fire area used for the storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).

5.     A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2).

6.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

 

903.2.9.1 Repair garages.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with Section 406.8 of the California Building Code, as shown:

1.    Buildings having two or more stories above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

2.    Buildings not more than one story above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

3.    Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements.

4.    A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2).

 

903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires.

 

Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 20,000 cubic feet (566 m3) shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

 

903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages–Amended.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 of the California Building Code where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds 7,500 square feet (697m2).

2.     Where then enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups.

3.     When the overall height of the building exceeds 45 feet.

 

 

903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2).

 

903.2.13 Group B Occupancies.

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in Group B occupancies where the floor area exceeds 7,500 square feet (697 m2).

 

903.6 Where required in existing buildings and structures-Amended.

 

The provisions of this section are in addition to those requirements set forth in Chapter 11. Fire sprinklers shall be installed in existing commercial occupancies when any of the following exist:

1.     Permits for additions and alterations increase the floor area by 25 percent.

2.     Whenever an addition is made to an existing building causing the total square footage of the building to exceed 7,500 square feet (697 m2). The entire building shall be equipped with sprinklers.

3.     When a change in occupancy or use to more hazardous occupancy type occurs, the structure will be required to meet the requirements as set forth for new construction for the new occupancy classification.

In residential occupancies, fire sprinklers shall be installed when there is an addition that result in the square footage exceeding 3600 square feet (334 m2) including any attached U occupancies or garages.

 

5003.2.4.2 Above-ground tanks-Amended with the addition of the following sentence:

 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, above-ground stationary tanks used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids is prohibited in any area zoned for other than commercial, industrial, or agricultural use.

 

5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited-Amended with the addition of the following sentence:

 

Storage is prohibited in areas designated as residential within the San Leandro city limits.

 

5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited–Amended with the addition of the following sentence:

 

Storage is prohibited in areas designated as residential within the San Leandro city limits.

 

5806.2 Limitations-Amended with the addition of the following sentence:

 

Storage is prohibited in areas designated as residential within the San Leandro city limits.

 

6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits-Amended with the addition of the following sentence:

 

Storage is prohibited in areas designated as residential within the San Leandro city limits.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-018, 10/21/19)

 

ARTICLE 9. PLUMBING CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 9, Plumbing Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 85-027, 8/19/85; 89-027, 1/2/90; 92-025, 9/8/92; 92-031, 9/21/92; 95-030, 11/6/95; 99-018, 6/21/99; 2002-19, 9/16/02; 2007-031, 11/5/07, 2010-019, 11/15/10, 2013-017, 11/18/13 and 2016-020, 12/5/16, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-900 ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the 2016 “California Plumbing Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5 as published by the

IAPMO publishes Parts 4 and 5, is hereby adopted as the “Plumbing Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Plumbing Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Plumbing Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

7-5-905 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-910 REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-915 BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-920 FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

7-5-930 SHUTOFF VALVES.
    Section 1208.10.1 shall be added to the California Plumbing Code as follows:

 

1208.10.1     Earthquake-Actuated Gas Shutoff Valves. Earthquake-actuated gas shutoff valves, certified conforming to California Referenced Standard Section 12-16-1, shall be provided:

a.     On all new construction utilizing gas.

b.     On any project utilizing gas, which the value of the project exceeds $10,000.00.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

ARTICLE 10. SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Article 10, Safety Assessment Placards, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 95-031, 11/6/96; 99-019, 6/21/99 and 2002-20, 9/16/02, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2007-032, 11/5/07.

 

7-5-1000 INTENT.
    This Article establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for con-tinued occupancy. The Article further authorizes the Building Official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.

 

7-5-1005 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
    The provisions of this Article are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of San Leandro.

 

 

7-5-1010 DEFINITIONS.
    Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy.

 

7-5-1015 PLACARDS.
    (a)   The following are verbal descriptions of the official placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures.

    (1)  Inspected—Lawful Occupancy Permitted to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

    (2)  Restricted Use is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note, in general terms, the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

    (3)  Unsafe—Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the Building Official or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note, in general terms, the type of damage encountered.

    (b)  Once attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the Building Official.

    (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this Article.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-032, 11/5/07 (Sections 7-5-1000—7-5-1015))

 

ARTICLE 10A. RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 10A, Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 89-027, 1/2/90, 92-028, 9/8/92, 2002-032, 12/9/02 and 2016-021, 12/5/16, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

7-5-1000A ADOPTION.
    Except as hereinafter specifically set forth, the “California Residential Code,” California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5, as published by the International Council Commission, is hereby adopted as the “Residential Building Code” of the City of San Leandro. However, in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4, no penalty clauses are adopted by reference. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Residential Building Standards Code has been on file with the San Leandro City Clerk since fifteen (15) days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this Article. While this Article is in force, a true copy of the California Residential Building Code shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the San Leandro Building Division.

 

    Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria

 

Table R301.2(1)

Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria (Please see Attachment A)

7-5-1005A ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
    Enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in the San Leandro Building Code or Articles 11, 12, and 13 of this Chapter shall apply to this Article.

 

7-5-1010A REFERENCED STANDARDS AND APPENDICES.
    Referenced Standards and Appendices in this Code are not adopted, but authorized for use by the Building Official.

 

7-5-1015A BOARD OF APPEALS.
    The Board of Appeals created under Section 7-5-113 of the San Leandro Building Code shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board shall function as described in said section of the San Leandro Building Code.

 

7-5-1020A FEES.
    All fees shall be determined in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 109 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2019-017, 11/4/19)

 

ARTICLE 11. ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURE—ADMINISTRATIVE
Note
*Editor’s Note: Article 11, Enforcement and Abatement Procedure—Administrative, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 84-027, 1/7/85; 85-027, 8/19/85; 92-019, 9/8/92; 95-032, 11/6/95; 99-020, 6/21/99 and 2002-21, 9/16/02, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2007-033, 11/5/07.

 

7-5-1100 ENFORCEMENT.
    The City Manager is hereby designated and charged with the enforcement of all provisions of this Chapter.

    The City Manager shall designate a Building Official within the Community Development Department and appoint such number of officials, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. He or she may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the Building and Safety Services Division.

    The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other monies collected and reviewed under this Code, the names of the person upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof and the location of the building or premises to which they relate.

 

7-5-1105 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter, or whenever the Building Official or his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe, the Building Official or his/her authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by this Chapter; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and demand entrance; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the Building Official or his/her authorized representative shall have recourse through every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

 

7-5-1110 STOP ORDERS.
    Whenever any building work is being done contrary to provisions of this Chapter, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work.

 

7-5-1115 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
    All buildings or structures which are unsafe as defined in Section 7-5-240(e), or which are substandard as defined in the Housing Code, or which are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing uses constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, neglect, decay, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article 2 of this Chapter and as hereinafter set forth.

 

7-5-1120 NOTICE AND ORDER—CONTENTS.
    Whenever the Building Official determines by inspection that any building or portion thereof constitutes a public nuisance as defined in Section 7-5-1115, he/she shall initiate proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, or demolition thereof. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building which notice and order shall contain:

    (a)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

    (b)  A statement that the Building Official has found the building to constitute a public nuisance and a brief and concise description of the condition found to render the building a public nuisance as defined in Section 7-5-1115.

    (c)   A statement of the action necessary to correct such conditions, and if the conditions cannot be corrected by repair and the building must be demolished, the reasons why the conditions cannot be corrected by repair; if the Building Official has determined that the building must be vacated, the order shall state the date by which the building is to be vacated.

    (d)  A statement that the required work must be commenced within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice and order or a longer period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the sole determination of the Building Official, as set forth in the order, such longer period is found to be necessary and appropriate and a statement that such work must be completed within such time as the Building Official shall determine is reasonable.

    (e)   A statement advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced within the time specified, the Building Official (i) will order the building vacated and post it to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and (ii) may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the cost thereof against the property or its owner.

    (f)   A statement advising that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order of the Building Official, in the manner set forth in Section 7-5-1210 within ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice and order. Failure to appeal within ten (10) days of the date of service of notice and order shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.

 

7-5-1135 SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDER OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
    The notice and order shall be served upon the record owner, in the manner hereinafter stated, and posted conspicuously on the property. One copy thereof shall also be served on each of the following: the holder of any known mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance or record; the owner or holder of any lease of record and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in the building or the land upon which it is located. The failure of the Building Official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceeding hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person or any duty or obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this section.

    Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of the mailing.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-033, 11/5/07 (Sections 7-5-1100—7-5-1135))

 

ARTICLE 11A. RESERVED
Note
(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 90-04, 2/20/90; Ordinance No. 90-05, 3/19/90; Ordinance No. 90-022, 12/17/90; Ordinance No. 92-029, 9/8/92; Ordinance No. 95-033, 11/6/95 (Sections 7-5-1100A—7-5-1165A); Ordinance No. 99-021 repealed Article 11A (Sections 7-5-1100A—7-5-1165A))

 

ARTICLE 12. ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT—APPEALS
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 12, Enforcement and Abatement—Appeals, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 84-027; 1/7/85; 84-14, 6/4/84; 92-019, 9/8/92; 95-034, 11/6/95; 99-022, 6/21/99 and 2002-22, 9/16/02, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2007-034, 11/5/07.

 

7-5-1200 RIGHT TO APPEAL FROM NOTICE AND ORDER OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL—BOARD OF APPEALS.
    Any person aggrieved by a notice and order of the Building Official hereunder to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or portion thereof, may appeal such order, in the manner stated in Section 7-5-1210, to the Board of Appeals.

 

7-5-1205 ORDER OF BUILDING OFFICIAL FINAL AND CONCLUSIVE.
    Whenever a notice and order has been issued by the Building Official and served as provided in Section 7-5-1135 and no appeal has been filed in accordance with Section 7-5-1210, the notice and order shall be deemed final and conclusive.

 

7-5-1210 PROCEDURE FOR FILING AN APPEAL FROM NOTICE ORDER OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
    Any person entitled to service under Section 7-5-1135 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the Building Official by filing a written appeal therefrom at the office of the Building Official within ten (10) days from the date of service of such notice and order. The written appeal request shall include, at minimum, the names and addresses of all appellants, a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the land or building involved in the notice and order, a brief statement of the specific order protested and a brief statement of the relief sought and the reasons therefor.

    On receipt of such appeal, the Building Official shall set the matter for hearing before the Board of Appeals. Notice of the date, hour and place of hearing shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing in the manner and upon the person specified in Section 7-5-1135. The notice of hearing shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard to appear and show cause, if any they have, why the building or portion thereof involved in the proceedings should not be repaired, vacated and repaired or demolished.

 

7-5-1215 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
    The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings by all parties in connection with the matter upon which the appeal is taken until determination of the appeal as hereinafter provided.

 

7-5-1220 CONDUCT OF HEARINGS BEFORE THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
    At the time and place stated in the notice, the Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing, and shall consider any relevant evidence offered by the Building Official and the owner, occupant or person in charge and control, mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee, or any other person having any estate or legal interest in said building or structure, pertaining to the matters set forth in the notice and order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish.

    The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and hearing. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.

    Whenever in the course of any proceedings taken hereunder, the Board shall have cause to request additional information, the same may be requested of the Fire Department, or the Building Department or other agency charged by law with enforcement of health or safety requirements of local or State law.

    The Board may continue the hearing from time to time at its discretion.

 

7-5-1225 DECISION AND ORDER OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
    After a full and fair consideration of the evidence and testimony received at the hearing, the Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse, or modify the notice and order issued by the Building Official. A written decision shall be issued by the Board and shall be posted and served in the manner and upon the persons specified in Section 7-5-1135, within fifteen (15) days from the date on which the hearing was closed.

    The decision of the Board shall contain findings stating in detail the conditions which render the building or portion thereof a public nuisance as defined in Section 7-5-1115, the work required to be done, and shall order that the work required by commenced within fifteen (15) days after service of the decision or a longer period not to exceed thirty (30) days, if in the sole determination of the Board, as set forth in its decision, such longer period is found to be necessary and appropriate, and a statement that the work be completed within a reasonable time as determined by the Board.

    The decision of the Board shall also state that if the work required has not been commenced or completed within the time specified in the decision, the Building Official may cause the work to be done and the cost hereof levied as a special assessment against the property.

    The findings and decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final and conclusive in the matter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-034, 11/5/07 (Sections 7-5-1200—7-5-1225))

 

ARTICLE 13. ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT—ACCOMPLISHMENT OF WORK—LIEN
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Article 13, Enforcement and Abatement—Accomplishment of Work—Lien, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 95-035, 11/6/95; 99-023, 6/21/99; and 2002-23, 9/16/02, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2007-035, 11/5/07.

 

7-5-1300 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL, BOARD OF APPEALS OR RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
    Whenever the work required by an order of the Building Official, Board of Appeals or by resolution of the City Council has not been commenced or completed within the times stated therein, the Building Official shall cause the work to be accomplished either by City personnel or by private contract under standard public works contractual procedures. The cost of such work shall be paid from the General Fund of the City and shall be repaid to said fund out of the proceeds of the collections hereinafter provided for.

 

7-5-1305 RECORD OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.
    Upon the completion of any repair or demolition work accomplished pursuant to Section 7-5-1300, the Building Official shall cause to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk a written report specifying:

    (1)  The work done;

    (2)  The cost of the work and incidental expenses (the term incidental expenses shall include but not be limited to the expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder);

    (3)  A description of the real property upon which the building is or was located;

    (4)  The names and address of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 7-5-1135; and

    (5)  The assessment proposed to be levied to pay the cost of the work.

 

7-5-1310 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT HEARING.
    Upon the filing of the report of the Building Official, the City Clerk shall present it to the Council for consideration. The City Council shall, by resolution, fix a time, date and place when it will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of repairs or demolition and any other interested persons. At least ten (10) days before the date for the hearing, the Building Official shall cause copies of his or her report and notice of the filing of his or her report and of the time, place and date when the Council will hear and pass on the report, and any protests or objections thereto, to be posted and served in the manner and upon the persons specified in Section 7-5-1135.

 

7-5-1315 ASSESSMENT HEARING.
    Any person interested in or affected by the proposed assessment may file written protests or objections with the City Clerk at any time prior to the hours set for the hearing on the report of the Building Official. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of each protest or objection.

    Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the Building Official, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the cost of the repairs or demolition, and any other interested persons. The Council may make such revisions, corrections, or modifications of the report as it may deem just, and the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, together with the assessment shall be confirmed by resolution. The decision of the Council on the report and the assessment and all protests or objections thereto shall be final and conclusive.

 

7-5-1320 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST PROPERTY—LIEN.
    The cost of the work of repair or demolition, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by the Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the property involved, and as thus made and confirmed shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment until paid. Such lien shall, for all purposes, be upon a parity with the lien of State, County and City taxes.

 

7-5-1325 COLLECTION.
    On or before August 10 of the year in which a special assessment is confirmed by the Council, the City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of said special assessment to be filed with the County Assessor and County Tax Collector. The description of the parcel reported shall be that used for the same parcel on the County Assessor’s map books for the current year.

    The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-035, 11/5/07 (Sections 7-5-1300—7-5-1325))

 

ARTICLE 14. VIOLATIONS AND SAVING PROVISIONS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Article 14, Violations and Saving Provisions, previously codified herein and derived from Ordinance Nos. 95-036, 11/6/95; 99-024, 6/21/99; and 2002-24, 9/16/02, was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 2007-036, 11/5/07.

 

7-5-1400 VIOLATIONS.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the posting of any notice provided for in this Chapter, or to tear down, mutilate, or alter any such notice posted in or upon any building or premises.

 

7-5-1405 RE-ENACTMENT.
    The provisions of this Chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinance provisions relating to the same subject matter shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2007-036, 11/5/07 (Sections 7-5-1400 and 7-5-1405))

 

ARTICLE 15. ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITS
7-5-1500 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined, permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This Article is intended to comply with the requirements of Government Code Section 65850.7.

 

7-5-1505 DEFINITIONS.
    For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings provided below:

    (a)   Electric vehicle charging station or charging station means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electrical vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

    (b)  Building Official means the Chief Building Official of the City of San Leandro or designee.

    (c)   Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    (1)  E-mail;

    (2)  The Internet;

    (3)  Facsimile.

    (d)  Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit.

    (e)   Specific adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

 

7-5-1510 EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS.
    The Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations consistent with this Article, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The City’s adopted checklist shall be published on the City’s website and shall be accessible to the public.

 

7-5-1515 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.
    (a)   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to, inspection of the following: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; and areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

    (b)  A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the City’s adopted checklist, and are consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits.

    (c)   Approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station unless and until approval is granted by the applicable electric utility.

    (d)  An inspection may be required and performed by the Building Official. If an inspection is required, the inspection shall be done in an efficient and timely manner. If the electric vehicle charging station fails the initial inspection, a subsequent inspection may be required.

    (e)   If the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

    (f)   Upon a determination of the City Manager that the City has such capabilities, the Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this Article and associated supporting documents.

 

7-5-1520 TECHNICAL REVIEW.
    (a)   If the Building Official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the City may require the applicant to apply for a use permit pursuant to the City’s Zoning Code.

    (b)  In the technical review of an electric vehicle charging station, the Building Official shall not condition the approval of any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080.

 

7-5-1525 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
    (a)   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or applicable electric utility regarding safety and reliability.

    (b)  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means, and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

    (c)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

    (d)  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2017-015, 9/15/17)

CHAPTER 7-6 CITY DATUM
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
7-6-100 CITY BASE ESTABLISHED.
    The City Base of the City of San Leandro is hereby established to be the datum plane adopted and determined by the National Geodetic Survey Vertical Datum of 1929, 1973, Adjustment

 

7-6-105 DETERMINATION OF ELEVATIONS.
    The City shall determine the elevations of all permanent City bench marks based upon the City Base. All public surveys shall be based upon the City Base.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 1095 N.S., 10/28/57)

CHAPTER 7-7 RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
7-7-100 DEFINITION.
    For the purpose of this Chapter, “building” or “structure” shall be as defined by the Uniform Building Code of the City of San Leandro and shall also include stairways, required off-street parking facilities, any well, whether for water, oil, or other hydrocarbon products, and any underground storage facilities in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallon capacity. “Building” or “structure” shall not include any building or structure existing on the effective date of this Section, any public utility installed under authority of franchise, or any fence.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL
7-7-200 GENERAL.
    Right-of-way lines may be established by the City Council as provided herein for the purpose of reserving areas for future widening, extension, or creation of streets, highways, or space for future utilities, pedestrian ways, fire and police emergency access, access to property, and all public rights-of-way.

 

7-7-205 INITIATION.
    A right-of-way line may be initiated by:

    (a)   The verified petition of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed right-of-way lines, which petition shall be filed with the Planning Commission and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set forth by the City Council by resolution; or

    (b)  Resolution of the City Council; or

    (c)   Resolution of the Planning Commission. Every petition shall be accompanied by a description of the streets or portions of the streets along which such right-of-way lines are sought to be established, a map or sketch showing the streets and relation of the proposed right-of-way lines, thereto, and such other plans and specifications necessary to show the proposed use of the area affected thereby.

 

7-7-210 PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION.
    Before any action shall be taken by the City Council as provided in Section 7-7-245 hereof, the proposal shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the Department of Public Works for report and recommendation.

 

7-7-215 PUBLIC HEARING.
    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on any proposed right-of-way line and shall give notice of the time and place of said public hearing by publishing notice thereof at least once and by causing notices of the hearing to be posted along a line as near as possible to the planned right-of-way where such right-of-way lines are proposed to be established at not more than three hundred (300) feet in distance apart, but not less than three (3) in all. Such publication and posting shall be accomplished at least five (5) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing. Upon review of the report and recommendation of the Department of Public Works and completion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit its report and recommendation to the City Council.

 

7-7-220 RESOLUTION OF INTENTION.
    Upon receipt of a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, but before determining and establishing any right-of-way lines, the City Council shall pass a resolution of intention designating the right-of-way lines proposed to be established.

 

7-7-225 CONTENTS OF RESOLUTION OF INTENTION.
    The resolution shall contain a description of the property affected and a notice of the hour, day, and place when and where any and all persons objecting to the establishment of the proposed right-of-way lines may appear before the City Council and object thereto.

 

7-7-230 PUBLICATION AND POSTING.
    Said resolution described in Section 7-7-220 above shall be published once at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing of objections to the proposal. A copy of the resolution shall be posted along the street or streets in front of each block where such right-of-way lines are proposed to be established at not more than three hundred (300) feet in distance apart, but not less than three (3) in all. Posting shall be accomplished at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing of objections to the proposal.

 

7-7-235 TIME FOR HEARING.
    The time for hearing objections to such proposal shall be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the adoption of the resolution of intention described in Section 7-7-220.

 

7-7-240 FILING OF PROTEST.
    At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the establishment of the proposed right-of-way line, any person having any interest in any land upon which said right-of-way lines are proposed to be established may file with the City Clerk a written objection to the establishment of said right-of-way lines.

 

7-7-245 ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
    At the time set for hearing, or at any time to which the said hearing may be continued, the City Council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests or objections filed pursuant hereto. Its decision shall be final and conclusive. The City Council may sustain any objections and abandon said proceeding, deny any and all objections and by ordinance establish said right-of-way lines described in the resolution, or it may deny any and all objections and by ordinance establish said right-of-way lines with such changes and modifications as it shall determine to be proper.

 

7-7-250 EFFECT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE.
    Whenever any ordinance establishing any right-of-way line or lines shall become effective, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or erect any building or structure within the space between the right-of-way line so established.

 

7-7-255 NO BUILDING PERMITS TO BE ISSUED.
    After the adoption of the resolution of intention described in Section 7-7-220, no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or structure between any proposed or established right-of-way lines.

 

7-7-260 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
    Existing buildings or structures non-conforming to the requirements of established right-of-way lines shall not be altered or enlarged in any manner.

 

7-7-265 VARIANCE.
    Variance may be granted from the provisions of this Chapter where unnecessary or unusual hardship is shown and where such variance will not defeat the purposes of the right-of-way lines established by this Chapter, provided that the applicant waives all claims for compensation and damages caused by the taking of any property affected by such a variance pursuant to the exercise of the right of eminent domain or any other right of this City or any other action.

 

7-7-270 PROCEDURE.
    The provisions governing the procedure for variances and appeals from the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro shall apply to the procedures for variances and appeals from the provisions of this Chapter.

 

7-7-275 YARD REQUIREMENTS ARE ADDITIONAL TO RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE REQUIREMENTS.
    Yard and other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be separately applied as requirements additional to right-of-way line requirements required herein. All yards, setbacks and such regulations of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro shall be measured from the established right-of-way lines herein. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, however, that portion of any parcel that lies between established right-of-way lines shall be considered as part of the lot area when determining the number of dwelling units that may be placed on a parcel or the percentage of lot area that may be covered by buildings or structures.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 72-10, 2/28/72)

CHAPTER 7-8 GRANT AND IMPROVEMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
ARTICLE 1. GRANT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
7-8-100 GRANT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIRED.
    No building permit shall be issued for construction, reconstruction or remodeling of any building or structure on any lot, the use of which building or structure thereafter will effect an increase of traffic generation on the street or streets upon which such lot abuts or will abut, unless the designated area of such lot has been granted to the City.

 

7-8-105 DESIGNATED AREA.
    (a)   Where future right-of-way lines have been established pursuant to Chapter 7 of Title VII the designated area shall be that part of the lot encompassed within the future right-of-way lines.

    (b)  Where no future right-of-way lines have been established the designated area shall be that part of the lot encompassed within the right-of-way width designation of the current Resolution Establishing The Master Plan of Streets determined by allocating fifty (50) per cent of said width or widths to each side of the existing center line of the abutting street or streets and including the corner radii, if any, applicable under the specifications therefor listed by street classification in the above-described resolution.

    (c)   Where the above subsections do not apply, the designated area shall be that part of the lot encompassed within the area defined by the extension of the predominant existing street alignment on the street on which the lot is located.

 

7-8-110 EXCEPTIONS.
    The provisions of Section 7-8-100 shall not be applicable to a building permit issued for construction, reconstruction or remodeling of a single family or two (2) family dwelling, unless such reconstruction or remodeling converts such dwelling or a portion thereof to any other use.

 

7-8-115 MAXIMUM GRANT.
    The maximum grant of land required by Section 7-8-100 shall not exceed fifteen (15) per cent of the area of a lot, nor shall said grant exceed a width of twenty-four (24) feet.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. IMPROVEMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
7-8-200 IMPROVEMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIRED.
    Any building permit issued for construction, reconstruction or remodeling of any building or structure, the use of which building or structure thereafter will effect an increase of traffic generation on the street or streets upon which such lot abuts or will abut shall be conditioned upon improvement by the developer of one-half (1/2) of such street or streets measured from the designated center line of such street or streets, by installation or relocation of paving, tie-in paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, storm and sanitary sewers, drainage facilities and street trees for the full width, and in the case of a corner lot, for the full depth and corner radii of such lot. No certificate of occupancy for such building or structure shall be issued until such improvements have been completed.

 

7-8-205 DESIGNATED CENTER LINE.
    (a)   Where future right-of-way lines have been established pursuant to Chapter 7 of Title VII, the designated center lines shall be established by said future right-of-way lines.

    (b)  Where no future right-of-way lines have been established and the lot abuts a street or streets designated on the current Resolution Establishing The Master Plan of Streets, the designated center lines shall be the existing center lines of the streets and the corner radii resulting from intersecting center lines shall be determined by the applicable specifications therefor listed by street classification in the above described resolution.

    (c)   Where the above subsections are not applicable the designated center lines shall be the existing center line of the street as defined by the extension of the predominant existing street alignment on the street on which the lot is located.

 

7-8-210 EXCEPTIONS.
    The provisions of Section 7-8-200, except those provisions requiring installation or relocation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways and street trees, shall not be applicable to a building permit issued for construction, reconstruction or remodeling of a single family or two (2) family dwelling, unless such reconstruction or remodeling converts such dwelling or a portion thereof to any other use.

 

7-8-215 IMPROVEMENT DEFERRED—GUARANTY.
    In any case in which installation or relocation prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy of all or any part of the improvements required by Section 7-8-200 is determined by the Public Works Director to be impractical, he or she may accept in lieu thereof:

    (a)   A guaranty approved by the City Attorney in an amount adequate to cover the cost of such improvements as estimated by the Public Works Director, providing for the installation or relocation of such improvements upon default of the developer; or

    (b)  A cash deposit of said amount, which will constitute a discharge of the developer’s improvement obligation hereunder.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. LIMITATION ON EXTENT OF GRANT AND IMPROVEMENT
7-8-300 REDUCTION OF OBLIGATION.
    In any case in which the City Engineer determines that by reason of unusual circumstances the designated area as defined in Section 7-8-105, or designated center line as defined in Section 7-8-205, require of the developer grant and improvements to a greater extent than is reasonably related to the increased traffic and other needs of the proposed land use, he or she shall recommend to the City Council that the developer’s obligation be reduced accordingly. The City Council may authorize the issuance of a building permit thereafter upon receipt of an agreement, executed by the developer, to make such grant and improvements as the City Council may require in reducing his or her obligation. Such agreement may include provisions for participation by the City in required right-of-way acquisition and improvements.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 4. PROCEEDINGS UNDER OTHER CHAPTERS
7-8-400 CONDITIONS OF APPROVALS UNAFFECTED.
    Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit or limit attachment of conditions requiring grant and improvement of rights of way to approvals required by other provisions of this Code, including but not limited to provisions of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro and Chapter 1 of Title VII (Subdivision Ordinance).

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 72-10, 2/28/72)

CHAPTER 7-9 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Note
*Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 99-07 repealed and replaced Chapter 7-9 in its entirety.

 

ARTICLE 1. FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, METHODS
7-9-100 FINDINGS OF FACT.
    (a)   The flood hazard areas of the City of San Leandro are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

    (b)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss.

 

7-9-105 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

    (a)   To protect human life and health;

    (b)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

    (c)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

    (d)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

    (e)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

    (f)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

    (g)  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

    (h)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

 

7-9-110 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes methods and provisions to:

    (a)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

    (b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

    (c)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

    (d)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

    (e)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-015, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 99-07, 4/9/99 (Sections 7-9-100 — 7-9-110))

 

ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
Note
*Editor’s Note: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

 

7-9-200 ACCESSORY USE.
    “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

 

7-9-201 ALLUVIAL FAN.
     “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

 

7-9-202 APEX.
    “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

 

7-9-203 APPEAL.
    “Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

 

7-9-204 AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
    “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or All Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

 

7-9-205 AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD.
    “Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

 

7-9-206 AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
    See “Special flood hazard area.”

 

7-9-207 AREA OF SPECIAL MUDSLIDE HAZARD.
    “Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard” is the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

 

7-9-208 BASE FLOOD.
    “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

 

7-9-209 BASEMENT.
    “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.

 

7-9-210 BREAKAWAY WALLS.
    “Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

    (a)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood, and

    (b)  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

 

7-9-211 BUILDING.
    See “Structure”.

 

7-9-212 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA.
    “Coastal high hazard area” means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone VI-V30, VE, or V.

 

7-9-213 DEVELOPMENT.
    “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

 

7-9-214 ENCROACHMENT.
    “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

 

7-9-215 EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
    “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

 

7-9-216 EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
    “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

 

7-9-217 FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOODWATER.
    “Flood, flooding, or floodwater” means:

    (a)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows). See “Mudslides”; and

    (b)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See “Flood-related erosion.”

 

7-9-218 FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP.
    “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

 

7-9-219 FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP.
    “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

 

7-9-220 FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP.
    “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

 

7-9-221 FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.
    “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

 

7-9-222 FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA.
    “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

 

7-9-223 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
    “Floodplain Administrator” is the Chief Building Official.

 

7-9-224 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.
    “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

 

7-9-225 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.
    “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

 

7-9-226 FLOODPROOFING.
    “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

 

7-9-227 FLOOD-RELATED EROSION.
    “Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

 

7-9-228 FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA OR FLOOD-RELATED EROSION-PRONE AREA.
    “Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion-prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.

 

7-9-229 FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT.
    “Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.

 

7-9-230 FLOODWAY.
    “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway”.

 

7-9-231 FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES.
    “Floodway encroachment lines” means the lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.

 

7-9-232 FLOODWAY FRINGE.
    “Floodway fringe” is that area of the flood plain on either side of the “Regulatory Floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

 

7-9-233 FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION.
    “Fraud and victimization” as related to Article 6, Variance Procedure, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City of San Leandro will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

 

7-9-234 FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.
    “Functionally dependent use” means a use which can not perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

 

7-9-235 GOVERNING BODY.
    “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

 

7-9-236 HARDSHIP.
    “Hardship” as related to Article 6, Variance Procedure, of this Chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City of San Leandro requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

 

7-9-237 HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.
    “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

 

7-9-238 HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
    “Historic structure” means any structure that is listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

 

7-9-239 LEVEE.
    “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

 

7-9-240 LEVEE SYSTEM.
    “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

 

7-9-241 LOWEST FLOOR.
    “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see “Basement”) is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.)

 

7-9-242 MANUFACTURED HOME.
    “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.

 

7-9-243 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
    “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

 

7-9-244 MEAN SEA LEVEL.
    “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

 

7-9-245 MUDSLIDE.
    “Mudslide” (i.e., mudflow) describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.

 

7-9-246 MUDSLIDE-PRONE AREA.
    “Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area” means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.

 

7-9-247 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
    “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

 

7-9-248 NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
    “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

 

7-9-249 OBSTRUCTION.
    “Obstruction” means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

 

7-9-250 ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD.
    “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood.” See “Base flood.”

 

7-9-251 PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE.
    “Primary frontal dune” means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope.

 

7-9-252 PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE.
    “Principal structure” means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use.

 

7-9-253 PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.
    “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Article 6, Variance Procedure, of this Chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

 

7-9-254 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
    “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis; four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

 

7-9-255 REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
    “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

 

7-9-256 RIVERINE.
    “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

 

7-9-257 SAND DUNES.
    “Sand dunes” mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

 

7-9-258 SHEET FLOW AREA.
    See “Area of shallow flooding.”

 

7-9-259 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
    “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, E, M, V1-V30, VE or V.

 

7-9-260 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
    “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

 

7-9-261 STRUCTURE.
    “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

 

7-9-262 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
    “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

 

7-9-263 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
    “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

 

7-9-264 V ZONE.
    See “Coastal high hazard area.”

 

7-9-265 VARIANCE.
    “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Chapter.

 

7-9-266 WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.
    “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

 

7-9-267 WATERCOURSE.
    “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-015, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 99-07, 4/9/99 (Sections 7-9-200 — 7-9-267))

 

ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-9-300 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
    This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of San Leandro.

 

7-9-305 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September, 1979 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 18, 1980, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. This Flood Insurance Study and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this Chapter and which are recommended to the City of San Leandro by the Floodplain Administrator. The study and FIRMs are on file at the office of the Chief Building Official.

 

7-9-310 COMPLIANCE.
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of San Leandro from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

 

7-9-315 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
    This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another Chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

 

7-9-320 INTERPRETATION.
    In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:

    (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;

    (b)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

    (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.

 

7-9-325 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
    The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of San Leandro, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

 

7-9-330 SEVERABILITY.
    This Chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-015, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 99-07, 4/9/99 (Sections 7-9-300 — 7-9-330))

 

ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION
7-9-400 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
    A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 7-9-305. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

    (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or

    (b)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 7-9-500(c)(3).

    (c)   All appropriate certifications listed in Section 7-9-410(d) of this Chapter; and

    (d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

 

7-9-405 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
    The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this Chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

 

7-9-410 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
    The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

    (a)   Permit Review: Review all development permits to determine that:

    (1)  Permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied,

    (2)  All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained,

    (3)  The site is reasonably safe from flooding, and

    (4)  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this Chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

    (b)  Review and Use of any Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 7-9-305, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Article 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the City of San Leandro for adoption.

    (c)   Notification of Other Agencies: In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

    (1)  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

    (2)  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

    (3)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

    (d)  Documentation of Floodplain Development: Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

    (1)  The certification required by Section 7-9-500(c)(1) (floor elevations),

    (2)  The certification required by Section 7-9-500(c)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures),

    (3)  The certification required by Section 7-9-500(c)(3) (wet floodproofing standard),

    (4)  The certified elevation required by Section 7-9-510(b) (subdivision standards),

    (5)  The certification required by Section 7-9-525(a) (floodway encroachments),

    (6)  The information required by Section 7-9-530(f) (coastal construction standards),

    (7)  The reports required by Section 7-9-535(c) (Mudflow Standards).

    (e)   Map Determinations: Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual. field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 6.

    (f)   Remedial Action: Take action to remedy violations of this Chapter as specified in Section 7-9-310.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-015, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 99-07, 4/9/99 (Section 7-9-400 — 7/9/410))

 

ARTICLE 5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
7-9-500 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

    (a)   Anchoring:

    (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

    (2)  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 7-9-515.

    (b)  Construction Materials and Methods: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed:

    (1)  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

    (2)  With methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

    (3)  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

    (4)  If within Zones AH or AO so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

    (c)   Elevation and Floodproofing: (See Article 2, Definitions for “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

    (1)  Residential construction, new or substantial improvements, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

    (i)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. (The State of California recommends that the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.)

    (ii)  In an A Zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by the community).

    (iii) In all other Zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.)

    (iv) Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

    (2)  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (c)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

    (i)   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (c)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

    (ii)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

    (iii) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

    (3)  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

    (i)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

    (ii)  Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; or

    (iii) Have a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

    (4)  Manufactured. homes shall also meet the standards in Section 7-9-515.

 

7-9-505 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
    (a)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

    (1)  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

    (2)  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

    (b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.

 

7-9-510 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
    (a)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

    (b)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

    (c)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

    (d)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

    (e)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

 

7-9-515 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
    (a)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

    (1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

    (2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

    (3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

    (4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

    (b)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section and Section 7-9-530.

    (c)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section will be elevated so that either:

    (1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or

    (2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

 

7-9-520 STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
    (a)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

    (1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

    (2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, fifteen (15) attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

    (3)  Meet the permit requirements of Article 4 of this Chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 7-9-515(a).

    (b)  Recreation vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section and Section 7-9-530.

 

7-9-525 FLOODWAYS.
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 7-9-305 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

    (a)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

    (b)  If subsection (a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 5.

 

7-9-530 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS.
    Within coastal high hazard areas as established under Section 7-9-305, the following standards shall apply:

    (a)   All new construction and substantial improvement shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading valves used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards.

    (b)  All new construction and other development shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide.

    (c)   All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Article 2 of this Chapter. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.

    (d)  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.

    (e)   Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

    (f)   The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records:

    (1)  Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with subsection (a) of this section.

    (2)  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement.

 

7-9-535 MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREAS.
    (a)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area.

    (b)  Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include but are not limited to:

    (1)  Type and quality of soils;

    (2)  Evidence of groundwater or surface water problems;

    (3)  Depth and quality of any fill;

    (4)  Overall slope of the site; and

    (5)  Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.

    (c)   Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the Floodplain Administration shall require that:

    (1)  A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering;

    (2)  The proposed grading, excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages;

    (3)  The proposed grading, excavations, new construction, and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and

    (4)  Drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance not endanger slope stability.

 

7-9-540 FLOOD-RELATED EROSION-PRONE AREAS.
    The Floodplain Administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas known to the community.

    (a)   Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

    (b)  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

    (c)   Within Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designed according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-015, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 99-07, 4/9/99 (Sections 7-9-500 — 7-9-540))

 

ARTICLE 6. VARIANCE PROCEDURE
7-9-600 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
    (a)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this Chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.

    (b)  It is the duty of the City of San Leandro to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this Chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

 

7-9-605 APPEAL BOARD.
    (a)   The City Council of the City of San Leandro shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Chapter.

    (b)  The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.

    (c)   In passing upon such applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter; and the following:

    (1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

    (2)  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

    (3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

    (4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

    (5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

    (6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

    (7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

    (8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

    (9)  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

    (10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

    (11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

    (d) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (c)(1) through (c)(11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

    (e)   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (c) of this section and the purposes of this Chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter.

    (f)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Alameda County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

 

7-9-610 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
    (a)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles 4 and 5 of this Chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

    (b)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Article 2 of this Chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

    (c)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

    (d)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this Chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City of San Leandro need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City of San Leandro believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

    (e)   Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause; determination that failure to grant the variance would result in “exceptional hardship” (as defined in Article 2 of this Chapter) to the applicant; and determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Article 2 - see “Public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Article 2) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

    (f)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 7-9-605(a) through 7-9- 605(e) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

    (g)  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 7-9-605 and the purposes of this Chapter, the City of San Leandro may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-015, 8/1/88; Ordinance No. 99-07, 4/9/99 (Sections 7-9-600 — 7-9-610))

CHAPTER 7-10 GEOLOGIC HAZARD ZONES
ARTICLE 1. SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES
7-10-100 SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES ESTABLISHED.
    That certain map entitled “City of San Leandro Geologic Hazard Special Studies Zones” dated July 29, 1974, and filed in the office or the City Clerk is hereby adopted for the purposes hereinafter set forth and is by this reference incorporated herein. Said map includes within the special studies zones all those properties and portions of properties included within the special studies zones delineated by the State Geologist pursuant to the provisions of the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act, and in addition thereto, additional properties and portions of properties as deemed necessary by the City Council to more adequately define the zone of hazard.

 

7-10-105 AMENDMENT OF MAP—PUBLIC HEARING.
    The City Council may amend said original map after a public hearing on the proposed amendment. No such amendment shall exclude from the special studies zones any property or portion of a property included within the special studies zones delineated by the State Geologist. Such an amendment shall be accomplished only by a resolution of the City Council approving an amending map indicating changes made in the special studies zones boundaries delineated on said original map. Thereafter, said original map shall be deemed amended as indicated on said amending map.

 

7-10-110 NOTICE OF HEARING.
    Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of hearing, notice of the time, place and purpose of a public hearing on a proposed amendment of said map shall be published in the official newspaper and shall be mailed to the owner of any property proposed to be included within the special studies zones, using for this purpose the names and addresses which appear on the last equalized assessment roll of Alameda County. At the same time, a copy of the proposed amending map shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk, and said notice shall refer thereto.

 

7-10-115 BOUNDARIES OF SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES.
    The boundaries of the special studies zones shall be so drawn that no individual property shall be intersected thereby.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 2. APPROVAL PROCEDURE FOR NEW REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENTS AND STRUCTURES FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY
7-10-200 GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED.
    That certain document entitled “City of San Leandro Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Guidelines” dated December 15, 1975, and filed in the office of the City Clerk is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing procedures for approval of proposed new real estate developments and structures for human occupancy defined as projects by the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act, and is by this reference incorporated herein. Said guidelines may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Any such amendment shall take effect immediately upon approval by the City Council.

 

7-10-205 LIMITATIONS ON APPROVALS.
    No tentative map or parcel map for a new real estate development shall be approved, and no building permit for a structure defined as a project by the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act shall be issued, for any property included within the special studies zones established by this Chapter unless the Public Works Director determines that the proposed development or structure would create no undue hazard. Such determination shall be made only in accordance with the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act, the policies and criteria of the State Mining and Geology Board adopted pursuant thereto and the City of San Leandro Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act, the policies and criteria of the State Mining and Geology Board adopted pursuant thereto and the City of San Leandro Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Guidelines. Such determination shall be final unless appealed to the Board of Appeals established by Chapter 5 of Title VII.

 

7-10-210 APPEALS—MANNER.
    Any person aggrieved by the determination of the Public Works Director may appeal such determination to the Board of Appeals by filing written notice of appeal with the Public Works Director within fifteen (15) days from the date of such determination.

 

7-10-215 APPEALS—HEARING—NOTICE.
    The Board of Appeals shall hear such appeal within thirty (30) days after notice of appeal is filed with the Public Works Director. Written notice by mail of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be given by the Public Works Director to all persons who have filed with him or her a written request therefor. No other notice thereof need be given.

 

7-10-220 APPEALS—DETERMINATION.
    The Board of Appeals shall independently determine from the evidence submitted whether an undue hazard would be created by the proposed development or structure. Such determinations shall be final.

 

(Legislative History: )

 

ARTICLE 3. FEES
7-10-300 FEE FOR GEOLOGIC EVALUATION.
    Each person filing a geologic report pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall pay to the City of San Leandro at the time and in the manner specified by the guidelines established by this Chapter a fee in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the amount charged to the City by its geological consultant for evaluation of such report.

 

7-10-305 FEE FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
    In addition to any other building permit fee provided for in this Code, each applicant for a building permit within a special studies zone shall pay to the City of San Leandro at the time and in the manner specified by the guidelines established by this Chapter a fee in an amount established by the City Council by resolution.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 74-42, 8/5/74; Ordinance No. 76-2, 1/12/76)

CHAPTER 7-11 DEVELOPMENT FEE FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS ON NEW DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-11-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
    The purpose of this Chapter is to carry out the findings and intentions of the City Council as found in the recitals hereto and to protect the general health, safety and welfare.

 

7-11-105 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words or phrases shall be construed as defined in this section.

    (a)   ACCESSORY USES. “Accessory uses” means any project requiring a building permit which is clearly incidental to the primary purpose of the structure such as fences, pools, patios and automobile garages.

    (b)  BUILDING PERMIT. “Building permit” means a permit required by and issued pursuant to Chapter 5, Title VII of this Code.

    (c)   NEW DEVELOPMENT. “New development” means any new construction or use of land or buildings that requires the issuance of a building permit or other use entitlement.

    (d)  P.M. PEAK HOUR TRIPS. “P.M. peak hour trips” means the number of one-way vehicular trips generated by a given land use during the one-hour period of highest traffic volume during the p.m. hours.

    (e)   REHABILITATION PROJECT. “Rehabilitation project” means any remodeling, expansion, or addition on a Rehabilitation Project site which enhances the appearance, quality or utility of the existing improvements and in which:

    (1)  The afternoon peak hour trip generation is not more than twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the existing trip generation; and

    (2)  The total cost of the proposed work is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the replacement value of the existing improvements on the site, or in which the building square footage of the proposed project is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the square footage of the existing building on the site.

    (f)   REHABILITATION PROJECT SITE. “Rehabilitation project site” means an area, including parking, loading and landscaped areas, not more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet for all land uses, provided that in the case of industrial uses, “site” shall mean an area not more than one acre.

    (g)  SAFETY PROJECT. “Safety projects” means any project that will increase the safety of motor vehicle drivers, pedestrians and bicyclists set forth in the circulation element of the general plan or the capital improvement plan.

    (h)  SMALL PROJECTS. “Small projects” means any project for which the required street improvement fee would be equal to or less than the fee for one general residential unit.

    (i)   STREET IMPROVEMENT. “Street improvement” includes but is not limited to the construction of or improvement to rights-of-way, traffic signals, overcrossings, interchanges, underpasses, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, pavement, and drainage improvements incidental to street improvements necessary to provide traffic circulation consistent with the Master Plan of City Streets. For the purpose of this definition street includes highway or road.

    (j)   USE ENTITLEMENT. “Use entitlement” means a conditional use permit, variance, amendment to the General Plan, rezoning ordinance or other discretionary approval for use or development of property.

 

7-11-110 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE.
    (a)   A Development Fee for Street Improvement is hereby established to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

    (b)  The fee required by this section is imposed on any new development of property and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit or other use entitlement.

    (c)   The fee authorized by this section is also imposed on all development projects for which building permits or other entitlements for use or development were issued previously subject to a condition requiring the developer pay an interim traffic impact fee. To the extent that any person paid an interim fee in an amount greater than would now be due under the Fee Schedule as authorized by this Chapter, the City shall refund the difference with interest in an amount determined by the Finance Director.

    (d)  The development fee for Street improvement is imposed in addition to any other means or legal authority of financing street improvements which may be imposed on the development of property by this Code, the Zoning Ordinance or the general laws.

    (e)   A credit may be given for prior use of the property. The credit shall be equal to the amount that would have been due for the prior use under the Fee Schedule in existence at the time of the application for the new building permit or use entitlement. The person seeking a credit for prior use the property shall have the burden of establishing the nature and extent of such use to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. No credit shall be given to any vacant land.

 

7-11-115 TIME OF FEE PAYMENT.
    The development fee for street improvement is payable before the issuance of any building permit or other use entitlement unless the City Manager determines that the fee shall be collected prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Administrative regulations may provide a means for paying the required fee in installments.

 

7-11-120 FEE SCHEDULE.
    The amount of the fee shall be determined in accordance with the Development Fee for Street Improvement Schedule which shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall be determined by multiplying the units or total gross square footage of the development project by the fee rate per unit or gross square foot established in the Fee Schedule. The Schedule shall from time to time be amended by resolution of the City Council to reflect any increase in the cost or mitigating additional traffic generation.

 

7-11-125 CREDITS.
    (a)   For new development consisting of an addition, extension or enlargement of an existing structure, the fee shall be paid only on any additional dwelling units or additional square footage resulting from such addition, extension or enlargement.

    (b)  A credit against the fee may be given for any right-of-way dedication contributed by the developer in excess of his or her obligation to make such contributions under Sections 7-8-100 through 7-8-115 of this Code. The credit provided for in this section shall be equal to the value of the right-of-way dedicated as determined in the sole and absolute discretion of the City Engineer.

    (c)   A credit may be given for street construction costs where street widening is required in excess of fourteen (14) feet. The credit shall be equal to the standard qualities and cost, as determined in the sole and absolute discretion of the City Engineer, to construct street improvements in excess of fourteen (14) feet.

    (d)  A credit may be given for projects with excessively high frontage improvement costs. Frontage improvement costs shall be deemed excessive when, in combination with the fee required under this Chapter, such costs exceed one-third (1/3) of the value of the property in the after condition. The credit shall equal the amount required, when subtracted from the sum of the applicable fee and frontage cost improvements, to make this sum equal to one-third (1/3) the value of the property in the after condition. These calculations shall be made in the sole and absolute discretion of the City Engineer.

    (e)   A credit may be given for prior use of property. The credit shall be equal to the amount that would have been due for the prior use under the Fee Schedule in existence at the time of the application for the new building permit or use entitlement. The person seeking a credit for prior use of the property shall have the burden of establishing the nature and extent of such use to the satisfaction of the City Engineer,

    (f)   Further rules governing credits shall be established by administrative regulation. The burden of proof shall be upon the person seeking to establish a credit under the provision of this section.

 

7-11-130 EXEMPTIONS.
    Projects exempted from the imposition of the traffic impact fee include:

    (a)   Projects for which the imposition of the fee would be in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of California.

    (b)  Projects for the construction of public buildings and facilities.

    (c)   Rehabilitation Projects on Rehabilitation Project sites.

    (d)  Accessory uses.

    (e)   Projects which require only zone changes or general plan amendments necessary to accomplish consistency between the general plan and zoning.

    (f)   Small projects.

 

7-11-135 INDIVIDUAL ADJUSTMENTS.
    (a)   The City Manager shall adopt administrative regulations that, in exceptional cases, allow modification of the fee where environmental review concludes that the fee due under the traffic impact fee schedule is insufficient to mitigate the traffic impacts of the development project. In such cases the City shall have the authority to increase the fee due for traffic mitigation, delete credits or make other determinations relative to the development project.

    (b)  The City Manager shall also adopt administrative regulations to provide for the reduction of the traffic impact fee in any circumstance where such adjustment is legally required.

 

7-11-140 APPLICATION OF FEES.
    The fees collected under this Article shall be segregated and held in trust in a manner to avoid commingling of the fees with other revenues or funds of the City. Any interest income earned by monies in the fund shall also be deposited in the fund. Adequate financial records of the funds shall be kept showing the source and disbursement of all revenues. Funds so collected shall be expended only for traffic improvements set forth in the Master Plan of City Streets or Capital Improvement Plan. These costs may include but are not limited to: roadway and intersection improvements and maintenance; right-of-way acquisition, mitigation of environmental impacts of these projects; and engineering, planning, and administrative and professional costs directly related to these projects and to the fee program.

 

7-11-145 REVIEW.
    Prior to the conclusion of each fiscal year, the City Engineer shall review the estimated cost of the fee program, the continued need for public improvements and the reasonable relationship between such need and the impacts of the various types of development pending or anticipated and for which this fee is charged. The City Engineer shall report his or her findings to the City Council at a noticed public hearing and recommend adjustment to the fee or other action as may be needed. The report shall identify all fees received, all fees expended, all fees unexpended and committed and all fees unexpended and uncommitted. If appropriate, the City Engineer shall recommend refund of unexpended and uncommitted fees as authorized under Government Code § 66001.

 

7-11-150 ADVANCE OF FUNDS.
    The City may advance money from any available source or fund for the construction of street improvements which would otherwise be paid for from the funds collected pursuant to this Chapter and reimburse itself from future fees.

 

7-11-155 MASTER PLAN CONSTITUTES A SPECIFIC PLAN.
    It is the intention of the City Council that the Master Plan of City Streets is necessary and convenient for the implementation of the General Plan of the City. For such purposes and for purposes of the Subdivision Map Act, the Master Plan shall and is hereby deemed a specific plan of the City of San Leandro.

 

7-11-160 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES OF BENEFIT.
    The City Manager may adopt administrative regulations to establish zones of benefit. Such zones, if established, will divide the City into areas of benefit. Fees collected from such zones will be expended in those zones for area-specific street improvement projects.

 

7-11-165 ADOPTION OF A CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
    The City Manager may prepare and submit to the City Council a Capital Improvement Plan. If adopted, the Capital Improvement Plan will prioritize the street improvement projects and schedule the expenditure of funds.

 

7-11-170 ADOPTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
    The City Manager is authorized to adopt administrative regulations. The administrative regulations will further implement the provisions of this Chapter and provide more detailed guidance thereon.

 

7-11-175 ENFORCEMENT.
    The fees imposed under this Chapter shall be enforced as a lien against the property if payment is not made.

 

7-11-180 OPERATIVE DATE OF CHAPTER.
    The operative date of this Chapter shall be thirty (30) days from the date of its adoption except that in the case of fees for single family or multi-family development projects, the operative date of this Chapter shall be sixty (60) days following the date of its adoption in accordance with Government Code Section 65962.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 88-023, 9/19/88; Ordinance No. 91-07, 7/15/91 (Sections 7-11-105 and 7-11-125); Ordinance 2000-01, 2/7/00 (Sections 7-11-105 and 7-11-110))

CHAPTER 7-12 GRADING, EXCAVATIONS AND FILLS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
7-12-100 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, wherever used in this Chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section unless otherwise required by the context. The singular shall be taken to mean the plural, and the plural shall mean the singular when required by the context of this Chapter.

    (a)   APPLICANT. “Applicant” is the property owner, authorized agents and employees, who apply for a grading permit pursuant to this Chapter.

    (b)  BENCH. “Bench” is a relatively level surface interrupting the slope of an excavation or embankment in sloping natural ground or cut or fill surfaces.

    (c)   BUILDING PERMIT. “Building permit” means a currently valid building permit issued by the City of San Leandro.

    (d)  CITY. “City” means the City of San Leandro.

    (e)   CITY MANAGER. “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of San Leandro.

    (f)   CITY COUNCIL. “City Council” means the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

    (g)  CIVIL ENGINEER. “Civil Engineer” means a civil engineer registered as such by the State of California.

    (h)  CIVIL ENGINEER IN CHARGE. “Civil engineer in charge” is that particular civil engineer whose signature appears on the Initial Statement of the Engineer (Section 7-12-240) submitted to’ the Engineering and Transportation Department with an Application for Grading Permit (Section 7-12-215)

    (i)   CLEARING AND GRUBBING. “Clearing and Grubbing” is site preparation for grading or construction by mechanical or manual means consisting primarily of, but not limited to, the removal of vegetation.

    (j)   COMPACTION. “Compaction” is the densification or fill by mechanical means.

    (k)  CUT SLOPE. “Cut slope” is a finished or interim surface of graded material caused by the removal of existing soils which exist naturally or as the result of previous filling, dumping or other method of placement.

    (l)   CITY ENGINEER. “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City of San Leandro.

    (m) DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES. “Director of Development Services” means the Director of Development Services of the City of San Leandro.

    (n)  ELEVATION. “Elevation” is the vertical distance above NGV Datum.

    (o)  EROSION. “Erosion” is the wearing away of ground surface due to natural action of the elements.

    (p)  EXCAVATION. “Excavation” means cutting, digging or moving of earth, rock or similar materials and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.

    (q)  EXPANSIVE SOILS. “Expansive soils” are those soils which are likely to cause damage to improvements such as streets, structures and buildings from their natural actions depending on water content.

    (r)   FILL. “Fill” means the depositing or placing of earth, rock or similar materials, from the same or different site, and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.

    (s)   GRADING. “Grading” means excavating or filling, or any combination thereof, and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or filling.

    (t)   LAND DISTURBANCE. “Land disturbance” is any moving or removing of the soil mantle or top six (6) inches of soil whichever is shallower, by manual or mechanical means whether or not that soil is removed from the site, when the disturbed site area is greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet measured horizontally, for all purposes except gardening or agriculture.

    (u)  LAND STABILITY PROBLEM AREA. “Land stability problem area” means any site where there is information available in the Engineering and Transportation Department to indicate special consideration must be undertaken due to purported land stability problems on or in the vicinity of the site.

    (v)  NATURAL PLANTING. “Natural planting” means the planting of varieties of plants which will survive under the natural conditions of graded areas without regular irrigation and maintenance after establishment.

    (w) PERMANENT EXCAVATION OR FILL. “Permanent excavation or fill” means excavation or fill created other than as defined herein as “temporary” excavation or fill.

    (x)  PERSON. “Person” means an individual, business and any other legally constituted entity such as, but not limited to, a partnership and a corporation.

    (y)  PLANS. “Plans” means maps, sketches, profiles, construction drawings and specifications, or any combination thereof as required to adequately describe the work, all as prepared by a Civil Engineer, all in accordance with this Chapter. “Plans” shall also include grading plans, drainage plans, erosion control plans and sedimentation control plans.

    (z)   SEDIMENT. “Sediment” means earth material deposited by water

    (aa) SOILS REPORT. “Soils report” means a report prepared by a California registered civil engineer which shall include, but is not limited to, field test results and observations regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils and recommendations and conclusions for grading procedures and design(s) for corrective action if necessary (including specifications for doing the work). The contents of said report being more specifically designated in Section 7-12-275.

    (bb) SITE. “Site” means all that contiguous parcel of land where grading is required to be accomplished under a permit.

    (cc) SLOPE. “Slope” is an inclined ground surface the inclination or rate of slope of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance, or as a percent using a ratio of vertical rise per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance.

    (dd) SUPERINTENDENT. “Superintendent” is the property owner or that particular agent of the property owner, who is fully responsible for the performance of the work required by this Chapter.

    (ee) TEMPORARY EXCAVATION OR FILL. “Temporary excavation or fill” means excavation of fill created as a temporary condition to accommodate construction of a structure authorized by a valid building permit, and which will not remain after completion of the work.

    (ff) WATERCOURSE. “Watercourse” means stream, stream bed, creek, canal, paved ditch, lake or other open drainage way.

    (gg) WET SEASON (OR RAINY SEASON). “Wet Season (or Rainy Season)” is October 15th through April 15th inclusive.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Section 7-12-100)

 

ARTICLE 2. PERMIT—APPLICATION
7-12-200 PERMIT—WHEN REQUIRED.
    No person shall do or cause any grading on property without first having obtained a permit to do so from the City Engineer if such grading will result in any of the following:

    (a)   The volume of excavation or fill will exceed fifty (50) cubic yards provided either:

    (1)  The existing or the resulting rate of slope will exceed twenty percent (20%), or

    (2)  The vertical distance between the top and bottom of excavation or fill will exceed five (5) feet at any location.

    (b)  Any permanently unretained excavation or fill exceeding five (5) cubic yards where the vertical distance between the top and bottom of the excavation or fill exceeds five (5) feet at any location, disregarding benches; and the rate of slope of the surface exceeds two to one (2:1) for fill or one and one-half to one (1 1/2:1) for excavation, regardless of findings in the “Soils Report” called for in Section 7-12-275 herein.

    (c)   Any excavation or fill exceeding five (5) cubic yards within fifteen (15) horizontal feet of any property line if the bottom of such excavation is below a line descending at a rate of slope of two to one (2:1) from the existing ground surface at such property line, or if the top of such fill is above a line ascending at a rate of two to one (2:1) from such property line, regardless of the findings in the “Soils Report” called for in Section 7-12-275 herein.

    (d)  Grading in connection with a building, swimming pool retaining wall or other structure where the vertical distance between top and bottom of the unretained slope will exceed five feet at any point, disregarding benches, when the cut slope exceeds one and one-half to one (1 1/2:1) or the fill slope exceeds two to one (2:1).

    (e)   Any retained or unretained excavation or fill of any volume and height where the City Engineer has information or purported land stability problems on or in the vicinity of the site (i.e., “Land Stability Problem Area”).

    (f)   Any “land disturbance” as defined in Section 7-12-100, where the rate of slope of the ground surface exceeds twenty percent (20%).

    (g)  An excavation or fill which will encroach on or alter a natural drainage channel or watercourse.

    (h)  The construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or installation of any structure in any natural watercourse.

    (i)   Removal of the natural vegetation or groundcover from an area in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet.

    Grading of an emergency nature to safeguard life or property may be undertaken prior to the issuance of a grading permit. If the emergency work will result in any of the criteria set forth above, an application for grading permit shall be initiated with the City Engineer no later than ten (10) days after the commencement of the emergency and said application shall be diligently pursued by the applicant.

    A separate permit shall be required for each non-contiguous site. One permit may cover both an excavation and a fill on the same site. Property of a given ownership “divided” by a street, path, easement, is considered contiguous.

 

7-12-205 PERMIT—WHEN NOT REQUIRED.
    No permit shall be required pursuant to this Chapter for any of the following:

    (a)   Temporary excavations in a public street or public right-of-way for which a permit has been issued under Chapter 1 of Title V of this Code.

    (b)  Any public agency which has a reciprocity agreement with the City of San Leandro pursuant to work under this Chapter.

    (c)   Any excavation below finished grade for basement, footing, retaining wall. swimming pool or other structure authorized by a valid building or foundation permit, which excavation will be completely occupied by and retained by the structure, provided such excavation is conducted in accordance with the laws of the State of California relating to lateral support when the existing and finished ground slope will not exceed ten percent (10%).

    (d)  A fill above existing grade, which fill will be retained by the exterior wall of a building, a retaining wall, swimming pool or other structure authorized by a valid building permit when the existing and finished ground slope will not exceed ten percent (10%).

    (e)   Grading within a street to conform to elevations established by the City Engineer and for which a permit has been issued under the provisions of Title V of this Code.

    (f)   For test trenches, pits and borings done under the supervision of a civil engineer or registered geologist or certified engineering geologist in accordance with the applicable regulations of the City and the State of California.

    (g)  Cemetery graves.

    (h)  Water wells.

    (i)   Grading in accordance with plans incorporated in an approved surface mining permit, reclamation plan or sanitary landfill.

    (j)   Denudation ordered in writing by the Fire Marshal for the preservation of life or property.

 

7-12-210 PERMIT APPLICATION—APPLICATION TO INCLUDE.
The application for a grading permit must include all of the following items:

    (a)   Application form.

    (b)  Vicinity Map, Site Map and grading plan.

    (c)   Erosion and sedimentation control, and drainage plan. (Can be shown on grading plan.)

    (d)  Pollutant control plan.

    (e)   Statement(s) of the engineer(s) in charge.

    (f)   Soils Report, unless omission of same is approved in writing by the City Engineer. Contents of the Soils Report shall be as delineated in Section 7-12-275.

    (g)  A landscape addendum to the erosion and sediment control plans by a licensed landscape architect when required by the Director of Development Services.

    (h)  Proposed work schedule.

    (i)   Fee and deposit for review of the application in accordance with the current Master Fee Schedule.

    (j)   Itemized estimate of cost of work by a Civil Engineer (Including retaining structures.)

    (k)  Such other items as may be required by the City Engineer or duly authorized representative to aid in the understanding and review of the proposed grading work.

 

7-12-215 PERMIT APPLICATION—APPLICATION FORM.
    The following information is required on the grading permit application form:

    (a)   A description of the property in sufficient detail to permit its identification and general location.

    (b)  The name(s) and address(es) and phone numbers of the owner or owners of the property.

    (c) A statement of the purpose of the grading work.

    (d)  Whether the grading is for the purpose of preparing the site for a subdivision under the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and Title VII, Chapter 1 of this Code.

    (e)   The name, address, telephone number and contractor’s license number of the person or firm who will be doing the grading.

    (f)   The names, addresses, or registration numbers, of the civil engineer(s) in charge who will direct the grading work, who prepared the grading plans and who will provide the testing and inspection of the work.

    (g)  The amount in cubic yards of the proposed excavation and fill and the amount of the cumulative total of grading work.

    (h)  The equipment and methods to be used in the grading work.

    (i)   Whether any material will be hauled from or imported onto the site over public streets, and if so, the site from which or to which said material will be moved and the routes to be used.

    (j)   The approximate starting and completion dates of the grading work.

    (k)  An estimate of total cost of all grading work.

    (l)   Whether the grading is located within the Special Studies Zone, Flood Hazard Area, watercourse, or Land Stability Problem Area or Site Containing Expansive Soils.

    (m) The signature of the owner or authorized agent and the date of the application.

    (n)  Such further applicable information, including a legal description of the site, as the City Engineer may require in order to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

 

7-12-220 PERMIT APPLICATION—VICINITY MAP.
    The vicinity map shall show the project site in relationship to the surrounding area’s water courses, water bodies and other significant geographic features, roads and other significant structures.

 

7-12-225 PERMIT APPLICATION—SITE MAP AND GRADING PLAN.
    The site map and grading plan shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer and shall include all of the following:

    (a)   A topographic and boundary survey of the site showing existing and proposed contours at not more than five (5) foot intervals to a minimum scale of 1:240 (1=20) for all sites to be graded containing up to and including five (5) acres. Sites containing more than five (5) acres shall have contours at intervals and a minimum scale subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Contour lines shall extend to the curb line of any City standard improved street or to the center line of any other street. Enough off-site contours shall also be included to show how surface runoff of storm water will flow onto and off of the site.

    (b)  Proposed limits of cuts and fills, both temporary and permanent, and other earthwork clearly designated.

    (c)   Proposed retaining structures.

    (d)  Drainage plan — to include existing, temporary, and final drainage facilities which shall be coordinated with erosion and sediment control plans.

    (e)   Existing and proposed improvements on the site.

    (f)   Existing off-site structures within fifteen (15) feet of the site boundary and other off-site improvements which may be affected by the grading work.

    (g)  Public and private easements of record.

    (h)  A Soils report, as hereinbefore defined, prepared by a California registered civil engineer, when required by the City Engineer.

    (i)   Typical engineering cross sections of areas to be graded and profiles of all proposed traveled ways for vehicles and pedestrians.

    (j)   Measures to be taken to protect against potential hazards arising during the progress of the grading work.

    (k)  If the site is in the Special Studies Zone, any purported fault trace which may or does cross or affect the site to be graded.

    (l)   All proposed corrective actions to be taken to alleviate existing site conditions detrimental to the improvements proposed including expansive soils and land stability problems.

    (m) Any such additional items as required by the City Engineer to clarify or provide additional information which may be necessary to allow a complete review of the proposed work.

 

7-12-230 PERMIT APPLICATION—EROSION CONTROL AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL, AND DRAINAGE PLANS.
    Erosion control and sedimentation control, and drainage plans shall be prepared by a Civil Engineer and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Overall, the plans shall ensure that storm water from the site meets the quality standards dictated by the “Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Program Ordinance No. 92-011.” The erosion and sediment control plans shall be prepared to the current “Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Manual of Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control Measures” and the “Handbook for Erosion and Sediment Control,” and shall include the following:

    (a)   Interim Measures: The plans shall include interim erosion and sedimentation control measures to be taken during wet seasons until permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures can adequately minimize erosion, excessive storm water runoff and sedimentation.

    The plans shall include all necessary measures to be taken to prevent excessive storm water runoff or carrying by storm water runoff of solid materials onto lands of adjacent property owners, public streets, or to watercourses as a result of conditions created by grading operations.

    The plans shall include, but not be limited to, such measures as short-term erosion control planting, waterproof slope covering, check dams, interceptor ditches, benches, storm drains, dissipation structures, diversion dikes, retarding berms and barriers, devices to trap, store and filter out sediment, and storm water retention basins. Off-site work by the applicant may be necessary.

    The applicant shall provide any off-site permission or easements necessary and present written proof thereof to the City Engineer.

    The plan shall include a schedule for the installation and maintenance of the erosion and sediment control measures. Erosion and sediment control work shall be coordinated with grading work.

    A narrative description shall also be provided of measures to be taken, planting materials and specifications, and maintenance provisions. There shall be a clear notation that the plans are subject to changes as changing conditions occur. Calculations of anticipated storm water runoff and sediment volumes shall be included, if required by the City Engineer.

    (b)  Permanent Measures: The plans shall include permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures which shall be primarily oriented towards prevention of erosion and shall include, but not be limited to, such measures as permanent erosion control planting, paved ditches, planted swales, benches, storm drains, dissipation structures, rip rap, and storm water retention basins.

    A narrative description shall also be provided of measures to be taken, specifications for planting materials, fertilizers, planting and maintenance procedures.

    An estimate of the length of time which will be required for the planting to produce a permanent coverage which will be sufficient to provide the degree of erosion control protection for which it is designed.

 

7-12-235 PERMIT APPLICATION—POLLUTANT CONTROL PLAN.
    Pollutant control plan shall be prepared by a civil engineer and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The pollutant control plan shall identify all construction or contractor activities that could cause pollutants in the storm water and what those pollutants are. Pollutants may include dust, fuels, pesticides, fertilizers and construction materials.

    The pollutant control plan shall also include a description or measures or practices to control these pollutants. The plan shall further include measures to prevent or control pollutants in runoff after construction is complete.

    The “Storm Water Quality Controls for New Developments in Santa Clara Valley and Alameda County” and the “California Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbooks” for construction and municipal activities, respectively, shall serve as guide for preparing the Pollutant Control Plan.

    If required by Federal, State or local laws and regulations to file a Notice of Intent (NOI), the applicant shall not be issued a grading permit until he/she has filed the required NOI to the State Water Resources Quality Board and has prepared a Storm Water Pollutant Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and said SWPPP has been reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.

 

7-12-240 PERMIT APPLICATION—INITIAL STATEMENT(S) OF THE CIVIL ENGINEER(S) IN CHARGE.
    Prior to the issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall submit an Initial Statement of the Engineer” shown below, signed by a civil engineer who will be responsible for the grading work. Such responsibility is defined in Section 7-12-245 below.

    (a)   One Civil Engineer In Charge: Where one civil engineer will be in responsible charge of the entire grading project, including but not limited to the preparation of the grading plans, the exact following initial statement of the engineer is required:

 

    Date _____________

 

    City Engineer

    835 East 14th Street   RE: Grading at

    San Leandro, CA 94577

 

    Initial Statement of the Engineer

 

           I have been retained by ______________

    (Applicant) 

    to be in responsible charge of the grading work at subject property. I will assume full responsibility as responsibility is defined in Section 7-12-245 below for carrying out the following to the best of my knowledge and ability:

           (1) Assuring that testing and inspection required for the work in progress and the completed work shall be accomplished in a professional manner to determine whether all the work is being/was done in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer.

           (2) Notifying the Applicant, verbally and in writing (with a copy to the City Engineer), of any work not being performed in accordance with the approved plans and. specifications.

           (3) Notifying the Applicant, verbally and in writing (with a copy to the City Engineer) of any work not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications.

           (4) Notifying the Applicant, verbally and in writing, of the modification(s) required in his or her performance and the necessary corrective measures to be taken to cure all deficiencies.

           (5) Submitting amended grading, erosion and sedimentation control, and pollutant control plans (through the Applicant) to the City Engineer for his or her review and approval for any significant changes caused by unforseen conditions, along with a report setting forth the reasons for these changes and the recommended changes to the improvement plans engendered as a result of the amended plans.

           (6) Notifying the Applicant, verbally and in writing (with a copy to the City Engineer), of any portion of the grading work affected by the amended plans and shall recommend whether or not the Applicant should proceed with the work before the amended plans are approved by the City Engineer.

           (7) Submitting upon the Applicant’s satisfactory completion of work under the permit, a Statement of Completion with the results of all tests and inspections attached thereto.

           (8) Stating in writing, along with the Statement of Completion, that the interim erosion control and sediment control measures appear to be adequate if properly maintained until the permanent erosion control measures are fully established, if any are required.

           If my services on the job are terminated, I will, at said time of termination, submit to the City Engineer, a Statement of Partial Completion addressing the progress and conditions of all of the applicable items above and attach thereto the results of such inspections and tests which have been completed.

   

    (SEAL)

 

    Signed: ______________________

    Registered Civil Engineer No. _____________

    (Exp. Date)

 

    (b) Different Civil Engineer In Charge: When the civil engineer in charge is other than the civil engineer who prepared the approved plan, the following paragraph will be added to the letter in subsection (a) above:

 

           “I have examined the plans to be used for this work as prepared by (name and registration of Civil Engineer) dated _____________ and hereby approve and adopt them as to the portions concerning the work to be performed under this permit.”

 

    (c)   Where More Than One Civil Engineer In Charge: Where more than one civil engineer shall function as civil engineer in charge and divide their responsibilities, each will submit in the exact text, the following initial statement of the engineer:

 

    Date _____________

 

    City Engineer

    835 East 14th Street   RE: Grading at

    San Leandro, CA 94577

 

    INITIAL STATEMENT OF THE ENGINEER (DIVIDED RESPONSIBILITY)

 

           I have been retained by _____________

    (Applicant) 

    to be in responsible charge of the portions grading work enumerated below.

           I will assume full responsibility as responsibility as defined in Section II below for carrying out the following to the best of my knowledge and ability: (Each individual engineer shall enumerate and provide the portions of work he or she is to be responsible for.)

           If my services on the job are terminated, I will, at said time of termination, submit to the City Engineer, a Statement of Partial Completion addressing the progress and conditions of all of the applicable items above and attach thereto the results of such inspections and tests which have been completed.

 

    (SEAL)

 

    Signed: _____________

    Registered Engineer No. _____________

    (Exp. Date)

 

    (d)  When those civil engineers in charge, as specified in subsection (c) above, are not the civil engineers who prepared the approved plan, each civil engineer in charge shall add the paragraph shown in subsection (b) above.

    (e)   No initial statement(s) of the engineer shall be accepted as complete until all responsibilities addressed in subsection (a) above have been covered by one or more civil engineer(s) in charge.

 

7-12-245 PERMIT APPLICATION—INITIAL STATEMENTS OF THE CIVIL ENGINEER(S) IN CHARGE—RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ENGINEER DEFINED.
    The responsibilities of the civil engineer(s) in charge are defined as follows:

    (a)   Inspection and Testing: The civil engineer in charge shall inspect the work in progress and perform such tests as may be necessary during the progress of the work to determine whether all grading work is done in accordance with the Plans and Specifications approved by the City Engineer.

    The City Engineer or authorized representative shall conduct unscheduled inspections of grading work in progress to assess whether such work poses a hazard to life and public or private property.

    (b)  Substandard Performance: Notification of Applicant: When the inspection and testing reveals that the work is not being properly performed, and/or all or any portion of the work does not meet with the requirements of the approved plans and specifications, he or she shall immediately notify the applicant, verbally and in writing (with a copy to the City Engineer).

    The civil engineer in charge shall also notify the applicant of any modifications which are required in his or her performance and the necessary corrective measures to be taken to cure the deficiencies in the work.

    (c)   Chances in the Approved Plans and Specifications Due to Unforeseen Conditions: If, during the progress of the grading work, the civil engineer in charge finds it necessary to require significant changes due to unforseen conditions, he or she shall submit (through the applicant), amended plans and specifications for the approval of the City Engineer. He or she shall also submit, at that time, a report setting forth the reason for the changes. The report shall also include any recommended changes to future improvement plans engendered as a result of the amended plan.

    The civil engineer in charge shall also notify, verbally and in writing (with a copy to the City Engineer), the applicant of any portion of the grading work affected by the amended plans and recommend whether or not work should proceed before the amended plans are approved by the City Engineer.

    (d)  Upon completion of the grading work, the civil engineer in charge shall submit a statement of completion shown in Section 7-12-500. He or she shall, at that time, also state in writing that interim erosion and sedimentation control measures, where required by the City Engineer, have been taken and appear to be adequate until permanent erosion control planting is effectively established.

    (e)   It shall not be the responsibility of the civil engineer in charge to perform the direction or supervision of the personnel and equipment performing the actual grading work unless they are in the employ of the civil engineer in charge.

    (f)   It shall not be the responsibility of the civil engineer in charge to supervise, direct, inspect, or test any improvements being constructed coincidentally with the grading work but not a part of the approved grading, erosion and sedimentation control, and pollutant control plans.

 

7-12-250 PERMIT APPLICATION—PROPOSED WORK SCHEDULE.
    The applicant must submit a master work schedule showing the following information:

    (a)   Proposed grading schedule.

    (b)  Proposed conditions of the site on each July 15, August 15, September 15, October 1, and October 15, during which the permit is in effect.

    (c)   Proposed schedule for installation of all interim drainage, erosion, and sediment control measures including, but not limited to, the state of completion of erosion and sediment control devices and vegetative measures on each of the dates set forth in subsection (b) above (also see Section 7-12-230).

    (d)  Schedule for construction of final improvements, if any.

    (e)   Schedule for installation of permanent erosion and sediment control devices where required (see Section 7-12-230).

 

7-12-255 PERMIT APPLICATION—ITEMIZED ESTIMATE OF COST OF WORK BY CIVIL ENGINEER.
    Quantities and costs of all the work to be done under the grading permit shall be submitted by a civil engineer to aid in establishing values for bonds or other surety which may be required. The actual value of bond or surety shall be determined by the City Engineer.

 

7-12-260 PERMIT APPLICATION—RELATED TO SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES DESIGNATED BY STATE GEOLOGIST (GEOLOGIC REPORT).
    No grading permit shall be issued for any site in the Special Studies Zones designated by the State Geologist before a geologic report has been submitted and approved pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 10 of Title VII of this Code. Said report and review shall be submitted as a part of the application for grading permit along with all other material required by this Chapter.

 

7-12-265 PERMIT APPLICATION—RELATED TO FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
    No grading permit shall be issued for any site located in a designated Flood Hazard Area unless the grading plan provides for mitigation measures relative to the projected flood hazard. The mitigation methods are subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.

 

7-12-270 PERMIT APPLICATION—RELATED TO EXPANSIVE SOILS CONDITIONS.
    No grading permit shall be issued for any site which is underlain by expansive soils unless the grading plan includes mitigation measures to prevent structural damages which may be caused by conditions due to expansive soils.

 

7-12-275 PERMIT APPLICATION—SOILS REPORT, CONTENTS.
    All soils reports shall be based at least in part, on information obtained from on-site testing. The minimum contents of a soils report submitted pursuant to this Chapter shall be as follows:

    (a)   Logs of Borings and/or Profiles of Test Pits and Trenches:

    (1)  Borings:

    (i)   The minimum number of borings acceptable, when not used in combination with test pits or trenches, shall be two (2), when in the opinion of the soils engineer such borings shall be sufficient to establish a soils profile suitable for the design of all footings, foundations and retaining structures.

    (ii)  The depth of each boring shall be sufficient to provide adequate design criteria for all proposed structures.

    (iii) All boring shall be included in the soils report logs.

    (2)  Test Pits and Trenches:

    (i)   Test pits and trenches shall be of sufficient length and depth to establish a suitable soils profile for the design of all proposed structures.

    (ii)  Soils profile of all test pits and trenches shall be included in the soils report.

    (b)  A plat shall be included which shows the relationship of all borings, test pits and trenches to the exterior boundary of the site. The plat shall also show the location of all proposed site improvements. All proposed improvements shall be labeled.

    (c)   Copies of all data generated by field and/or laboratory testing to determine allowable soil bearing pressures, sheer strength, active and passive pressures, maximum allowable slopes where applicable and any such other information which may be required for the proper design of foundations, retaining walls and other structures to be erected subsequent to or concurrent with work done under the grading permit.

    (d)  A written report which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

    (1)  Site description.

    (2)  Local and site geology.

    (3)  Review of previous field and laboratory investigations on the site, it any.

    (4)  Review of information on or in the vicinity of the site on file at the Office of the City Engineer, if any.

    (5)  Site stability shall be addressed with particular attention to existing conditions and proposed corrective actions at locations where land stability problems exist

    (6)  Conclusions and recommendations for foundations and retaining structures, resistance to lateral loading, slopes and specifications for fills and pavement design as required.

    (7)  Conclusions and recommendations for temporary and permanent erosion control and drainage if not provided in a separate report appended to the required soils report.

    (8)  All other items which the soils engineer deems necessary.

    (9)  The signature and California registration number and expiration date of the civil engineer preparing the report.

    (e)   The city engineer may reject any report he or she believes is not sufficient.

 

7-12-280 PERMIT APPLICATION—REFERRED TO THE DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
    All applications for grading permits shall be referred to the Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall report on any aspect of the proposed grading, excavation, or fill that relates to or affects the San Leandro General Plan, and the zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.

 

7-12-285 PERMIT APPLICATION—REFERRED TO THE DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES—LANDSCAPE ADDENDUM TO THE GRADING PLANS—REPORT—CONTENTS.
    (a)   A landscape addendum to the grading plans may be required at the discretion of the Director of Development Services. The landscape plan, when required, shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect to the current professional standards in landscape architecture and is subject to the approval of the Director of Development Services.

    (b)  The Director of Development Services upon completion of his or her investigation including review of the Landscape Addendum (when required), shall transmit his or her report and recommendations to the City Engineer, and no permit shall be issued until such report has been received.

    (c)   The Director of Development Services may prescribe the scale for required landscape plans. Further he or she may require any of the following information to be submitted as part of those plans.

    (1)  Proposed grading contours at specified intervals; existing contours; all grades related to established data or bench mark;

    (2)  Yard drainage (and roof drainage, if applicable); together with controlling grades and dimensions or all tile lines, culverts, catch basins, drain inlet, turf and masonry gutters; and all curbs, drainage disposal, and all existing facilities to be used;

    (3)  Outlines of buildings and other improvements within the project, together with physical features of the site, for the purpose of establishing the location and relationship of planting and related construction;

    (4)  A list of plant material giving standardized botanical plant names and key numbers for each variety, for reference to the plan; and, a description common to the trade;

    (5)  A specification describing the methods for planting the areas to be landscaped including (a) soil preparation, fertilization, plant material and methods of planting; and (b) initial maintenance of the plant material and slopes until a specified percentage of plant coverage is established uniformly on the cut and fill slopes;

    (6)  A statement by the author of the landscape plans giving his or her opinion regarding; (a) the time after planting in which the specified planting with the specified initial maintenance normally will produce the specified percentage of plant coverage in the slope control areas; and (b) the time in which this specific plant coverage, without any special additional maintenance, normally will produce coverage of permanent planting which will control erosion;

    (7)  Details of all items and features pertaining to site preservation and improvement such as retaining walls, tree wells, and details not shown on other plans accompanying the application;

    (8)  Any other details, including further plans, the reviewing Department may require to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

    (d)  If the City Engineer deems it necessary, any soil or civil engineer may be required to review and sign the landscape plans on which they have prepared grading or soils reports.

 

7-12-290 PERMIT APPLICATION—REFERRAL TO OTHER PUBLIC AGENCIES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES.
    Upon receipt, the City Engineer may refer a copy of any permit application to any other public agency or public utility which, in his or her judgment, may have an interest in or be affected by the proposed grading. The City Engineer, in acting upon the permit application, may consider any report or recommendation received from such other public agency or public utility.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Sections 7-12-200 — 7-12-290)

 

ARTICLE 3. PERMIT—ISSUANCE—CONDITIONS
7-12-300 PERMIT ISSUANCE—EFFECT IN GENERAL.
    (a)   A permit issued under this Chapter authorizes only the work described or illustrated in the permit as issued or on the site plans and specifications constituting a part of the permit.

    The applicant shall bear full responsibility for the performance of the work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and any approved modifications thereof, and also shall bear full responsibility for accomplishing the work in accordance with the recommendations of the civil engineer in charge during the progress of the work.

    The applicant or designated superintendent shall be present at all times work is in progress and shall be completely responsible for the supervision and direction of all personnel and equipment performing work under the grading permit.

    (b)  No permit issued under this Chapter shall be deemed to relieve the applicant or any property owner of responsibility for securing any required permit for work to be done regulated under any other law, any department, or any division of the City.

    (c)   A permit issued under this Chapter shall not relieve any person from liability, nor impose liability on the City, for damage to persons or public or private property; nor shall compliance with such permit or any conditions therein relieve any person from such liability.

 

7-12-305 PERMIT—CONDITIONS UPON ISSUANCE.
    In granting any permit under this Chapter, the City Engineer may attach such conditions thereto as he or she deems reasonably necessary to safeguard life, public and private property, and to insure that the work will be carried out in an orderly manner in conformance with all regulations and without creating a public nuisance; and he or she may add to, remove, or change such conditions from time to time during the duration of the permit as he or she deems reasonably necessary as a result of changed conditions or otherwise. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:

    (a)   Limitations on the hours of operations, days of operations or the period of the year in which the work may be performed.

    (b)  Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment to be used.

    (c)   Prohibition or restriction on the use of explosives.

    (d)  Designation of the routes over which the materials may be transported.

    (e)   Requirements as to the suppression of dust and prevention against spilling or tracking of dirt, and the prevention of excessive noise or other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood and the general public, or any portion thereof.

    (f)   Regulations as to the use of public streets and places in the course of the work.

    (g)  Regulations for the repair and cleaning of streets and other public facilities if their safe, operable, and clean condition has been jeopardized.

    (h)  Requirements for safe and adequate drainage of the site.

    (i)   A requirement that approval of the City Engineer be secured before any work which has been commenced may be discontinued.

    (j)   A requirement that men and equipment be provided at the site during storms to prevent damage to other property from flooding or the depositing of material washed from the site.

    (k)  Requirements for fences, barricades or other protective devices.

    (1)  Requirements pertaining to reshaping and planting the site, including the limit for such work.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Sections 7-12-300 — 7-12-305)

 

ARTICLE 4. PERMIT—DENIAL
7-12-400 PERMIT—GROUNDS FOR DENIAL—HAZARD.
    The City Engineer shall deny a permit if any violation of this Code, or any other application, local, State, or Federal laws, rules, and regulations is found to exist, or whenever, in his or her judgment, the proposed work will directly or indirectly create a hazard to human life or endanger public or private property. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the danger or hazard can be eliminated by the erection or installation of protective devices or by performing the work in a particular manner approved by the City Engineer, the City Engineer may grant a permit upon conditions that the protective and precautionary work or manner of performing the work, as approved, shall be used.

 

7-12-405 PERMIT—GROUNDS FOR DENIAL—DISINTERESTED CIVIL ENGINEER IN CHARGE.
    In all cases where a grading permit is required, to prevent potential conflicts of interest and to assure that inspection and testing of the grading work is performed by a disinterested party, neither the owner of the property, nor the builder who is to construct the improvements on the property or perform the grading work, shall be the civil engineer in charge that provides any statement of engineer pursuant to the requirements or this Chapter.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Sections 7-12-400 — 7-12-405)

 

ARTICLE 5. PERMIT—COMPLETION—TIME OF VALIDITY
7-12-500 STATEMENT OF COMPLETION OF CIVIL ENGINEERS IN CHARGE (FINAL COMPLETION).
    Within ten (10) days after completion of the work authorized by the grading permit, the civil engineer(s) in charge shall provide the following written statement of completion in his/their areas of responsibility.

    “The grading work under any permit shall not be considered complete until each of the following items have been addressed by the civil engineer in charge, who shall file with the City Engineer, a written statement pursuant to Section 7-12-240 above stating that said items have been completed and/or are true to the best of his or her knowledge and belief:

    (a)   His/their appropriate portion of grading work has been done in accordance with the plans and amended plans prepared or adjusted by him or her and approved by the City Engineer. All modifications made by the civil engineer in charge shall be specifically set forth in his or her statement of completion.

    (b)  In his or her opinion, the finished graded slopes in the subject area are in a stable condition.

    (c)   Where required by the City Engineer, interim and/or permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures have been taken, and that where interim measures have been taken, they will adequately control erosion and sedimentation if properly maintained, until permanent erosion control planting is effectively established.

    (d)  The magnitude of the total settlements and differential settlements which are likely to occur, the allowable loads or bearing pressures which may be imposed, and stating that compaction is adequate for the uses proposed for the property and adequate to develop the recommended bearing pressures.

    (e)   Any limitations which should be imposed on the development of the property because of soil conditions and amendments to the approved grading plan.

    (f)   The civil engineer(s) in charge shall also submit with the above items, all documentation necessary to support his/their statement(s) of completion, (i.e., records of inspections, tests, observations, etc.)”

 

7-12-505 STATEMENT OF COMPLETION OF CIVIL ENGINEER(S) IN CHARGE—PARTIAL COMPLETION.
    When in the estimation of the civil engineer in charge of directing the work, an entire grading project cannot be completed before construction must proceed on structural foundations or retaining structures in order to provide for the public and private welfare, safety and convenience, the City Engineer may accept a partial written statement addressing the satisfactory completion of those items above. Separate building permits may then be issued for the necessary structures when the structural plans meet with the approval of the Chief Building Official. However, the total grading work shall be addressed in a statement of completion shown above prior to final inspection of any structures.

 

7-12-510 STATEMENT OF COMPLETION OF CIVIL ENGINEER(S) IN CHARGE—RESPONSIBILITY CHANGES HANDS.
    In all grading operations, if the services of one civil engineer in charge are terminated and another civil engineer assumes the responsibility for the remainder of the work, each Civil Engineer shall file the statement of completion referred to above with respect to the portion of the work for which he or she is responsible and stating what work, if any, was improperly or inadequately done at the time of the termination of his or her responsibility. No grading work shall proceed unless the civil engineer in charge takes the responsibilities pursuant to Section 7-12-245 above, and the City Engineer shall suspend any permit when the grading work is not under the responsibility of a civil engineer in charge.

 

7-12-515 STATEMENT OF COMPLETION OF CIVIL ENGINEER(S) IN CHARGE—GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF BUILDING PERMIT.
    When a grading permit is issued on the site, the Chief Building Official shall be notified that no Building Permit for the construction of any structure on the property shall be issued until statement(s) of completion covering the completed grading work has/have been filed, unless the issuance of a Building Permit is required to allow construction of retaining walls or other structures designed in accordance with the San Leandro Building Code in order to allow completion of the grading work.

 

7-12-520 STATEMENT OF COMPLETION OF THE CIVIL ENGINEER(S) IN CHARGE—RELATED TO FINAL INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
    No final inspection shall be made; no Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted by the Chief Building Official or authorized representative(s) for any structures located on the site for which a grading permit has been issued prior to the acceptance of the statement of completion of the civil engineer in charge by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may reject a statement of completion which, in his or her judgment, does not adequately meet the requirements of 7-12-500 above.

 

7-12-525 PERMIT—TIME OF VALIDITY.
    All grading permits shall become invalid thirty (30) days after the estimated completion date indicated on the application or one year after the date on which the permit is issued, whichever is earlier. When the grading work cannot be completed within one year after the permit is issued, the grading permit may be renewed. Any renewal requests must be accompanied by payment of a renewal fee equal to one-half the original permit charges and by a statement by the civil engineer in charge that:

    (a)   The grading work already performed was accomplished in accordance with the approved plans and amended plans, if any.

    (b)  All terms and agreements in the “Initial Statement of Engineer” submitted with the original application are still in force and will be adhered to.

    (c)   If the grading work cannot be completed and any retaining structures necessary cannot be completely constructed prior to the wet season, the engineer in charge shall show what actions have been taken to eliminate any dangerous conditions which may result from the incompleteness of the grading work, or he or she shall state no such actions are necessary. The addendum shall bear his or her signature and registration number.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/13/93, Sections 7-12-500 — 7-12-525)

 

ARTICLE 6. PERMIT—GENERAL REQUIREMENTS—BONDS—DEFAULT
7-12-600 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE FOR ALL GRADING WORK UNLESS MODIFIED BY THE CITY ENGINEER.
    The following shall apply to all grading work unless otherwise specified in the soils report and grading plan by the applicant’s civil engineer in charge which has been approved by the City Engineer or duly authorized representatives:

    (a)   Grading, erosion control, sedimentation and pollutant control work shall be done in accordance with plans hereinbefore described.

    (b)  No grading work shall be done during the wet season unless specifically permitted in writing by the City Engineer.

    (c)   Temporary erosion and sedimentation control facilities shall be completely in place prior to October 15th, and shall be diligently maintained to ensure effectiveness through April 15th.

    (d)  The hours of grading operations shall be only between 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (Monday-Saturday) unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer or authorized representative. No grading shall be done on Sundays except if authorized by the City Engineer for reasons of public safety.

    (e)   No clearing and grubbing shall take place on any site for which a grading permit is required prior to the issuance of a valid grading permit.

    (f)   Where a tree removal permit is required by this Code, no tree removal shall take place if a grading permit is required until both permits have been granted.

    (g)  No grading shall be approved on properties adjacent to the site without the written permission of the adjacent property owner. Such written permission shall be notarized and acknowledged and presented to the City Engineer as part of the items required with the application for grading permit.

    (h)  The rate of slope of the surface of permanent fills shall not be steeper than two to one (2:1) and the rate of slope of permanent cut slopes, shall not be steeper than one and one-half to one (1 1/2:1), unless otherwise recommended in the soils report and approved in writing by the City Engineer.

    (i)   Drainage facilities shall be provided to convey storm waters to a natural watercourse, swale or other drainage way, or to a public storm drainage system at locations and in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. Adequate measures shall be taken to control storm waters during grading operations. The quality of storm water from the site shall be as required in the “Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Program Ordinance.” The current “Storm Water Quality Controls for New Developments in Santa Clara Valley and Alameda County,” otherwise known as the Best Management Practices Manual, shall serve as a guide to achieving the required storm water quality.

    (j)   Erosion control shall include planting of all graded areas to be left exposed to the elements in accordance with the planned maintenance of such areas.

    (k)  No grading shall be done which will cause sloughing of materials from or onto adjoining property.

    (l)   Applicant shall not dump, move or place any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material so as to cause the same to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon or over the premises of another without the express consent of the owner of such premises so affected or upon or over any public place or way.

    (m) Applicant shall not, when hauling any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone, or other excavated material over any public street, alley or other public place, allow such material to blow or spill over and upon such street, alley, or place or adjacent private property.

    (n)  If due to a violation of subsections (l) and (m) of this section, any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any public place or way, the applicant therefor shall cause the same to be removed from such public place or way within thirty-six (36) hours. In the event it is not so removed, the City Engineer shall cause such removal and the cost of such removal by the City Engineer shall be paid to the City by the applicant who failed to so remove the material.

    (o)  Applicant shall not excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or the public property without supporting and protecting such public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property from settling, cracking, or other damage which might result from such excavation. Should the nature of the excavation in the opinion of the City Engineer create a hazard to life unless adequately fenced, the applicant shall construct such fences or guard rails to safeguard persons using the public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property as the City Engineer may require.

    (p)  If at any stage of work on an excavation or fill the City Engineer determines by inspection that the nature or the formation is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger any property or public way, the City Engineer may require as a condition to allowing further work to be done that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as the City Engineer considers necessary to avoid such likelihood of danger. Such safety precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a flatter exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing.

 

7-12-605 BONDS—PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED FOR POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS CONDITION.
    A performance bond or other security acceptable to the City Engineer shall be required for every grading permit issued under this Chapter when the volume of material to be graded exceeds five hundred (500) cubic yards.

    Ten percent (10%) of the required amount shall be cash. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the City Engineer after consideration of the estimated cost of the work, the possible consequences of noncompletion, particularly with respect to adjacent properties, public safety and any other relevant factors. The bond shall remain in full force and effect until the statement of completion in accordance with Section 7-12-500 has been accepted by the City Engineer. The bond shall obligate the principal, his or her executors, administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, with the surety, and shall inure to the benefit of the City, its officers, and employees.

    The bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the work under the grading permit and the immediate abatement of any conditions listed in Section 7-12-600. Failure of the person to whom the permit is issued to abate such hazard(s) shall result in summary abatement pursuant to Section 7-12-800.

 

7-12-610 BONDS—EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL BOND.
    Where erosion and sedimentation control work is required as a part of the approved grading plan, the City Engineer may require such work to be bonded either separately from, or along with any grading bonds which may be required.

    Where a separate bond is required for the erosion and sedimentation control work, ten percent (10%) of the required amount shall be cash.

    Where the erosion control work is bonded along with the grading work, ten percent (10%) of the total required amount for the combined aspects of work shall be cash.

    The erosion and sedimentation control bond shall be conditioned on the performance of the erosion and sedimentation control portion of the approved grading plan and shall remain in full force and effect during the “Wet Season” or such other time period which shall be determined by the City Engineer.

 

7-12-615 BONDS—NOTICE OF DEFAULT.
    Whenever the City Engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety of the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the City Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.

    The principal shall have thirty (30) days from the delivery date of the notice to comply with same or to appeal to the City Engineer; except that in an emergency, the City Engineer shall have the authority to take action three (3) days after giving the before-mentioned notice to the principal.

    The cash portion of the surety provided to the City shall be used by the City Engineer to initiate any corrective actions he or she deems necessary. Further funding shall be provided by the surety in accordance with Section 7-12-620 of this Code.

 

7-12-620 BONDS—DUTY OF SURETY.
    After receipt of such notice of default, the surety must cause the required work to be performed within the time therein specified or failing therein, pay to the City Engineer the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost, but not to exceed the principal sum of the bond. Upon receipt of such monies, the City Engineer shall proceed by such method as he or she deems convenient to cause the required work to be completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of the sum in hand therefor. The balance, if any, of such bond funds shall, upon completion of the work, be returned to the surety, after deducting the cost of the work plus ten percent (10%) thereof.

 

7-12-625 BONDS—TERM OF BONDS—COMPLETION.
    The term of each bond posted shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion to the satisfaction of the City Engineer of all of the terms and conditions of the permit for the work. Such completion shall be evidenced by a statement thereof signed by the City Engineer, a copy of which will be sent to any surety or principal upon request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor or to his or her successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used.

 

7-12-630 DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE—RIGHT OF ENTRY.
    In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition or the permit for the work, the surety or any person employed on or engaged on his or her behalf shall have the right to enter upon the premises to complete the required work or render it safe to persons and property.

    Duly authorized representatives of the City Engineer shall have the right to enter upon the premises during the course of work or upon completion to determine compliance with the terms or conditions of the permit and provisions of this Chapter.

    Whenever work done under the terms or conditions of a permit issued according to the provisions of this Chapter is discovered, during the course of construction, to be in a condition which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, endangers the public safety, the City Engineer shall have the authority to order its immediate emergency repair by City forces or take such other action as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public. The actual cost of such work by the City, plus fifteen percent (15%) as an overhead charge, shall be charged against the performance bond, or when no bond was required, shall be a charge against and a lien upon the concerned property if not paid by the permittee.

 

7-12-635 DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE—INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
    No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises by an authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the City engaged in completing the work required to be performed under the permit, inspecting for compliance of the work with the terms or conditions of the permit and the provisions of this Chapter, or taking emergency actions deemed necessary for the protection of the public.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Sections 7-12-600 — 7-12-635)

 

ARTICLE 7. PERMIT—REVOCATION—SUSPENSION
7-12-700 PERMIT—REVOCATION.
    Any permit issued under this Chapter may be revoked by the City Engineer after notice and opportunity for hearing for:

    (a)   Violation of any condition of the permit.

    (b)  Violation of any provision of this Code or any other applicable ordinance or law relating to the work.

    (c)   The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering lives or property.

 

7-12-705 PERMIT—HEARING FOR REVOCATION.
    The City Engineer shall hold a hearing on the proposed revocation of a permit. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the owner, the permittee, the contractor or the engineer (named as such in the application) five (5) days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a statement of the grounds for revoking the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person(s) to be notified at the address(es) appearing in the application. In the event an appeal is made regarding the decision of the City Engineer, all work shall be stopped while the appeal is pending.

 

7-12-710 PERMIT REVOKED—APPEAL.
    In the event the City Engineer makes the determination to revoke the permit, the permittee may appeal such determination to the City Manager or his/her designee. Such an appeal shall be made in writing and shall state in clear and concise language the grounds therefor and shall be filed with the City Engineer within ten (10) days of the date of the City Engineer’s determination.

    The City Manager may make such modifications in the requirements of these provisions or may grant such waivers or modifications of the determinations which are appealed to him or her as he or she shall determine are warranted to prevent any unreasonable hardship under the facts of each case, provided that such modification or waiver is in conformity with the general intent of the requirements of these provisions.

 

7-12-715 PERMIT—SUSPENSION BASED ON NOTICE OF HEARING.
    Any permit issued under this Chapter may be suspended by the City Engineer without hearing and for a period not exceeding ten (10) days whenever the City Engineer has issued a notice of hearing for revocation of permit. Any such suspension shall terminate upon its expiration date or upon the rendering of a decision on the question of revocation, whichever shall occur first. No work shall be authorized or performed during the time the permit is suspended.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Sections 7-12-700 — 7-12-715)

 

ARTICLE 8. ABATEMENT
7-12-800 NOTICE TO CORRECT ADVERSE OR HAZARDOUS CONDITION—SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
    Whenever the City Engineer determines that any existing excavation or fill has become a menace to life or property or threatens the safe and operable condition of any public way, watercourse, or other public property, or violates the Alameda County Urban Run-Off Clean Water Program, written notice as specified in Section 7-12-715 above shall be given to the owner of the premises upon which said condition exists to abate said condition in such premises upon which said condition exists to abate said condition in such manner as shall comply with the law. The order shall specify the adverse and/or dangerous condition, the manner in which the same shall be abated, and the period within which such abatement shall be accomplished. In determining said period within which said owner shall abate said adverse and/or dangerous condition, the City Engineer shall consider the nature of said condition and its effect on life, safety, and property, its effect on storm water quality, together with the time reasonably required by said owner to comply with such order. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail or neglect to comply with such order of the City Engineer. In the event the owner shall not promptly proceed to abate said dangerous condition, as ordered by the City Engineer, the abatement procedures set forth in Sections 7-12-805 through 7-12-835 will be undertaken.

 

7-12-805 COMPLAINT AND HEARING OF DANGEROUS CONDITION.
    The City Engineer may file with the City Manager a written complaint setting forth facts showing that a dangerous condition exists upon any premises in the City of San Leandro. Upon receipt of such complaint, the City Manager shall present the same to the City Council, and the City Council shall forthwith by resolution fix a time and place for a public hearing on such complaint.

    The City Engineer shall cause a copy of such resolution and complaint to be served upon the person in possession of such premises, or upon the owner thereof, not less than five (5) days prior to the time fixed for such hearing. Such service may be by delivery of a copy of such resolution and complaint to the owner or occupant personally or by enclosing the same in a sealed envelope, postage pre-paid, addressed to the occupant at such premises, or to the owner at his or her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the City of San Leandro, and depositing the same in the United States mail. Services shall be deemed completed at the time of the deposit in the United States mail.

 

7-12-810 ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
    Upon the date, and at the place and hour fixed for the hearing on such complaint, the City Council shall hear such evidence as may be presented by any interested party. Such hearing may be continued from time to time by the City Council. Upon the completion of such hearing, the City Council shall either dismiss the complaint, or shall direct that the dangerous condition shall be abated. The City Engineer shall forthwith give written notice, in the manner provided in Section 7-12-805 to the owner or occupant of said premises to abate such condition forthwith. If such abatement is not commenced within five (5) days thereafter, and diligently prosecuted to completion, the City Engineer shall cause the same to be abated. The City or its representatives shall have the authority to enter upon the property to abate the condition constituting the hazard.

    The Council shall order to be paid all sums which may be necessarily expended by the City Engineer in abating such condition. In lieu of employing a contractor, or other person to abate such condition, the City Engineer may call upon the City forces to abate such condition.

 

7-12-815 EXPENSE OF MANDATORY ABATEMENT AGAINST PROPERTY.
    The cost outlined in Section 7-12-810 above shall constitute a special assessment against that real property abated. The City Engineer shall cause a copy of the report of assessment to be served upon the owner of said property not less than five (5) days prior to the time fixed for confirmation of said assessment; service may be by enclosing a copy of the report of assessment in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at his/her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the City of San Leandro, and depositing the same in the United States mail; and service shall be deemed completed at the time of deposit in the United States mail.

    A copy of the report of assessment shall be posted by the City Clerk at least three (3) days prior to the time when the report will be submitted to the City Council. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it shall be a lien on the said real property.

    Such lien attaches upon recordation in the Office of the County Recorder, Alameda County, by certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. After confirmation of the report, a certified copy shall be filed with the County Auditor, Alameda County, on or before August 10. The description of the parcel reported shall be that used for the same parcel as the County Assessor’s map books for the current year. The County Assessor shall enter each assessment on the County tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquencies as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

 

7-12-820 NOTICE OF LIEN, MANDATORY AGREEMENT.
    The lien mentioned in Section 7-12-815 shall take the following forms:

 

    NOTICE OF LIEN

 

           Pursuant to authority vested in me by Resolution No. _____________of the Council of the City of San Leandro, passed on the __________ day of _____________, 19_______ , and the provisions of Chapter 12, Title VII or the San Leandro Municipal Code, I did, on the ______day of _____________, 19____, cause an adverse and/or dangerous condition located upon the hereinafter described real property to be abated at the expense of the owners thereof, in the amount of $_____________, and that said amount has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the City of San Leandro does hereby claim a lien upon the hereinafter described real property in said amount; the same shall be a lien upon the said real property until said sum with interest thereon at the legally allowable rate from the date of the recordation of this lien in the Office of the County Recorder of the County or Alameda, State of California, has been paid in full. The real property hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City or San Leandro, County of Alameda, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:

 

    (Insert Description of Property)

 

    Dated this ____ day of _________, 19_____.

 

    ___________________

    City Engineer

    City of San Leandro

 

7-12-825 EXPENSE OF VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT.
    In order to fulfill the responsibility outlined in Section 7-12-810 above, owners may elect to have the City abate the dangerous condition. The City Engineer is authorized and directed to execute an agreement on behalf of the City with such persons which would include the following conditions:

    (1)  Agreement to allow City and/or its contractor to enter the property and perform the necessary work:

    (2)  agreement to pay the actual abatement cost, plus interest, plus an additional charge to cover the City’s cost of contract administration, engineering and inspection; the interest rate to be charged will be the rate of interest earned on the City’s investment portfolio, as reported by the Director or Finance, for the most recent month prior to execution of the agreement, rounded to the nearest one-half percent; (3) option to pay these costs in annual installments not to exceed five years with the ability to pay the balance at any time before the five (5) year period is completed; and (4) a notice of lien will be filed by the City Engineer with the Alameda County Recorder against the property and will be released only when the charges have been paid in full. Such lien will take the form set forth herein; and (5) a waiver of all rights under Sections 7-12-800, 7-12-805, and 7-12-810.

 

7-12-830 NOTICE OF LIEN, VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT.
    The lien mentioned in Section 7-12-825 shall take the following form:

 

    NOTICE OF LIEN

 

           Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12, Title VII of the San Leandro Municipal Code, I did, on the _____________ day of _____________, 19___ an adverse and/or dangerous condition located upon the hereinafter described real property to be abated at the expense of the owner thereof, in the amount of $ _____________and that said amount has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the City of San Leandro does hereby claim a lien upon the hereinafter described real property in said amount; the same shall be a lien upon the said real property until said sum with interest thereon at the rate of _____________ per annum from the date of the recordation of this lien in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Alameda, State of California, has been paid in full. The real property hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of San Leandro, County of Alameda, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:

 

    (Insert Description of Property)

 

    Dated this ____ day of ____________, 19____.

 

    _____________

    City Engineer

    City of San Leandro

 

7-12-835 FAILURE TO MAKE ANNUAL PAYMENTS.
    An owner shall be deemed to be delinquent in the payment of a voluntary abatement if said owner fails to make an annual payment within three (3) months of the due date for such annual payment. In the event of delinquency, the City shall proceed pursuant to Section 7-12-815. The costs which constitute the special assessment shall be those outlined in Section 7-12-825.

 

7-12-840 ABATEMENT BY INJUNCTIVE OR OTHER JUDICIAL RELIEF.
    Nothing in the foregoing subsection shall be deemed to affect the rights of the City, or any private person to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement of such nuisance, public or private, by injunctive or other judicial relief available by the terms of any law.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Sections 7-12-800 — 7-12-840)

 

ARTICLE 9. VIOLATIONS
7-12-900 VIOLATION OF THIS ARTICLE—ENFORCEMENT BY CITATION METHOD.
    (a)   Any violation of this Chapter shall be deemed an infraction, and each day the violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.

    (b)  This Chapter may be enforced by officers and employees of the City duly authorized to issue citations.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 93-013, 8/16/93, Section 7-12-900)

CHAPTER 7-13 PARK FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
ARTICLE I. PARK FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
7-13-100 PARK FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ESTABLISHED.
    (a)   A park facilities development impact fee (“park impact fee”) is established to pay for public park and recreation facilities.

    (b)  Pursuant to Government Code Section 66001, the City Council shall, in a City Council Resolution adopted after a duly noticed public hearing, set forth the amount of the park impact fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the park impact fee is imposed, identify the City-owned public facilities to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the use of the park impact fee and the need for the public facilities and the types of future development projects on which the park impact fee is imposed, and set forth time for payment.

 

7-13-105 USE OF FEE REVENUES.
    The revenues raised by payment of the park impact fee shall be accounted for in the City’s capital project fund. Separate and special accounts within the fund shall be used to account for revenues, along with any interest earnings on such account. These monies shall be used for the following purposes:

    (a)   To pay for design, engineering, right-of-way acquisition and construction of the public facilities designated in the City Council resolution and reasonable costs of outside consultant studies related thereto;

    (b)  To reimburse the City for designated public facilities constructed by the City with funds (other than gifts or grants) from other sources together with accrued interest;

    (c)   To reimburse developers who have designed and constructed such designated public facilities; and/or

    (d)  To pay for and/or reimburse costs of program development and ongoing administration of the park impact fee program.

 

7-13-110 DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES.
    If a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a permit, to construct a public facility that has been designated to be financed with park impact fees, a credit against the fee otherwise levied by this Article on the development project in an amount not to exceed the cost of such public facility as estimated by the City in adopting the fee shall be offered by the City and, if the fee is less than such amount, the developer shall be entitled to reimbursement. The reimbursement amount shall be from fee revenues only.

 

7-13-115 ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES.
    The City Council may, by resolution, adopt administrative guidelines to provide procedures for calculation, credit, reimbursement, or deferred payment and other administrative aspects of the park impact fee.

 

(Legislative History: Ordinance No. 2000-07, 6/5/00)

ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

TITLE 1 CITY COUNCIL
TITLE 2 CITY MANAGER
TITLE 3 CITY ATTORNEY
TITLE 4 CITY CLERK
TITLE 5 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
TITLE 6 FINANCE
TITLE 7 RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES
TITLE 8 ENGINEERING AND TRANSPORTATION
TITLE 9 LIBRARY
TITLE 10 HUMAN RESOURCES
TITLE 11 POLICE
TITLE 12 PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE 13 RENT REVIEW BOARD
TITLE 14 BOARD OF APPEALS
TITLE 15 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENTS
TITLE 16 HANDICAPPED ACCESS APPEALS BOARD
TITLE 17 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMISSION
TITLE 18 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
TITLE 19 LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION
TITLE 20 PERSONNEL RELATIONS BOARD
TITLE 21 PLANNING COMMISSION
TITLE 22 RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
TITLE 23 SENIOR COMMISSION
TITLE 24 ARTS COMMISSION
TITLE 25 PUBLIC FINANCING AUTHORITY
TITLE 26 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
TITLE 27 PARKING AUTHORITY
TITLE 28 {RESERVED}
TITLE 29 {RESERVED}
TITLE 30 {RESERVED}
TITLE 31 {RESERVED}
TITLE 32 {RESERVED}

TITLE 1 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 1 Council Meetings
Chapter 2 Professional Assistants
Chapter 3 Reimbursement for Expenses
Chapter 4 Assistance to Parades, Promotions, and Miscellaneous Special Events
Chapter 5 Car Allowance
Chapter 6 Health and Welfare Benefits
Chapter 7 Flag Policy
Chapter 8 Banner Policy
Chapter 9 Gifts, Donations, and Sponsorships Policy
Chapter 10 Naming/Renaming Facilities
Chapter 11 Policy Governing Use of Computer Systems, E-Mail and Information Security
Chapter 12 Policy on City Hall Lighting

Chapter 1 Council Meetings
§1.1.100: ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
An adjourned regular meeting ordinarily will be held at 7:00 p.m. on the Monday following the regular meeting which is adjourned.

 

§1.1.105: WORK SESSIONS.
A work session ordinarily will be held in the Helen Lawrence South Offices Conference Room at 7:00 p.m. on the second Monday of each month, with an additional work session scheduled on the fourth Monday, if needed.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 79-116, 04/16/1979 [§§1.1.100-1.1.105]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§1.1.100-1.1.105]

Chapter 2 Professional Assistants
§1.2.100: CITY ATTORNEY.
The following professional assistant positions are hereby authorized for the office of the City Attorney:

 

(a)       1 Chief Assistant City Attorney

 

(b)       1 Assistant City Attorney

 

§1.2.105: CITY MANAGER.
The following professional assistant position is hereby authorized for the office of the City Manager:

 

(a)       1 Assistant City Manager

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 79-116, 04/16/1979 [§§1.2.100-1.2.105]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§1.2.100-1.2.105]

Chapter 3 Reimbursement for Expenses
§1.3.100: {RESERVED}.
 

§1.3.105: {RESERVED}.
 

§1.3.110: TRAVEL PER DIEM.
Pursuant to Charter §255, the City Council finds and declares that the sum of one hundred dollars ($100) per full day and fifty dollars ($50) per one-half day is hereby fixed and determined as reasonable expenses to be allowed each member of the City Council when traveling on official duty for all out-of-pocket expenses other than transportation and hotel expenses. For purposes of this section, a full day is defined as including that period in which a member of the City Council will be away from home for all meals. A one-half day is defined as including that period in which a member of the City Council will be away from home for breakfast and lunch, lunch and dinner or dinner only. Upon presentation of receipts for out-of-pocket transportation and hotel expenses incurred, each member of the City Council shall be reimbursed for said expense. Reimbursable transportation expenses shall be limited to airfare, including conveyance to and from the airport, other reasonable conveyance costs pertaining to the official duty. Reimbursable hotel expense shall be limited to lodging, telephone charges for official business and applicable taxes.

 

§1.3.115: TRAVEL FOR OTHER AGENCIES.
Members of the City Council may be reimbursed for all actual and reasonable expenses incurred when traveling on official business as ex officio members of another public agency or body to which the City is a member. Such reimbursement shall be only to the extent of actual and reasonable expenses and not otherwise reimbursed by such public body and shall be in lieu of the sum fixed by §1.3.110 hereof.

 

§1.3.120: REIMBURSEMENT FOR USE OF TECHNOLOGY.
Members of the City Council may be reimbursed for expenses incurred for Internet E-Mail Provider service, Fax Machine telephone line service, Cell Phone service (City business only), Electronic Datebook service, and like expenses for a combined reimbursement of up to, but not exceeding, one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175) per month.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 80-45, 03/24/1980 [§§1.3.100-1.3.105]; Resolution No. 83-95, 05/16/1983 [§§1.3.100-1.3.115]; Resolution No. 91-67, 05/06/1991 [§§1.3.100-1.3.115]; Resolution No. 2001-192, 11/05/2001 [§§1.3.100-1.3.120]; Resolution No. 2004-060, 04/12/2004 [§§1.3.100-1.3.120]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§1.3.100-1.3.105]

Chapter 4 Assistance to Parades, Promotions, and Miscellaneous Special Events
§1.4.100: GENERAL.
The City may provide assistance in the forms of services to individuals and organizations conducting activities governed by Section 4-20-100 et seq., of the San Leandro Municipal Code, and special events and promotions involving assistance in the form of personnel assistance, barricade services, or special refuse services in accordance with the following general guidelines:

 

(a)       Application Processing and Approval Fees—Section 4-20-100—Permits. An application fee as stated in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code is established for processing all applications filed for events covered by Section 4-20-100 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(b)       Support per Event. The City may provide service in support of each applicant/event conducted pursuant to this policy. Actual City costs will be accounted for on a per event basis, and event sponsors may be billed following the activity.

 

(c)       Insurance Requirements. All activities conducted pursuant to Section 4-20-100 of the San Leandro Municipal Code and other special events or activities conducted upon City property or public area controlled by the City are required to furnish insurance coverage in a form and amount acceptable to the City Manager prior to issuance of a permit. The City will provide, on a fee basis, special event insurance for those individual/organizations unable to provide adequate coverage.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Resolution No. 83-7, 01/03/1983, was codified into this Chapter administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§1.4.100]

Chapter 5 Car Allowance
§1.5.100: GENERAL.
The City Council finds and declares that the Mayor is hereby provided a car allowance of a flat three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375) per month, which shall be in lieu of the one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125) travel reimbursement afforded other City Councilmembers.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 97-102, 08/04/1997 [§1.5.100]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§1.5.100]; Resolution No. 2007-004, 01/16/2007 [§1.5.100]; Resolution No. 2008-090, 07/21/2008 [§1.5.100]

Chapter 6 Health and Welfare Benefits
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 1, Chapter 6, City Equipment, was repealed by Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012.

 

§1.6.100: GENERAL.
Members of the City Council will be enrolled in the following health and welfare benefit plans:

•           Employee Assistance Program (EAP): City paid

•           Basic Group Term Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment insurance equal to $50,000: City paid

•           Group Long-Term Disability: City paid

 

In addition, members of the City Council will have the option of enrolling in the following plans:

•           California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS): If enrolled, the members of the City Council will pay the entire employee portion of the benefits.

•           Medical and Dental: If enrolled, the City will contribute the same monthly amount as received by the San Leandro Management Organization (SLMO). If the City’s coverage is waived and proof of other insurance is provided, the members of the City Council will receive opt-out payments as follows:

 

Employee: Medical $200 per month +/or Dental $50 = $250/month maximum

Two-party: Medical $350 per month +/or Dental $50 = $400/month maximum

Family: Medical $500 per month +/or Dental $50 = $550/month maximum

 

•           Voluntary Vision: No City contribution

•           Flexible Spending Accounts: No City contribution

•           Supplemental Life Insurance: No City contribution

•           Supplemental Long-Term Disability Insurance: No City contribution

•           Voluntary Short-term Disability Insurance: No City contribution

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2014-141, 12/15/2014 [§1.6.100]

Chapter 7 Flag Policy
ARTICLE 1 POLICY ON LOWERING FLAGS
§1.7.100: POLICY ON LOWERING FLAGS ON CITY PROPERTY TO HALF-MAST.
The purpose of this administrative policy is to establish a uniform policy to govern the lowering of the United States, State and City flags to half-mast on City-owned property to pay homage to the deceased.

 

§1.7.105: APPLICABILITY.
As a general rule, City flags shall be placed at half-mast during periods of mourning declared by the Governor of California or the President of the United States. Flags shall also be lowered upon the death of a current or former City elected official and of a current City employee as set forth below. All other situations are to be referred to the City Manager.

 

§1.7.110: PROCEDURES.
The Public Works Services staff will be responsible for the lowering of the United States, State and City flags to half-mast at City Hall. For City Hall only, the Mayor will make the determination to lower the United States, State and City flags to half-mast.

 

For all other City facilities (community centers, libraries, corporation yard, sanitation plant, parks, etc.), the respective department head will designate specific staff to do the same under the following circumstances*:

 

(a)       {Reserved};

 

(b)       When prescribed by the President of the United States for days of national mourning, or by the Governor of California;

 

(c)       Thirty days after the death of a President or former President;

 

(d)       Ten days after the death of the U.S. Vice President, the Chief Justice, or a retired Chief Justice, or the Speaker of the House of Representatives;

 

(e)       From the day of death until the burial of an Associate Justice, a Secretary from an executive or military department, or the governor of a state;

 

(f)        From the day of death until the burial of a California Senator, the Congressional Representative for San Leandro, the State Senator or Assemblymember representing San Leandro, and/or the County Supervisor representing San Leandro;

 

(g)       When prescribed by the Office of the Mayor in accordance with the following guidelines:

 

(1)       From the day of death until burial of any:

 

(i)        City Councilmember of the City of San Leandro, past or present;

 

(ii)       City employee whose death occurred during the discharge of duty;

 

(iii)      City employee or retiree having served the City for 25 or more years.

 

(2)       Upon authority issuing from the Office of the Mayor, similar recognition may be given in the case of a prominent citizen not holding or having held public office, whose accomplishments and contributions to the community clearly demonstrated a commitment over and beyond that which would be normally associated with the performance of work.

 

(3)       Flags will be lowered to half-mast as soon as practicable following notification of death of the above, and will ordinarily be continued until after the conclusion of burial services. In the event current notice is not given or the date of funeral is unknown, as is frequently the case, flags will be lowered for 48 hours from the day of notification.

 

(4)       Any person having definite knowledge of a death requiring City acknowledgment should immediately advise the Office of the Mayor as the central point for notification of those responsible for handling our flags. Should contact with this office be impracticable, the information should be given, in order, to the Director of Public Works Services or to the Police Chief, who will then become responsible for taking action in conformity with the policy herein outlined.

 

*     Reference: U.S. Flag Code, adopted by the United States Congress, as amended by Congress and the President of the United States.

 

§1.7.115: COUNCIL ACTION.
The City Council, upon notification of the death of the above stated, may elect to adjourn a City Council meeting in respect of the deceased.

 

ARTICLE 2 POLICY ON RAISING FLAGS
§1.7.200: POLICY ON RAISING FLAGS AT CITY HALL.
The purpose of this administrative policy is to establish a uniform policy to govern the raising of special flags at City Hall.

 

§1.7.205: APPLICABILITY.
As a general rule, special designation flags (such United Nations flag, flag of a Sister City, Children’s Memorial Flag, etc.) will be raised only upon the direction of the Mayor or City Manager. Such flags will only be flown at City Hall, and when raised, shall replace the flag of the City of San Leandro, not the flag of the United States or the flag of the State of California.

 

§1.7.210: PROCEDURES.
Requests for raising of special designation flags will be made in writing to the Office of the Mayor. Such requests will include the length of time the special designation flag is to be flown and a detailed assessment of the ancillary needs associated with the request. The Mayor will notify the City Council of the request and his/her action.

 

In the case that the request is directed to the City Council in writing, the item will be referred to the Mayor for action.

 

Upon approval, the Public Works Services staff will be responsible for raising the special designation flag. Public Works will also be responsible for either storing the flag or returning the flag to the requestor, as appropriate.

 

Children’s Memorial Flag. In 1997, the County Board of Supervisors advised the City that the City was expected to fly the Children’s Memorial Flag on two occasions. The first would be in the event of the death of a child due to violence in San Leandro. City Hall and County offices would be expected to fly the flag on the Friday following the death. The second is a standing annual event where every City, School District and County office is asked to fly the flag on the fourth Friday of each April. Otherwise, there is no expectation to have the flag flown at City Hall.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 98-127, 10/05/1998 [§§1.7.100-1.7.115]; Resolution No. 98-156, 12/07/1998 [§§1.7.200-1.7.210]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§1.7.110(a)]; Resolution No. 2017-159, 11/6/2017 [§§1.7.110, 1.7.210]

Chapter 8 Banner Policy
§1.8.100: PURPOSE.
The purpose of this administrative policy is to establish a process by which overhead and Decorative banner and similar decorations installation requests are approved, denied, and financed by commercial or San Leandro-based nonprofit organizations. Except as otherwise permitted by this Chapter and the relevant provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code, no encroachment within the public right of way shall be permitted.

 

The activity being advertised must benefit a San Leandro nonprofit organization, applicant, or activity for the betterment of the community, or must be financially supported by the City of San Leandro.

 

§1.8.105: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Overhead Banner. “Overhead Banner” means a banner suspended over the public roadway, attached at both ends to an electrolier, outdoor advertising structure, or building.

 

(b)       Decorative Banner. “Decorative Banner” means a banner suspended over the public roadway or sidewalk, attached to a single electrolier.

 

§1.8.110: POLICY.
Banners that are strictly of a commercial nature shall not be installed in the City of San Leandro, except in accordance with §1.8.111 of this chapter. For the purpose of this policy, a banner of a “commercial nature” is one which directs attention to a commodity, product, service, attraction, or event that is sold or offered for sale or for a charge by a commercial enterprise or which in any way promotes a commercial enterprise or its products. A “commercial enterprise” is an institution, business, or enterprise conducted for profit.

 

This prohibition shall not apply to banners announcing a community, charitable, or non-profit event which is jointly sponsored by a commercial enterprise and displaying on such banner the identification of such commercial enterprise solely by name and/or trademark. Banners shall be permitted only for events and programs that celebrate and/or increase awareness of a significant occasion. Organizations must demonstrate how the proposed banners are linked to a comprehensive public relations or marketing program that serves the same purpose for which the banners are requested.

 

In the event that a commercial enterprise wishes to have a sponsorship logo or company name on its banners, it shall be limited to no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total banner, with all lettering on the banner maintained at an equal size ratio.

 

The City shall not endorse or oppose political or religious viewpoints in the implementation of this policy and, as such, overhead or decorative banners of a political or religious nature shall not be installed in the City of San Leandro. For the purpose of this policy, a banner of a “political or religious nature” is a banner that supports or opposes a candidate, issue or cause, or which advocates or opposes a religion, political position or belief.

Decorative banner installations shall only be permitted on light poles that are City-owned and without signal light standards. Such banner installation requests shall also be restricted to locations and time frames that do not interfere with the City’s ongoing decorative banner installation schedule. Overhead banner requests shall only be permitted in one area of the City on East 14th Street (between Estudillo Avenue and Joaquin Avenue). The City may elect to remove any and all banners at its own discretion. Any exceptions to this policy will be at the discretion of the City Manager.

 

Any entity requesting installation of overhead or Decorative banners shall request the City’s approval of such installation by submitting a “Request for Authorization for Temporary Banner” application for overhead banners, or letter of agreement between the requestor and the City for Decorative banners.

 

§1.8.111: COMMEMORATIVE OR CELEBRATORY DECORATIVE BANNERS FOR COMMERCIAL INTERESTS.
Upon request by a San Leandro commercial interest, such as a corporation or company, the City Manager may approve the installation of commemorative or celebratory decorative banners in recognition of a milestone anniversary or receipt of special recognition by the commercial interest. Commemorative or celebratory decorative banners shall comply with all rules and regulations within this chapter.

 

§1.8.115: FINANCIAL.
The financial responsibility of each entity requesting to install banners shall be as follows:

 

(a)       Overhead Banner. An installation fee for each overhead banner will be assessed as provided for in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code. The requesting entity shall be responsible for one hundred percent (100%) of the costs associated with the design, production, installation, maintenance, and removal of its overhead banners.

 

(b)       Decorative Banner. Commercial enterprises and nonprofit organizations shall be responsible for one hundred percent (100%) of the costs associated with the design, production, installation, maintenance, and removal of its decorative banners.

 

§1.8.120: DECORATIVE BANNERS PROCEDURES.
The City Manager’s Office shall be responsible for accepting and reviewing all requests by outside agencies to install decorative banners on City streets. The City reserves the right to approve or deny all decorative banner designs based upon quality, artistic interpretation, and general aesthetic appeal.

 

All requests shall be submitted to the City Manager’s Office for review and approval in writing.

 

All decorative banner designs must comply with the City’s standard of quality and adhere to the design and size specifications agreed upon between the City and an approved banner contractor. It shall be the responsibility of the approved banner contractor to fabricate and install all decorative banners to ensure quality control.

 

The amount of time that a decorative banner shall be installed on behalf of an outside agency is a minimum of six (6) months. Approved banner requests will be handled on a first come, first serve basis. Each agency shall be limited to one (1) banner program every three (3) years. (Exceptions may be granted by the City Manager.) The City has the ability to display six (6) different banner exhibits concurrently. Every effort will be made to accommodate each request that meets the aforementioned City requirements.

 

All enterprises and agencies participating in the City’s Banner Program are required to purchase replacement banners to be used when banners are damaged and/or stolen, and to pay for reinstallation costs.

 

§1.8.125: OVERHEAD BANNERS PROCEDURES.
The City’s Engineering and Transportation Department shall be responsible for accepting and reviewing all requests by outside agencies to install overhead banners on City streets. The City reserves the right to approve or deny all overhead banner designs and construction based upon quality, artistic interpretation, general aesthetic appeal, and specifications. Only the City’s Public Works Department will be allowed to install overhead banners on City streets, unless the City Manager provides an exception.

 

To request an overhead banner installation, outside agencies must submit a completed “Request For Authorization For Temporary Banner” application to the City’s Engineering and Transportation Department for review and approval. The Engineering and Transportation Department Director or his/her designee will be responsible for informing the City Manager’s Office of all requests via a written memorandum.

 

Applicants may initially request one 14-day period for their banner to be hung. A second 14-day period may be requested, but the request cannot be submitted more than two months in advance of the second installation date. Outside agencies may request no more than two 14-day periods per year.

 

If two applicants request the same two-week period, each group will be allotted one week. The agency that submitted their application first will be able to choose their desired week. Either applicant may request a substitute period for their banner, or if the two applicants agree, two separate banners can be displayed together (back to back) for two weeks.

 

The approved applicant will bring the banner seven (7) days before it is to be installed to the Public Works Service Center at 14200 Chapman Road. If the banner is not constructed properly and does not meet City specifications, it will not be installed.

 

An installation fee will be assessed as provided for in the San Leandro Administrative Code, §6.4.100. Schools advertising an event or program which has been approved by the Superintendent of Schools, or in the case of private schools the School Administrator, will be exempt from installation fees.

 

The applicant shall pick up the banner within fourteen (14) days after the banner is taken down. Otherwise, the City may dispose of it and charge the applicant for any costs associated.

 

The City will install and remove the banners but is not responsible for their condition during this period. The City reserves the right to remove any banner at any time at the City’s sole discretion.

 

No lights, streamers, loose pieces, etc., are allowed on the banner.

 

§1.8.130: STRUCTURAL SUPPORT, INSTALLATION.
Any banner permitted herein shall be constructed and erected solely in accordance with the specifications of the Engineering and Transportation Department and to the extent applicable with the requirements of the State of California Department of Transportation.

 

§1.8.135: INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
Applicants shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City of San Leandro from any and all claims of liability for damage to property or injury to person as a consequence of the installation of banners provided herein.

 

Entities requesting installation of Decorative banners in accordance with this Chapter shall also provide the City with a Certificate of $1 million Liability Insurance, listing the City of San Leandro as additional insured.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Title 1, Chapter 8, City Council: Banner Policy, was consolidated with former Title 12, Chapter 4, Public Works: Displays within Public Right-of-Way, during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 98-129, 10/05/1998 [§§1.8.100-1.8.125]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§1.8.100-1.8.135]; Resolution No. 2006-119, 11/06/2006 [§1.8.125]; Resolution No. 2012-046, 05/21/2012 [§§1.8.100-1.8.135]

Chapter 9 Gifts, Donations, and Sponsorships Policy
§1.9.100: POLICY ON GIFTS, DONATIONS, AND SPONSORSHIPS TO THE CITY.
From time to time, individuals, groups, or corporations may wish to sponsor, donate or bequeath real or personal property to the City. Cash donations are also often made to the City for the purchase of a variety of goods and services, intended for public and administrative use. Sponsorships by individuals, groups and/or corporations are also a major source of support to many City functions be they in the form of cash or in-kind contributions. This policy establishes procedures for solicitation and/or acceptance of donations and sponsorships. A uniform set of procedures shall be followed in acceptance of all donations and proper approval shall be obtained prior to acceptance. All cash and capital goods donated to the City shall be accounted for in accordance with the procedures set forth in this policy.

 

The City Manager shall recommend to the City Council to accept, reject or recommend the sale of any gift made to or for the City for any public purpose. The City may utilize the gift as prescribed by the donor or, providing use of the gift and/or the income from it is not restricted, the gift may be used for any purpose that furthers City goals and objectives. The City Council shall provide for acknowledgment of the donation per the guidelines of this policy or in any manner deemed appropriate.

 

§1.9.105: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Gift. For purposes of this policy, the terms “gifts,” “donations” and “sponsorships” shall be synonymous. A gift may be a monetary contribution and/or a real/personal property item(s) that the City has accepted and for which the donor has not received any good(s) or service in return.

 

§1.9.110: DONATIONS TO THE CITY.
 

(a)       Responsibility. The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to accept donations in which the total value is less than $5,000. All donations whose total value exceeds $5,000 shall be reviewed and accepted by City Council. The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for management of all donated funds and facilitating the disbursement of donated items.

 

(b)       Solicitation of Gifts. The Mayor, and/or City Councilmembers, City Manager, and, if so authorized by the City Manager, City staff, may approach companies or organizations to request donations of goods, services, property or funds to facilitate the achievement of identified City goals.

 

All solicited gifts shall be subject to applicable Fair Political Practices Commission and Government Code reporting requirements.

 

(c)       Unsolicited Gift. Unsolicited donations will be evaluated to determine whether the donation has a valid unrestricted use to the City.

(1)       Donors who wish to give a gift that is not specific to a given department will be referred to the City Manager.

 

(2)       In the event the donated item does not have an obvious use by the department to which it has been presented, notice will be circulated to each department director to determine if it can be used elsewhere. The donor will be notified within two weeks as to whether the City is interested in the given item.

 

(3)       If the item obviously has no use to the City or would be more effectively used elsewhere, the donor will be informed immediately and referred to an appropriate agency by the City Manager.

 

(4)       Proof of Ownership. If there is question as to the legal owner of the donated item, proof of ownership may be requested.

 

(5)       Donors shall be encouraged not to place unrealistic restrictions on donated items that may impede the City’s flexibility in determining usefulness.

 

(d)       Conditions for Accepting/Rejecting Donations. Staff shall work with the donor to assure that restrictions are reasonable and do not leave the donor with unrealistic expectations regarding permanency of life of the donation. For example, if a tree is donated it may not be replaced if it dies or becomes diseased or damaged. It is the policy of the City not to accept property that will impose a significant maintenance or operations expense on the City. As applicable, the following are criteria which may be applied in determining if a donation is appropriate for acceptance:

 

(1)       The use of item(s) must be consistent with existing City policy.

 

(2)       Restrictions placed upon the use and/or disposition of the item must be practical to accept.

 

(3)       Required accounting of the item(s) must not be excessively burdensome.

 

(4)       Maintenance must not be excessive and/or maintenance support must be available.

 

(5)       Does use of the item(s) require the purchase of additional item(s) to be useful?

 

(6)       Acceptance of the item must not present a conflict of interest for the City or its employees. Regardless of the value of the donation, if the donor is a person or entity doing business with the City, a contractor or potential contractor, or there is reason to believe there may be a conflict of interest, the City Manager will determine if the gift should be accepted, rejected or submitted to the City Council for approval.

 

 

§1.9.115: PROCEDURES.
 

(a)       The following procedures shall be followed for all donations.

 

(1)       A Donation Receipt Form will be completed by City staff when donations are received, and a copy of the form will be forwarded to the City Clerk for retention. The donor will be given a copy of the form. The Finance Department will retain a copy if the item is a capital good (valued in excess of $7,500 with at least a one-year life).

 

(2)       The City will not place any value on the gift for the donor.

 

(3)       The Finance Director shall be notified of acceptance of capital items. Finance shall make the necessary entries on the respective accounts and property records to insure that the property is charged to the account of the proper City program. This reporting must take place no later than thirty (30) days after the receipt of the donated item(s).

 

(4)       If the gift is a capital good of the type that is ordinarily maintained by the Public Works Services Department, the department receiving the gift must discuss the item with the Public Works Services Director before accepting it.

 

(b)       Cash Gifts.

 

(1)       Depositing Cash Gifts. All cash gifts shall be deposited immediately with the Finance Department in accordance with the City cash collection policy and procedure and shall be accompanied by a Donation Receipt. Cash donations shall be deposited in the Gifts and Donations account in the General Fund.

 

(2)       Restricted Cash Donations.

 

(i)        Donation Receipt. Restricted cash donations must be supported in department files by the Donation Receipt signed by the donor and identifying the name, address and telephone numbers of the donor, the amount and date of the donation, and the nature of the restriction.

 

(ii)       Deposit of Restricted Cash Donations. Donations shall be deposited in the City’s Gifts and Donations account, which is managed by the Finance Department. This account shall be utilized by all departments.

 

(iii)      Council Authorization. A request for authorization must be sent to the City Council in the form of a staff report and approved before a restricted cash donation is spent for its intended use. The Report to Council must state the name of the donor, the amount of the donation, the date the donation was received and the nature of the restriction. A copy of this report must be submitted to the Finance Department to confirm spending authority.

(iv)      Procedures for Expending Donated Cash. The donation may be liquidated by the appropriate department when the purchase is made. Any over expenditures must come out of the department’s operating budget. Funds shall remain in this account until they are spent on their intended purpose. If a department is unable to spend the cash as intended, the cash must be returned to the donor or the donor must provide written authorization to expend the cash differently from the original purpose. A minimum of ninety percent (90%) of the donated funds must be utilized for the stated purpose. The remaining balance will go into the General Fund once the purpose of the donation has been achieved. This will occur at the end of the fiscal year.

 

(3)       Unrestricted Cash Donations. Unrestricted cash donations shall be deposited in the City’s Gifts and Donations account in the General Fund.

 

(c)       Reporting of Donations. Within thirty (30) days of the end of the fiscal year, each department director shall submit a report to the City Manager that summarizes all donations received by each department during the fiscal year, with an estimate of the monetary value of the donations. Volunteer time is excluded from this report.

 

(d)       Donation Acknowledgments. The Department receiving a gift will have the responsibility of acknowledging the donor and/or making arrangements for such in the following manner. Copies of all acknowledgement letters shall be sent to the City Council.

 

$199 and Under — A thank you letter acknowledging the gift by the City Manager.

 

$200 and Up — A thank you letter acknowledging the gift signed by the Mayor and a commemorative plaque if appropriate.

 

(e)       Commemorative Plaques. It is the policy of the City Council that donations that are so identified via a commemorative plaque be maintained for the assets’ normal life or five (5) years, whichever is shorter. At the end of its useful life, the donated item may be replaced or removed at the discretion of the director of the department maintaining the donated item.

 

A commemorative plaque may not be replaced or repaired if it is stolen or damaged during that five (5) year time span.

 

Text on any commemorative plaque may be limited to acknowledging the name of the person to be remembered, dates of the person’s life or service to the community, and the name of the person or organization making the donation. Additional text on the plaque, the size of the plaque, the material it is made of and the placement of the plaque on the donated item shall be determined by the department accepting the donation.

 

 

 

§1.9.120: AGENCY DISTRIBUTION OF TICKETS AND PASSES.
 

(a)       Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to ensure that all tickets and passes the City receives from public and private entities and individuals, which the City purchases or which the City owns because of its control of the event or facility, are distributed in furtherance of a public purpose. A ticket or pass provided to a public official by the City and distributed and used in accordance with this policy is not a gift under the Political Reform Act if all of the following criteria are met.

 

(b)       Limitation. This policy shall only apply to the City’s distribution of tickets and/or passes to, or at the behest of, a City Official, as defined by Government Code Section 82048.

 

(c)       Ticket Distribution Public Purposes. The City may accomplish one or more public purposes of the City through the distribution of tickets to, or at the behest of, a City Official. The following list is illustrative rather than exhaustive of the public purposes of the City that may be accomplished by City officials attending events using tickets distributed to them by the City:

 

(1)       Support of general employee morale, retention or to reward public service;

 

(2)       Promotion of City activities within the City and the State of California;

 

(3)       Promotion of City recognition, visibility, and/or profile on a local, state, or national scale;

 

(4)       Recognition of a City program or purpose;

 

(5)       Promotion of City issues and interest.

 

The distribution of any ticket or pass by the City, or at the behest of, a City official shall accomplish one or more public purposes of the City.

 

(d)       No Transfer of Tickets. The transfer by any City official of any ticket or pass distributed to that official pursuant to this policy to any other person is prohibited except to members of the official’s immediate family for their personal use, or to no more than one guest solely for their attendance at the event.

 

(e)       No Disproportionate Use. Disproportionate use of tickets or passes by a member of the City Council, a City appointed official, a department head, or a particular employee shall be prohibited.

 

(f)        City’s Sole Discretion. Tickets and passes distributed according to this policy shall not be earmarked by an outside source for use by a specific City official. The City determines, in its sole discretion, who receives the ticket or pass.

 

 

(g)       Reporting. Within forty-five (45) days of distribution of a ticket or pass, the distribution must be reported on a form provided by the Fair Political Practices Commission (“FPPC”), according to California Code of Regulations Section 18944.1(d).

 

(h)       Public Record. Within thirty (30) days after adoption, this policy shall be published in the City’s Administrative Code, which is posted on the City’s website, and sent to the FPPC by email.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 98-128, 10/05/1998 [§§1.9.100-1.9.115]; Resolution No. 2005-085, 06/20/2005 [§§1.9.100-1.9.115]; Resolution No, 2020-005, 01/06/2020 [§1.9.120]

 
Chapter 10 Naming/Renaming Facilities
§1.10.100: POLICY ON NAMING/RENAMING FACILITIES.
It is in the public interest to officially name certain City properties and facilities in order to identify them for the public and to celebrate those individuals who have made a significant contribution to the City. This policy recognizes that requests for naming or renaming of facilities most often occur after the death of a prominent citizen. However, similar recognition may be given in the case of a living prominent citizen whose accomplishments and contributions to the community clearly demonstrate a commitment over and beyond what would be normally associated with the performance of their work.

 

§1.10.105: APPLICABILITY.
This policy applies to certain City properties or facilities such as City buildings; structures, parks, public rights-of-way, recreation areas, or other tangible assets, except properties donated to the City upon condition that a certain name be used. This policy also applies to the naming and/or renaming of individual rooms in City facilities and the renaming of City streets, but not the naming of a City street which is the responsibility of the developer.

 

§1.10.110: PROCEDURES.
While it is the policy of the City to continue to use existing names for City properties, should the City Council so direct by motion, the Rules and Communications Committee shall review the requested name change for dispersal to the appropriate Board or Commission for further review and report its decision to Council. The following criteria shall be used:

 

(a)       In the case of an individual who is deceased, the individual for whom a facility is to be named must be deceased at least one hundred eighty (180) days.

 

(b)       The individual for whom a facility is to be named (or renamed) must have been one of the following:

 

(1)       Long-term resident of the community or owner of a business in the community who has made significant, notable, and tangible contributions to the facility or property in question or to the San Leandro community at large.

 

(2)       Elected official or employee of the City whose accomplishments and contributions to the community clearly demonstrate a commitment over and beyond that which would otherwise be normally associated with the performance of their work.

 

(c)       There must be a well-defined connection between the contributions of the individual and the property or facility.

 

(d)       In the case of a request involves renaming a facility, the next of kin of the individual for whom the facility is currently named (provided that the person was a local resident) should be notified of the proposed change and given an opportunity for input before the City Council acts upon the request.

§1.10.115: COUNCIL ACTION.
The Council, upon report and recommendation of the recommending body, shall take such action as it deems appropriate, including hearing any appeals that may be presented. The Council may also refer the recommendations back to a City Board or Commission for further discussion and review.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 98-164, 12/21/1998 [§§1.10.100-1.10.115]; Resolution No. 2002-12, 01/22/2002 [§§1.10.100-1.10.115]; Resolution No. 2008-128, 10/20/2008 [§1.10.110]

Chapter 11 Policy Governing Use of Computer Systems, E-Mail and Information Security
§1.11.100: POLICY GOVERNING USE OF COMPUTER SYSTEMS, E-MAIL AND INFORMATION SECURITY.
City computer systems are made available to employees, public officials, and in some cases consultants to improve efficiency, communications and productivity when providing services to the community. City computer systems are defined to include any City provided computer hardware (personal computers, laptops, personal digital assistants [PDAs], smart phones, mobile digital terminals, host systems and related devices, printers and other production peripheral equipment, scanners, the City’s network), computer software, remote access, electronic mail (e-mail) and Internet connection tools used to provide City services. Use of City provided computer systems are for official City purposes only. This policy is established to protect the City’s investment in information technology; safeguard the information contained within City computer systems; and assist in the efficient delivery of City services.

 

All City computer systems provided in accordance with this policy remain the property of the City. Users of City computer systems have no right to or expectation of privacy or confidentiality in any activity using the City computer systems, equipment, or networks. Any electronic files, documents, or records (as that term is defined in the California Public Records Act) stored, accessed, or transferred on the City’s computer systems are not private to the user and are potentially disclosable under the California Public Records Act.

 

(a)       E-Mail System.

 

(1)       The E-Mail System shall be used for the transmission of communications and documents only and shall not be used for the storage of information or records. The E-Mail System is provided by the City to Users as a convenient and efficient method for rapidly communicating transitory information in an electronic format.

 

(2)       The forwarding of E-Mails from City computer systems or through City provided E-Mail accounts by employees or public officials to any personal or other E-Mail account that is not a City provided email account that belongs to, or is managed by the employee or public official is strongly discouraged. Users are cautioned that any E-Mail sent or forwarded from a City computer system or email account to a personal email account may subject that entire personal account to disclosure pursuant to a public records request. An email sent from a personal email account to a City email account or City computer system is a public record subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act.

 

(3)       No User shall attempt to disguise the origin of any E-Mail, unless authorized by the Chief of Police for a criminal investigation.

 

(4)       E-Mail messages located in a User’s Inbox, Sent Items and Deleted Items folders will be automatically deleted by Information Technology from all computer devices and systems on the 120th day after sending or receipt, whether deleted by the User or not. All email will be archived and retained for 24 months.

 

(5)       E-Mail messages that must be retained in accordance with the City’s Records Retention Schedule or by law should be moved to a User’s Outlook Cabinet or saved and placed in the appropriate subject file, either electronically or in hard copy.

 

(b)       Use.

 

(1)       City employees and public officials are responsible for the care, security and appropriate use of City computer systems and any related equipment. Inappropriate uses may include, but are not limited to, obscenity, harassment, slander, defamation, commercial or for-profit activities, and political or campaign activities.

 

(2)       City computer systems are for use by employees, public officials, and City Manager designated persons only. Contractors, vendors and other non-City users may be granted access to City computer systems with approval from the Information Services Manager. Contractors, volunteers, and other non-City users accessing the City of San Leandro’s computer systems are subject to the same policies and guidelines as any City employee or public official.

 

(3)       City computer hardware and software will be installed, configured and supported by the City Manager’s Office, Information Technology Division only.

 

(4)       All Users shall respect copyright and license agreements and shall not distribute or download programs or materials without the legal right to do so.

 

(5)       Any City-owned computer systems provided to or used by employees and public officials of the City should be returned to the City Manager’s Office immediately upon request.

 

(c)       Unacceptable Uses. City computer systems shall not be used for:

 

(1)       Personal gain or political activity.

 

(2)       Outside business activities, fundraising, or charitable activity without the express authorization of the City Manager.

 

(3)       Libelous, offensive, or harassing statements, documents or images, including disparagement of others based on their race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, religious or political beliefs.

 

(4)       Sending or soliciting sexually oriented messages or images; accessing internet sites which are “adult-oriented” in nature, or which require the user to be over the age of 18 years, or which offer gambling services, or which contain obscene content of any nature. Employees of the Police Department are exempt when performing duties that require him or her to perform these prohibited activities.

 

(5)       Impersonation of any person or communication under a false or unauthorized name.

 

(6)       Inappropriate mass mailing or “spamming.”

 

(7)       Knowingly or maliciously introducing any invasive or destructive programs (i.e. viruses, worms, Trojan Horses) into City computer systems or networks.

 

(8)       Attempting to circumvent local or network system security measures.

 

(d)       Information Security.

 

(1)       City employees and elected officials access City computer systems with a unique identification and password. In order to protect City equipment and information, the City issued identification and passwords should not be shared or easily accessible to anyone but the individual user.

 

(2)       All devices used to connect to the City’s computer systems must be continually executing approved virus-scanning software with a current virus database. Users shall not disable any anti-virus software installed nor download any files which trigger a warning from the anti-virus software.

 

(3)       The Information Technology Division of the City Manager’s Office will backup files stored on the City’s computer networks according to the City’s network backup policies. Users shall utilize network resources to store their data files to the fullest extent possible to protect the City’s data resources. Users are responsible for ensuring that critical data not stored on network servers is backed up and stored in a safe location.

 

(e)       Public Disclosure. The disclosure or exemption from disclosure of “public records” (which generally means any writing, whether electronic or paper, that contains information relating to the conduct of the public’s business) is governed by the California Public Records Act and its exemptions (California Government Code §§ 6250 et seq.). It is City policy to exempt from disclosure all records that may be exempted pursuant to specific provisions of the California Public Records Act, unless specifically waived by the City Council, or City Manager.

 

Refer to San Leandro Administrative Code, Title 10, Chapter 6, Human Resources: Policy Governing Use of Computer Systems, E-Mail and Information Security.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2000-133, 09/05/2000 [§1.11.100]; Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012 [§1.11.100]

Chapter 12 Policy on City Hall Lighting
§1.12.100: PURPOSE.
The purpose of this administrative policy is to govern the use of the multi-color City Hall exterior LED lighting system that displays a spectrum of colors and color schemes across the exterior façade of the City Hall administration building located at 835 East 14th Street. This system enables temporary lighting displays at City Hall to highlight or celebrate official City business as well as local, national, or world events, or other activities or public campaigns.

 

§1.12:105: DEFINITIONS.
Official City Business shall mean the official business of the City and may include meetings, indoor events, limited outdoor events, and outdoor events of the City Council and City departments that are directly connected to: (i) the adopted goals of the City Council; or (ii) the core services of City department(s); or (iii) the promotion of local or regional economic development.

 

§1.12.110: APPLICABILITY.
As a general rule, City lights displaying various colors on the exterior of City Hall is for public events as it relates to official City business, or otherwise highlight or celebrate local, national, or world events, or other activities or campaigns that support official City business.

 

(a)       Official Ceremonial Items. Lights may be displayed in conjunction with proclamations for official actions, or ceremonial items as approved by City Council, such as for the recognition of public awareness campaigns, e.g, Breast Cancer Awareness month.

 

(b)       Official City Business. Lights may be displayed in conjunction with a recognition or proclamation from the Mayor or City Council in recognition of Official City Business or other public campaigns that directly connect to the goals of the City Council, core services of a City department, or the promotion of economic development, such as for the recognition of National Police Week.

 

(c)       Commemoration of a Special Event or Sporting Event. Lights may be displayed to commemorate a significant achievement, initiative, or event involving the City of San Leandro, the San Leandro Unified School District, the San Lorenzo Unified School District, or local or regional sports teams, or a proclamation by the City Council.

 

(d)       Official Public Art Displays. Light displays of public art should be coordinated through the City of San Leandro Arts Commission in recognition of artistic and cultural endeavors by, for, or on behalf of the City of San Leandro or in conjunction with a proclamation or other recognition from the Mayor or City Council.

 

(e)       Honorary or Solidarity Events. Lights may be displayed in honorable recognition of a world, national, local, or City event, tragedy, or act of God, or the life or death of a prominent figure whose life achievements benefitted the San Leandro community, based upon the request of the Mayor, City Manager or his or her designee, or a proclamation by the City Council, such as for the honoring of the victims of the September 11 attacks.

 

Extended lighting shall be subject to approval in advance by the Mayor, or his or her designee, or at the direction of the City Council.

 

The lighting system may also be displayed during the day or week of the following recognized holidays or other special occasions, unless otherwise superseded via authorization by the Mayor or his or her designee, or at the direction of the City Council, or for an Honorary or Solidarity Event. Prescheduled lighting may resume after such an event. Prescheduled events that do not require the express authorization of the Mayor or City Council include:

 

(a)       Opening day or championship series participation by the Oakland Athletics (green).

(b)       Opening day or championship series participation by the Golden State Warriors (blue and/or gold).

(c)       Cinco de Mayo (red, green, white).

(d)       Memorial Day (red, white, and blue).

(e)       City of San Leandro’s Cherry Festival (red).

(f)        Pride Week (rainbow spectrum, such as red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple).

(g)       Independence Day (red, white, and blue).

(h)       Veterans Day (red, white, and blue).

 

All other requests shall be referred to the Mayor or his or her designee, or may also be referred to the City Council at the Mayor’s discretion.

 

§1.12.115: PROCEDURES.
Public Works Department staff or other staff as designated by the City Manager shall be responsible for displaying the appropriate colors to light City Hall on the specified date and duration of time. The Mayor or his or her designee, or the full City Council if so referred, shall make the determination as to which event(s) merit a specific color display visible to the public.

 

Requests for all City Hall lighting shall be made in writing to the Office of the Mayor at least five (5) business days prior, or as soon as possible, to the first date of when the lighting display should be implemented. A request must include the suggested duration of time and color(s) for the specific request, along with a statement of how the associated event or campaign to be honored or commemorated complies with Section 1.12.110. The City may also require that applicants or organizations requesting usage of the lighting display provide a detailed assessment of the ancillary needs associated with the request, such as for example, if a ceremony were to be held along with the lighting display, the applicant may also be required to submit an overview of the anticipated location and duration of the event or activity, or any other associated logistical needs that could impact City resources or staffing capacity.

 

When time allows, the Mayor or his or her designee should also either notify the City Council when determinations have been made in response to lighting requests, or such matters may be referred to the City Council for direction.

 

Upon approval, Public Works staff or the City Manager’s designee shall be responsible for displaying the special lighting request. Public Works staff shall also be responsible for notifying the Mayor’s office for all requests related to City Hall lighting prior to executing any such requests not included in the above prescheduled list.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution 2018-146, 11/19/2018 [§§1.12.100—1.12.115]

 
TITLE 2 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 1 Authorization to Settle Claims
Chapter 2 Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities
Chapter 3 Basic Cable Television Service Tier—Rate Regulations
Chapter 4 Regulation of Professional Filming and Videotaping
Chapter 5 Americans with Disabilities Act/Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Chapter 6 Regulation of Social Media Use

Chapter 1 Authorization to Settle Claims
§2.1.100: AUTHORIZATION TO SETTLE CLAIMS.
Pursuant to Resolution No. 2004-046, the City Manager is hereby authorized to compromise and settle as the best interests of the City of San Leandro may dictate, any and all workers’ compensation claims up to a maximum of $100,000.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 2, Chapter 1, City Manager: Departmental Divisions, was removed during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§2.1.100]

Chapter 2 Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities
§2.2.100: ADOPTION OF A SMOKING POLICY.
Title 4, Chapter 12, Section 4-12-600 of the San Leandro Municipal Code provides that within three (3) months after the effective date of this Section, every employer regularly employing four (4) or more persons in any building or structure in the City of San Leandro shall adopt, implement and maintain a written smoking policy. Pursuant thereto, the City of San Leandro adopts the following rules and regulations governing smoking in all City-owned facilities.

 

§2.2.200: AREAS WHERE SMOKING IS PROHIBITED.
Smoking is prohibited in and within 20 feet of a main, exit, entrance, or operable window of all facilities owned and operated or leased and operated by the City of San Leandro or by a concessionaire of the City.

 

§2.2.300: SIGNAGE.
Pursuant to Section 6404.5(c)(1)(A) of the California Labor Code and Section 7597(a) of the California Government Code, the City Manager shall post or cause to be posted “No Smoking Within 20 Feet” signs in conspicuous locations at each entrance to each facility owned and operated or leased and operated by the City of San Leandro or by a concessionaire of the City.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 30, Chapter 1, Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities: Authorization, Prohibitions, and Signs, was editorially renumbered to be Title 2, Chapter 2, City Manager: Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for Title 30, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 97-13, 02/03/1997 [§§30.1.100-30.1.300]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§2.2.100-2.2.300]

Chapter 3 Basic Cable Television Service Tier—Rate Regulations
§2.3.100: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       AICPA. “AICPA” means American Institute of Certified Public Accounts.

 

(b)       Cable Act of 1992. “Cable Act of 1992” means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. sec 521 et seq.).

 

(c)       Citation. These Regulations may be cited as the “Basic Service Tier Rate Regulations.”

 

(d)       Council. “Council” means the City of San Leandro City Council.

 

(e)       City Manager. “City Manager” means the City of San Leandro’s City Manager or designee thereof.

 

(f)        Company. “Company” as used herein means any cable television franchise of the City.

 

(g)       Customer. “Customer” as used herein means any person or entity utilizing or desiring to utilize cable television services provided by the Company for consideration. “Customer” also means “customer” and/or “subscriber(s)” as those terms are used in the Cable Act of 1992 and the FCC rules and regulations adopted thereunder.

 

(h)       Effective Date. “Effective Date” means the date the Basic Service Rate Regulations become effective as provided for in 47 CFR §76.910.

 

(i)        FCC. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Council.

 

§2.3.105: INCORPORATION OF FCC RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Council hereby incorporates by reference the FCC rules and regulations implementing the Cable Act of 1992 as part of these Regulations including, but not limited to, those rules and regulations regarding subscriber rate regulations as set forth in 47 CFR §§76.900-76.985. Amendments to FCC rules and regulations implementing the Cable Act of 1992 made subsequent to the Effective Date of these Regulations shall also be incorporated by reference as part of these Regulations without further action on the part of the Council.

 

§2.3.110: COMPLIANCE WITH THE CABLE ACT OF 1992 AND FCC RULES AND REGULATIONS.
These Regulations shall at all times fully comply with Cable Act of 1992, as amended, and then-current FCC rules and regulations implementing the Cable Act of 1992. In the event any provision of these Regulations shall be invalidated for any reason or cause, any remaining portions shall be deemed severed therefrom and thereupon remain in full force and effect thereafter.

 

§2.3.115: DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM INITIAL PERMITTED RATES FOR REGULATED CABLE SERVICES AND ACTUAL COST OF REGULATED EQUIPMENT.
 

(a)       Materials to be Submitted by Company to the City Manager. In connection with the submission of a completed FCC Form 393, or such other similar form as may be hereafter utilized by the FCC for the determination of maximum initial permitted rates for regulated cable services and actual cost of regulated equipment, and/or any other materials required by the Cable Act of 1992 and FCC rules and regulations implementing the Cable Act of 1992, the Company shall submit therewith the City Manager information necessary for the Council to ensure that the rates are consistent with the Cable Act of 1992.

 

(b)       Scheduling of Review by Council. Upon the submission by Company of a complete submittal, pursuant to §2.3.115(a), the City Manager shall schedule review of Company’s request. The City Manager is authorized on behalf of Council to toll the thirty (30) day period pursuant to 47 CFR §76.933.

 

(c)       Council’s Power to Audit Company. Nothing contained in these Regulations shall abrogate the Council’s powers under any other ordinance or resolution related to the franchising of cable television service, to conduct its own audit of the financial records of the company, or to require such audit to be performed.

 

(d)       Comment by Interested Parties. The Council shall hold a public hearing providing for the comment of interested parties on any proposed determination or order of the Council pursuant to these regulations, provided that no public hearing shall be required where the proposed action before the Council is to receive information and refer to the City Manager for further report, or to toll the review period pursuant to 47 CFR §76.933, and the Council makes no order with regard to the setting of rates, refunds, or the imposition of enforcement sanctions on the Company.

 

§2.3.120: REFUNDS TO CUSTOMERS.
All refunds owing by Company to Customers pursuant to 47 CFR §76.942 shall be paid by the Company to Customers by direct payment, credit to the Customer’s bill or a prospective percentage reduction in rates pursuant to 47 CFR §76.942(d)(1) or (2) within ninety (90) days from the date of the implementation of a prospective rate reduction pursuant to 47 CFR §76.942(c)(1) or (2).

 

§2.3.125: ENFORCEMENT.
 

(a)       Informal Resolution. In the event that the Company shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply fully with the requirements of these Regulations, the City Manager shall, except in instances in which time is of the essence in obtaining the Company’s compliance and/or the City Manager determines that such efforts would be futile, attempt informal resolution and rectification of the Company’s non-compliance by informal meeting and/or telephone conference between the Company and the City Manager. Said informal resolution efforts shall be initiated by the City Manager’s general statement of the alleged violations under investigation and the general nature of the evidence then known by the City Manager. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the nature and extent of evidence which may be presented by the City Manager in any subsequent Enforcement Hearing pursuant to §2.3.125(d) below shall not be limited or abridged by reason of the presentment or non-presentment or recitation or non-recitation of such evidence in the course of the informal resolution efforts.

 

(b)       Council Preference for Cure. To the extent reasonably consistent with the goal of obtaining compliance with the Regulations, it shall be the policy of the City Council to notify the Company of a possible or alleged violation and, if said violation is then curable, allow a reasonable time for the Company to cure the possible or alleged violation. If the Company does so cure, in the absence of aggravating circumstances, it shall be the preference of the City Council to abstain from further enforcement action.

 

(c)       Determination of Probable Cause for Enforcement Hearing. In the event that the informal efforts at resolution are ineffective or otherwise inappropriate:

 

(1)       The City Manager may notice the Company to meet with the City Manager on not less than ten (10) days notice to determine whether or not probable cause exists to believe that the Company has failed, neglected or refused to comply with the provisions of these Regulations; or

 

(2)       In the sole discretion of the City Manager, the City Manager may notice the Company to meet with the Council on not less than ten (10) days notice to determine whether or not probable cause exists to believe that the Company has failed, neglected or refused to comply with the provisions of these Regulations.

 

In either event, the probable cause determination shall be initiated by the City Manager’s general statement of the alleged violations under investigation and the general nature of the evidence then known to the City Manager and/or the Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the nature and extent of evidence which may be presented by the City Manager in any subsequent Enforcement Hearing pursuant to §2.3.125(d) below shall not be limited or abridged by reason of the presentment or non-presentment or recitation or non-recitation of such evidence in the course of the probable cause determination.

 

(d)       Enforcement Hearings. Upon a determination of the City Manager or the Council pursuant to §2.3.125(a) above, the probable cause exists to believe that the Company has failed, neglected or refused to comply with the provisions of these Regulations, the City Council may hold such hearings, conduct such procedures and impose such remedies as are authorized by these Regulations.

 

(e)       Conduct of Enforcement Hearings. The hearing may be conducted either by the City Council or, at the sole discretion of the City Council, by a hearing officer appointed by the City Manager to conduct the hearing.

 

(f)        Selection of Hearing Officer. If the matter shall be referred to a hearing officer, the City Manager and the Company shall each exchange to the other party, not later than ten (10) business days after said order of referral by the City Council, the names of three (3) qualified, neutral and unaffiliated potential hearing officers. Thereupon, each party shall have ten (10) business days to strike two (2) of the other party’s named potential hearing officers and the hearing officer shall be thereafter determined, as between the two remaining names, by lot. Any such hearing officer shall be a person whose professional and technical expertise would qualify that person to act as a neutral, third party in the capacity of a hearing officer. The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, the compensation for the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to record the proceedings shall be borne equally by the Company and the City Council. If Company fails to pay their share, City Council is authorized to pursue all legal means to obtain reimbursement. The costs incurred by the parties for attorney’s fees, expert witness fees and other expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs.

 

(g)       Burden of Proof at Enforcement Hearings. At any hearing conducted pursuant to §2.3.125 above, the City Manager shall have the burden of establishing the violation of these Regulations to the satisfaction of the Council or the hearing officer by a preponderance of the evidence. The Company may present such evidence, consistent with §2.3.125(h) below, as it may desire.

 

(h)       Process of the Enforcement Hearing. All witnesses testifying at the hearing shall be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil or criminal proceedings in the trial courts of this State shall apply to evidence adduced at the hearing only to the extent that such rules are reasonably necessary to the preservation of the probative nature of the evidence proffered. The provisions of the Administrative Procedures Act, commencing at Section 11500 of the Government Code or any successor legislative enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

 

(i)        Recommended Decision of Hearing Officer. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer shall, upon conclusion of the hearing, prepare a recommended decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. The recommended decision shall be filed with the City Clerk and mailed to the parties not later than thirty (30) calendar days after conclusion of the hearing. Upon receipt of such a recommended decision, the City Council may, without a hearing except as otherwise required below, either:

 

(1)       Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and conclusions submitted by the hearing officer;

 

(2)       Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the recommended decision, modify the decision, and adopt the recommended decision as so revised;

 

(3)       Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact, conclusions or decision, and adopt the recommended decision as so revised; or

(4)       Reject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing before a hearing officer provided at Council’s expense.

 

If the City Council shall act under either Subsections (2), (3) or (4) above, the Council shall set forth clearly its rationale and reasoning for so doing.

 

(j)        Findings by City Council. If the hearing is conducted by the City Council, upon conclusion of the proceedings, the Council shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions.

 

§2.3.130: REMEDIES.
 

(a)       Monetary Sanctions. Monetary sanctions may be imposed by the City Council upon a finding that the Company has not complied with one or more provisions of these Regulations. At the conclusion of a noticed hearing pursuant to §2.3.125(a) above, the City Council may impose monetary sanctions for a violation of an order the City Council issued pursuant to these Regulations. Each violation so found, is not to exceed the amount(s) set forth for the commitment of the applicable violation(s) as set forth below.

 

(b)       Conscious Violation. A Conscious Violation is any failure, neglect or refusal of the Company to materially comply with any order issued pursuant to these Regulations, under such circumstances as to indicate:

 

(1)       A conscious policy of non-compliance with the requirements thereof; or

 

(2)       A conscious lack of a policy of compliance with the requirements thereof. A prior finding of a violation under §2.3.125 or 2.3.130 for substantially the same or similar conduct shall create a rebuttable presumption of conscious action or inaction on the part of the Company. For each such violation, the Council may impose a monetary sanction in an amount not to exceed Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) and in additional like sum for each month or portion thereof during which the Company shall fail, neglect or refuse to rectify said violation beginning thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from the Council to the Company.

 

(3)       The maximum amount specified above shall be doubled for the second violation under that section for substantially the same or similar conduct occurring within any given twenty-four (24) month period and shall be quintupled for the third violation under that section for substantially the same or similar conduct within any given twenty-four (24) month period.

 

(c)       Inadvertent Subscriber Violation. An Inadvertent Subscriber Violation is any failure, neglect or refusal of the Company to comply with the requirements of an Order issued under these Regulations as to its obligations hereunder in relation to one or more subscribers, including but not limited to refunding or crediting monies to subscribers pursuant to §2.3.120 hereof and/or 47 CFR §76.942(d)(1) or (2), under such circumstances as do not to indicate a pattern of behavior by the Company in derogation of the referenced requirement. For each such violation, the Council may impose a monetary sanction:

 

(1)       In an amount not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100) for each such subscriber and Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) in accumulation of the violations as to all such subscribers resulting from any substantially continuous behavior, act or omission; and

 

(2)       In an additional like sum for each month or portion thereof during which the Company shall fail, neglect or refuse to rectify said violation beginning thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from the Council to the Company.

 

(d)       Inadvertent Company Violation. An Inadvertent Company Violation is any failure, neglect or refusal of the Company to materially comply with the requirements of an Order issued under these Regulations with respect to the Company in relation to the Council. For each such violation, the Council may impose a monetary sanction in an amount not to exceed Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) and in an additional like sum for each month or portion thereof during which the Company shall fail, neglect or refuse to rectify said violation beginning thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from the Council to the Company.

 

(e)       Alternative Remedies. Neither monetary sanctions imposed hereunder nor any order issued by the Council related hereto shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the Council to obtain judicial enforcement of the Company’s obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief, mandate or other remedies at law or in equity, other than monetary damages.

 

(f)        Temporary Stay of Remedies. Application of the remedies provided herein shall be stayed for the period of time during which any order of the Council pursuant to these regulations is under appeal by the Company to the FCC, pursuant to 47 CFR §76.944.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 31, Chapter 1, Cable Television: Basic Cable Television Service Tier—Rate Regulations, was editorially renumbered to be Title 2, Chapter 3, City Manager: Basic Cable Television Service Tier—Rate Regulations, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for Title 31, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 94-165, 08/15/1994 [§§31.1.100-31.1.130]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§2.3.100-2.3.130]

Chapter 4 Regulation of Professional Filming and Videotaping
§2.4.100: PERMIT REQUIRED.
All persons who engage in professional filming within the City of San Leandro shall be required to obtain a permit, except where the professional filming involved is for news gathering purposes.

 

§2.4.200: APPLICATION.
All persons seeking a permit for professional filming must submit an application to the Film Liaison on the forms provided by the City.

 

§2.4.300: FEES.
Unless exempt pursuant to §2.4.400, all persons shall pay a non-refundable application fee. The amount of this application fee shall be as set forth in San Leandro Administrative Code. All applicants granted a permit shall also pay a permit fee as set forth in the San Leandro Administrative Code prior to issuance of the permit.

 

§2.4.400: FEE EXEMPTIONS.
The following persons are exempt from the application fee requirement in §2.4.300: bona fide students, non-profit corporations, and persons engaging in public service filming. Notwithstanding this Section, all persons exempt from the application fee are required to obtain a permit and to pay any and all other required fees, rates or charges.

 

§2.4.500: WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED.
Prior to commencement of professional filming, all permittees are required to obtain and submit to the City evidence of written permission to enter the property from all property owners and tenants of those properties surrounding the location that will be directly affected by the professional filming.

 

§2.4.600: WRITTEN NOTICE REQUIRED.
Not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to commencement of professional filming, all permittees shall provide written notice to all property owners or tenants within a 300-foot radius of the professional filming location.

 

§2.4.700: PROFESSIONAL FILMING HOURS.
Professional filming shall not be permitted between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except as specifically allowed by the Film Liaison.

 

§2.4.800: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
All permittees shall have insurance coverage of the type and in the amounts specified by the Film Liaison. Evidence of compliance must be submitted to the Film Liaison prior to professional filming. Each permittee shall hold harmless, defend and indemnify the City, its elected officials, officers, and employees from and against any or all loss, liability, expense, claim, costs (including costs of defense), suits and damages of every kind, nature and description from the negligence of the permittee or its agents.

§2.4.900: FILM LIAISON.
The Film Liaison is authorized to promulgate any additional regulations necessary to effectuate the provisions of this Title. The Film Liaison shall act with reasonable dispatch and diligence in administering these regulations.

 

§2.4.905: BUSINESS LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
A business license shall not be required for filming projects lasting three (3) days or less and involving a total of three (3) or fewer cast and crew members. The Finance Director shall have the discretion to require a business license for any project scheduled to last more than three (3) days and involving more than three (3) cast and crew members.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 32, Chapter 1, Regulation of Professional Filming and Videotaping Activities: Professional Filming, was editorially renumbered to be Title 2, Chapter 4, City Manager: Regulation of Professional Filming and Videotaping, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for former Title 32, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 97-61, 05/19/1997 [§§32.1.100-32.1.900]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§2.4.100-2.4.900]; Resolution No. 2011-084, 05/02/2011 [§2.4.900 was administratively reassigned to §2.4.905 to correct duplicate section number]

Chapter 5 Americans with Disabilities Act/Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
ARTICLE 1 COORDINATORS
§2.5.100: SECTION 504 COORDINATOR AND ADA COORDINATOR.
The City of San Leandro Section 504 Coordinator shall be the Housing Specialist I in the Community Development Department, and the Americans with Disabilities Act Coordinator will be the Community Relations Representative in the City Manager’s Office.

 

The 504 Coordinator and ADA Coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating the efforts of the City of San Leandro to comply with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, respectively as they pertain to services, programs, events, activities, facilities and public meetings. The respective coordinator shall investigate complaints that the City or the City’s subrecipients of Federal funding have violated statutes or regulations under the Acts, or other state or federal laws relating to persons with disabilities.

 

Issues arising in the course of employment with or employment application to the City of San Leandro are covered by Administrative Procedure #1230 Reasonable Accommodation Process, and are not subject to the provisions of this Administrative Code Chapter.

 

ARTICLE 2 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION POLICY FOR CITY SERVICES, PROGRAMS, FACILITIES, AND EVENTS
§2.5.200: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION POLICY.
It is the policy of the City of San Leandro to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the comprehensive civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination against persons with disabilities. Under the ADA and FEHA, persons with disabilities must have equal access to all City services, programs, events, facilities and public meetings that are available to individuals without disabilities through a reasonable accommodation.

 

(a)       Services, Programs, Events, Activities, Facilities and Public Meetings. In all of its services, programs, events, activities, facilities and public meetings, the City of San Leandro will strive to eliminate any barriers that prohibit persons with disabilities from participating in those services, programs, events or activities, or from having full access to facilities. This will not preclude the City, however, from adopting legitimate safety requirements necessary for safe operation based on identified risks. If a service, program, event or activity is not fully accessible, the City will, to the best of its ability, relocate said service, program, event or activity to an accessible facility, or provide equal services at alternate accessible sites. A request for special accommodation for a service, program, event or activity must be made to the ADA Coordinator by the individual needing the accommodation or his/her representative with at least two (2) weeks advance notice of the service, program, event or activity.

 

(b)       Public Meetings.

(1)       Meeting Locations. City Council, Commission, Board, Committee and all other open public meetings of the City will be held in facilities that are fully accessible.

 

(2)       Meeting Materials. Taped, recorded, large print, electronic, or Braille versions of any written materials produced for public usage, review or inspection may be requested with five (5) working days advance notice to the department responsible for the meeting or the City Clerk’s Office.

 

(3)       Telecommunication Device for the Deaf (TDD). The City will maintain Telecommunication Device for the Deaf (TDD) telephone service during normal business hours. The San Leandro Police Department will maintain a dedicated TDD line at all times.

 

(4)       Sign Language Interpreters or Assistive Listening Devices. Sign language interpreters or assistive listening devices will be made available upon request for all City meetings or activities open to the public with an advance request to the department responsible for the meeting, or the City Clerk’s Office, with at least five (5) working days advance notice.

 

(5)       Other Accommodation Requests. Accommodations other than those listed above must be submitted to the department responsible for the meeting or the City Clerk’s Office with at least five (5) working days advance notice.

 

(c)       Undue Hardship. The City is not obligated to provide an accommodation that will impose an undue hardship on the operation of the City’s business. An undue hardship would be an accommodation that will impose significant difficulty or expense in the provision of the accommodation. Undue hardship includes, but is not limited to, financial difficulty, and refers to any accommodation that would be unduly costly, extensive, substantial, or disruptive, or that would fundamentally alter the nature or operation of City business.

 

Whether a particular accommodation will impose an undue hardship on the City will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the City’s ADA Coordinator and the Department Head responsible for the program, activity or service in question. If the City initiates the accommodation process in response to the request of an individual, but ultimately does not provide an accommodation, the following will be documented by the ADA Coordinator:

 

(1)       All accommodations considered or offered in the accommodation process.

 

(2)       The reasons other accommodations were not feasible.

 

(3)       The reasons the requesting individual rejected any accommodations.

 

(4)       The requesting individual’s response to each offered accommodation.

 

(5)       Written notification to the requesting individual of rejected accommodations.

§2.5.205: GRIEVANCE POLICY.
The City of San Leandro hereby adopts a grievance procedure to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (504). It may be used by anyone wishing to file a grievance alleging discrimination on the basis of disability in the provision of services, activities, programs, or benefits by the City of San Leandro.

 

(a)       The grievance should be in writing on the City of San Leandro ADA/504 Grievance Form. Alternative means of filing a grievance, such as personal interviews or a tape recording of the grievance, are available to persons with disabilities upon request.

 

(b)       The grievance must be submitted by the complainant and/or his/her designee to the City’s ADA Coordinator or Section 504 Coordinator as soon as possible but no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the alleged violation.

 

(c)       Within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the grievance, the ADA Coordinator, the Section 504 Coordinator or his/her designee will schedule a meeting or telephone interview with the complainant to discuss the grievance and possible resolutions.

 

(d)       After an investigation and review, the ADA Coordinator or Section 504 Coordinator will respond in writing, and where appropriate in a format accessible to the complainant. The response will explain his/her position on the issue and offer options for substantive resolution of the grievance.

 

(e)       If the response by the ADA Coordinator or Section 504 Coordinator does not satisfactorily resolve the issue, the complainant and/or his/her designee may appeal the decision to the City Manager within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the response.

 

(f)        After receiving the appeal, the City Manager or his/her designee will review the appeal and the ADA Coordinator’s or Section 504 Coordinator’s finding. Within a reasonable period, after a review, the City Manager or his/her designee will respond in writing, and where appropriate in a format that is accessible to the complainant, with a final resolution to the grievance.

 

(g)       Grievance files shall be maintained for a period three (3) years from the date the grievance was received by the City.

 

ARTICLE 3 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION POLICY FOR ZONING AND LAND USE
§2.5.300: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION POLICY—ZONING AND LAND USE.
This Article provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures.

 

§2.5.305: APPLICABILITY.
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, his/her representative or any entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This Article is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts.

 

A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of his/her choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by §2.5.310 (Application Requirements) and shall be made to the City’s ADA Coordinator.

 

§2.5.310: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
 

(a)       Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the ADA Coordinator and shall include the following information:

 

(1)       The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

 

(2)       Address of the property for which the request is being made.

 

(3)       The current actual use of the property.

 

(4)       The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts.

 

(5)       The zoning code provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.

 

(6)       Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

 

(b)       Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including but not limited to; conditional use permit, design review, general plan amendment, zone change, annexation, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by Subsection (a) together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval.

 

§2.5.315: REVIEW AUTHORITY.
Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the ADA Coordinator who may at the Coordinator’s discretion, forward to the relevant department head for his/her review and determination.

§2.5.320: REVIEW PROCEDURE.
The ADA Coordinator or his/her designee, shall make a written determination within 45 days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with §2.5.325 (Findings and Decision).

 

§2.5.325: FINDINGS AND DECISION.
 

(a)       Findings. The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

 

(1)       Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual disabled under the Acts.

 

(2)       Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts.

 

(3)       Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City.

 

(4)       Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning.

 

(5)       Potential impact on surrounding uses.

 

(6)       Physical attributes of the property and structures.

 

(7)       Alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit.

 

(b)       Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by Subsection (a) above.

 

§2.5.330: APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.
A determination by the reviewing authority to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2009-144, 11/02/2009 [§§2.5.100-2.5.110]; Resolution No. 2010-117, 09/20/2010 [§§2.5.100-2.5.330]

Chapter 6 Regulation of Social Media Use
§2.6.100: ADOPTION OF SOCIAL MEDIA USE POLICIES.
The City Manager is authorized to establish and implement rules and procedures governing departmental use of Social Media. Social Media refers to activities that integrate technology, social interaction and content creation. These rules and procedures may include the acceptable use of the Communication Systems used to access Social Media websites and related websites, limitations on privacy, prohibition on certain uses, and restrictions on activities that would compromise other City policies. As Electronic Communication Systems and Social Media develops and changes, the City Manager is authorized to modify those written policies to accurately reflect the changing communication practices and mediums.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012 [§2.6.100]

TITLE 3 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 1 Authorization to Settle Claims
Chapter 2 Alameda County as Agent for Service of Process

Chapter 1 Authorization to Settle Claims
§3.1.100: AUTHORIZATION TO SETTLE CLAIMS.
The City Attorney, in consultation with the City Manager, is hereby authorized to compromise and settle as the best interests of the City of San Leandro may dictate, any and all claims up to a maximum of $50,000.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Resolution No. 73-196, 07/16/1973, Resolution No. 80-75, 05/05/1980, and Resolution No. 2004-141, 09/20/2004, were codified into this Chapter administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-131, 12/04/2006 [§3.1.100]

Chapter 2 Alameda County as Agent for Service of Process
§3.2.100: ALAMEDA COUNTY AS AGENT FOR SERVICE OF PROCESS.
Pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5, Part 9, Division 1 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, the City of San Leandro adopted Resolution No. 86-146 wherein Alameda County was named as the City of San Leandro’s agent for service of process for any and all actions brought against the City for tax refunds and thus allows the County to defend the City of San Leandro in any and all such actions.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Resolution No. 86-146, 06/02/1986, was codified into this Chapter administratively.

TITLE 4 CITY CLERK
Chapter 1 Deeds
Chapter 2 Conflict of Interest
Chapter 3 City Council Meeting Minutes

Chapter 1 Deeds
§4.1.100: AUTHORIZATION TO ACCEPT AND RECORD DEEDS.
Pursuant to §27281 of the Government Code of the State of California, the City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk of the City of San Leandro are hereby authorized to accept deeds and easements conveying an interest in or easement upon real property to the City of San Leandro, a political corporation, and to consent to the recordation thereof.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 83-203, 09/12/1983 [§4.1.100]; Resolution No. 84-198, 10/01/1984 [§4.1.100]; Resolution No. 89-91, 05/15/1989 [§4.1.100]; Resolution No. 96-140, 08/19/1996 [§4.1.100]; Resolution No. 97-50, 05/05/1997 [§4.1.100]; Resolution No. 2001-212, 12/17/2001 [§4.1.100]; Resolution No. 2005-143, 10/17/2005 [§4.1.100]

Chapter 2 Conflict of Interest
§4.2.100: LEGAL REQUIREMENT.
Under the Political Reform Act, California Government Code Section 81000 et seq., all public agencies are required to adopt a conflict of interest code. This code designates positions required to file Statements of Economic Interests (Form 700), and assigns disclosure categories specifying the types of interest to be reported. The Form 700 is a public document intended to alert public officials and members of the public to the types of financial interests that may create conflicts of interests.

 

§4.2.105: ADOPTION OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE.
Fair Political Practices Commission (FPPC) Regulation 18730 in Title 2, Division 6 of the California Code of Regulations is adopted and incorporated into this chapter by reference. FPPC Regulation 18730, together with the designated positions set forth in Appendix A and the disclosure categories set forth in Appendix B, constitutes the formation and promulgation of the City’s Conflict of Interest Code.

 

§4.2.110: FILING OF FORM 700.
All designated officials and employees shall file the required Form 700 pursuant to provisions of this chapter with the City Clerk, the City’s filing officer. Failure to timely file the required Form 700 may result in disciplinary action by the relevant department head and/or in the imposition of administrative, criminal, and civil sanctions as provided in California Government Code Sections 81000—91014.

 

§4.2.115: PUBLIC INSPECTION AND REPRODUCTION.
Every Form 700 filed pursuant to this chapter shall be open for public inspection and reproduction in the office of the City Clerk during regular business hours.

 

APPENDIX A—DESIGNATED POSITIONS

 

POSITION                                                                                DISCLOSURE CATEGORY

 

City Attorney’s Office

Assistant City Attorney                                                                                                             1

Associate Attorney                                                                                                                    1

 

City Manager’s Office

Administrative Analyst I                                                                                                           1

Assistant City Manager                                                                                                         1, 5

Assistant Information Services Manager                                                                                  2

Assistant to the City Manager                                                                                               1, 5

City Clerk                                                                                                                                  1

Consultant                                                                                                                                  1

Deputy City Clerk                                                                                                                      1

Deputy City Manager                                                                                                            1, 5

Human Resources Director                                                                                                        2

Human Resources Manager                                                                                                       2

Information Services Manager                                                                                                  2

Senior Human Resources Analyst                                                                                             2

 

Community Development Department

Administrative Analyst                                                                                                         1, 5

Building Inspector                                                                                                                     4

Chief Building Official                                                                                                         4, 5

Chief Innovation Officer                                                                                                       1, 5

Code Enforcement Officer                                                                                                        1

Community Development Director                                                                                       1, 5

Deputy Community Development Director                                                                          1, 5

Economic Development Manager                                                                                         1, 5

Planning Manager                                                                                                                  1, 5

Permits Center Coordinator                                                                                                       4

Principal Planner                                                                                                                   4, 5

Project Specialist I                                                                                                                 4, 5

Project Specialist II                                                                                                               4, 5

Senior Building Inspector                                                                                                          4

Senior Engineer                                                                                                                     4, 5

Senior Project Specialist (Senior Planner)                                                                           4, 5

Supervising Building Inspector                                                                                             4, 5

 

Engineering/Transportation Department

Administrative Analyst/Manager                                                                                              5

City Engineer                                                                                                                         1, 5

Engineering Inspectors                                                                                                          4, 5

Engineering and Transportation Director                                                                             1, 5

Principal Engineer                                                                                                                 1, 5

Senior Engineer                                                                                                                     1, 5

Supervising Engineering Inspector                                                                                       4, 5

 

Finance Department

Administrative Specialist III (Purchasing Technician, Risk Management Analyst)                2

Assistant Finance Director

Budget and Compliance Manager

Finance Director                                                                                                                        2

Deputy Finance Director                                                                                                           1

Police Business Manager                                                                                                          1

Purchasing Technician                                                                                                               

 

Library Department

Library Director                                                                                                                         2

Library Services Manager                                                                                                         3

 

 

Police Department

Police Captain                                                                                                                            1

Police Chief                                                                                                                               1

 

Public Works Services Department

Administrative Analyst I                                                                                                           3

Administrative Analyst II (Sustainability Manager)                                                            3, 4

Administrative Specialist III (Solid Waste & Recycling Specialist)                                       4

Consultant                                                                                                                                  1

Deputy Public Works Services Director                                                                                   1

Environmental Services Supervisor                                                                                          4

Environmental Protection Specialist I                                                                                      4

Environmental Protection Specialist II                                                                                     4

Public Works Services Director                                                                                                1

Sustainability Manager                                                                                                     2, 3, 4

Water Pollution Control Plant Manager                                                                               3, 4

 

Recreation & Human Services Department

Recreation and Human Services Director                                                                                 1

Recreation and Human Services Manager                                                                                1

 

Arts Commission

Entire Board                                                                                                                           4, 5

 

Board of Zoning Adjustments

Entire Board                                                                                                                               1

 

Human Services Commission

Entire Commission                                                                                                                    4

 

Library-Historical Commission

Entire Commission                                                                                                                    4

 

Rent Review Board

Entire Board                                                                                                                               5

 

Consultants as defined by FPPC Regulation 18701                                                                  *

 

*      A consultant’s disclosure category is determined by the responsible department head in

        consultation with the City Attorney based on the scope of services or duties.

 

NOTE:   Members of the City Council, members of the Planning Commission, City Manager, City Attorney and Finance Director are required under California Government Code Section 87200 to file full disclosure of economic interests (Disclosure Category 1).

 

APPENDIX B—DISCLOSURE CATEGORIES

 

CATEGORY 1—BROAD RESPONSIBILITIES

 

All designated employees and officials in this category shall disclose all sources of income, all interests in real property, and all investments and business positions in business entities.

 

Employees in this category must complete all schedules on the Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests Form:

        •       Schedule A-1: Investments

        •       Schedule A-2: Investments, Income, and Assets of Business Entities/Trusts

        •       Schedule B: Interest in Real Property

        •       Schedule C: Income, Loans, and Business Positions

        •       Schedule D: Income – Gifts

        •       Schedule E: Income – Travel Payments, Advances, and Reimbursements

 

CATEGORY 2—PURCHASING DECISION FOR CITY

 

All designated employees in this category shall disclose investments, business positions and sources of income from business entities which provide services, supplies, materials, machinery or equipment of the type utilized by the City of San Leandro.

 

Employees in this category must complete the following schedules on the Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests Form:

        •       Schedule A-1: Investments

        •       Schedule A-2: Investments, Income, and Assets of Business Entities/Trusts

        •       Schedule C: Income, Loans, and Business Positions

        •       Schedule D: Income – Gifts

 

CATEGORY 3—PURCHASING DECISION FOR DEPARTMENT

 

All designated employees in this category shall disclose investments, business positions and sources of income from business entities which provide services, supplies, materials, machinery or equipment of the type utilized by the designated employee’s department or division.

 

Employees in this category must complete the following schedules on the Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests Form:

        •       Schedule A-1: Investments

        •       Schedule A-2: Investments, Income, and Assets of Business Entities/Trusts

        •       Schedule C: Income, Loans, and Business Positions

        •       Schedule D: Income – Gifts

 

 

CATEGORY 4—REGULATORY/PERMIT/LICENSING/GRANT AUTHORITY

 

All designated employees and officials in this category shall disclose all investments, business positions and sources of income from business entities, and interests in real property, which are subject to the regulatory, permit or licensing authority of the City of San Leandro, or which may receive grants from the City of San Leandro.

 

Employees in this category must complete all schedules on the Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests Form:

        •       Schedule A-1: Investments

        •       Schedule A-2: Investments, Income, and Assets of Business Entities/Trusts

        •       Schedule B: Interest in Real Property

        •       Schedule C: Income, Loans, and Business Positions

        •       Schedule D: Income – Gifts

        •       Schedule E: Income – Travel Payments, Advances, and Reimbursements

 

CATEGORY 5—REAL PROPERTY DECISION

 

All designated employees and officials in this category shall disclose all investments, business positions and sources of income from business entities which engage in land development, construction or the acquisition or sale of real property, and all interests in real property.

 

Employees in this category must complete all schedules on the Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests Form:

        •       Schedule A-1: Investments

        •       Schedule A-2: Investments, Income, and Assets of Business Entities/Trusts

        •       Schedule B: Interest in Real Property

        •       Schedule C: Income, Loans, and Business Positions

        •       Schedule D: Income – Gifts

        •       Schedule E: Income – Travel Payments, Advances, and Reimbursements

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 4, Chapter 2, City Clerk: Fireworks Stand Permit, was removed and former Title 25, Chapter 1, Conflict of Interest Code: Administrative Regulations, was editorially renumbered to be Title 4, Chapter 2, City Clerk, Conflict of Interest, during the 2005-06 republication.  Legislative history for former Title 25, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 80-18, 02/04/1980 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 90-204, 09/17/1990 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 92-253, 09/08/1992 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 95-10, 01/07/1995 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 96-186, 12/16/1996 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 98-130, 10/05/1998 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 2000-156, 10/02/2000 [§25.1.100]; Resolution No. 2003-084, 03/17/2003 [§25.1.100].  Appendix C was revised administratively on 02/27/2008 to reflect changes that FPPC made to the Form 700.

 

Resolution No. 2015-029, 02/17/2015, repealed and replaced Chapter 2, Conflict of Interest, which removed existing Appendix A and relettered Appendices B and C to be Appendices A and B, respectively.

 

Resolution No. 2016-146, 11/07/2016, repealed and replaced Chapter 2, Conflict of Interest.

Resolution No. 2018-075, 7/16/2018, repealed and replaced Chapter 2, Conflict of Interest.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§4.2.100-4.2.105]; Resolution No. 2006-128, 12/04/2006 [§§4.2.100-4.2.105]; Resolution No. 2008-144, 12/15/2008 [Appendices A, B, C]; Resolution No. 2011-005, 01/18/2011 [Appendices A, B, C]; Resolution No. 2013-033, 03/18/2013 [Appendices A, B, C]; Resolution No. 2015-029, 02/17/2015 [§§4.2.100—4.2.105, Appendices A, B]; Resolution No. 2016-146, 11/07/2016 [§§4.2.100—4.2.115, Appendices A, B]; Resolution No. 2018-075, 7-16-2018 [§§4.2.100—4.2.115, Appendices A, B]

Chapter 3 City Council Meeting Minutes
§4.3.100: MINUTES OF REGULAR AND SPECIAL CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Clerk shall tape record the proceedings for all regular and special City Council meetings. The City Clerk shall prepare Action Minutes for all regular and special City Council meetings. The minutes shall be the official record of action taken and shall prevail in the event of an inconsistency with the tape recording. The tape recordings of these meetings shall be maintained for five (5) years by the City Clerk for future reference and/or court proceedings.

 

§4.3.105: WORK SESSIONS.
The City Clerk may tape record proceedings for all work sessions. No minutes shall be composed for these meetings. The tape recordings shall serve as the Official Record and be maintained for five (5) years by the City Clerk for future reference and/or court proceedings.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 99-34, 03/15/1999 [§§4.3.100-4.3.105]

TITLE 5 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1 Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
Chapter 2 {Reserved}
Chapter 3 Condominium Conversion Fee Regulations
Chapter 4 Development Agreements
Chapter 5 Application Processing
Chapter 6 Cannabis Product Manufacturing Pilot Program
Chapter 7 General Plan Conformance Compliance

Chapter 1 Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
§5.1.100: IMPLEMENTATION OF CEQA GUIDELINES.
In implementing the CEQA and the CEQA Guidelines when assessing the potential environmental impacts of a proposed project, the City will utilize the most current amended version of the Act and Guidelines. For projects that are deemed to require some level of environmental documentation; i.e., Categorical Exemption, Mitigated Negative Declaration/Negative Declaration, or Environmental Impact Report, the City shall follow the procedures for preparation of said documents, including preparation of appropriate notices, as provided for in the Guidelines.

 

§5.1.105: FORMS.
The City shall use the attached forms for Initial Study Checklist (Appendix A) and Negative Declaration (Appendix B).

 

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 28, Chapter 1, California Environmental Quality Act: Implementation of State CEQA Guidelines, was editorially renumbered to be Title 5, Chapter 1, Community Development: Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for Title 28, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 82-226, 08/16/1982 [§28.1.100]; Resolution No. 84-13, 02/06/1984 [§28.1.100]; Resolution No. 85-126, 07/01/1985 [§28.1.100]; Resolution No. 88-175, 08/15/1988 [§28.1.100]; Resolution No. 2000-170, 11/06/2000 [§28.1.100]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§5.1.100-5.1.105]

Chapter 2 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 5, Chapter 2, Community Development: Below Market Rate Program Guidelines, was repealed and deleted by Resolution No. 2004-115, 07/19/2004.

Chapter 3 Condominium Conversion Fee Regulations
§5.3.100: DEFINITIONS.
The following terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:

 

(a)       Median Income. “Median income” means the area median income level as estimated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for the geographic area that includes San Leandro.

 

(b)       Gross Income. “Gross income” means that amount defined by Title 26, U.S.C.A. §61 (Internal Revenue Code).

 

(c)       Purchaser. “Purchaser” means the person or persons in whose name title is vested under the policy of title insurance issued upon close of escrow, for any converted unit.

 

(d)       Converted Unit. “Converted unit” means a unit approved for conversion to a condominium pursuant to Article 24 of the Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro.

 

(e)       Conversion Fee. “Conversion fee” means a fee as adopted in Title 6, Chapter 4 of the San Leandro Administrative Code as established by the City Council, assessed upon the conversion of a residential apartment building or complex to a condominium.

 

§5.3.105: PAYMENT OF CONVERSION FEE; CONDITION OF FINAL MAP; SECURITY.
As a condition of approval of the final subdivision map for an approved condominium conversion project, the City Engineer shall certify that an instrument has been recorded against the property containing language in substantially the following form: “Upon the close of escrow of the sale of a converted unit in this subdivision the subdivider shall make payment to the City of the conversion fee for that unit.” As a further condition of approval of the final map, the subdivider shall have deposited with the City security guaranteeing payment of the fees. The security may, at the option of the City Manager, be in the form of:

 

(a)       An irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the City Attorney and in an amount not less than twenty percent (20%) of the total fees; or

 

(b)       Any other security, whether or not recorded against the property, guaranteeing to the satisfaction of the City Manager, the payment of the fee.

 

§5.3.110: EXAMINATION OF FINAL MAP.
Prior to approving the final map the City Engineer shall certify that the map contains language satisfying §5.3.105, above.

 

 

§5.3.115: DIRECT PURCHASE REBATE FOR QUALIFIED PURCHASERS.
The City may, at the request of a qualified purchaser, apply the conversion fee on behalf of such qualified purchaser toward the purchase of a converted unit. A qualified purchaser is one who:

 

(a)       Has a gross income not in excess of one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the median income; and

 

(b)       Resides or is employed within the City of San Leandro as of the date application is made for such use of the fee; and

 

(c)       Contributes at least two and one-half percent (2½%) of the purchase price towards the purchase of the residential unit.

 

In such case, the fee may only be used for the purpose of reducing the principal purchase price of the unit. The total amount of the fee must be used for this purpose.

 

The converter shall post in a conspicuous place in its sales offices, a notice informing prospective purchasers of the Direct Purchase Rebate benefit. Such notice shall also be printed on all brochures and other advertising material distributed by the converter.

 

§5.3.120: DETERMINATION OF QUALIFIED PURCHASER.
A mortgage lender selected by the purchaser shall be responsible for determining qualification of the purchaser for use of the fee as set forth in §5.3.115 herein. If the lender determines the buyer to be eligible for such use of the fee, the lender shall so certify in writing to the Finance Director prior to the close of escrow. Upon certification, a qualified purchaser shall be entitled to the Direct Purchase Rebate benefit described in §5.3.115, upon requesting such benefit on a form supplied by the Finance Director.

 

§5.3.125: REPAYMENT OF FEE.
 

(a)       The fee used in the manner specified in §5.3.115 herein shall be in the form of a deferred loan with payments starting in year six (6) from the City to the buyer.

 

(b)       The conditions of repayment of the loan shall be:

 

(1)       A promissory note secured by a deed of trust in the principal amount of the loan shall be recorded against the property;

 

(2)       The interest on the loan shall be a simple interest, as determined by the City, accrued from the date the escrow closes;

 

(3)       Repayment of the principal plus interest is due upon sale or other transfer of ownership of the property, or at such time as the borrower ceases to maintain the unit as his or her principal place of residence; and

 

(4)       The loan may be prepaid in full to the City at any time with no prepayment penalty attaching.

 

§5.3.130: CLOSING COSTS.
All costs associated with processing and recording the Direct Purchase Rebate benefit loan shall be the obligation of the qualified purchaser to pay.

 

§5.3.135: COMPLIANCE WITH FAIR DEBT COLLECTION PRACTICES ACT.
In administering the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall comply with applicable fair lending requirements of the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, as may be amended from time to time, and of any other applicable federal or state statute.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1984.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§5.3.100, 5.3.125, 5.3.135]

Chapter 4 Development Agreements
§5.4.100: AUTHORITY.
These regulations are adopted under the authority of California Government Code Sections 65864-65869.5.

 

§5.4.105: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Development Agreement. “Development agreement” means a development agreement entered into between the City and a Developer (as defined in §5.4.115) pursuant to California Government Code Section 65864 et seq. and this Chapter.

 

(b)       Person. “Person” means an individual, group, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trust, governmental agency, or any other form of business or legal entity.

 

(c)       Project. “Project” means the development project that is the subject of a development agreement.

 

§5.4.110: FORMS, INFORMATION, AND FEES.
 

(a)       Any person wishing to enter into a development agreement with the City shall file a development agreement application with the Community Development Director (“Director”).

 

(b)       The Director shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and documents provided for or required hereunder for the preparation and implementation of development agreements.

 

(c)       The Director may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as considered necessary to process the application.

 

(d)       Each application shall be accompanied by a proposed development agreement which shall be on the City’s form for development agreements.

 

(e)       The City Council shall establish by resolution the schedule of fees and charges for the filing and processing of applications and documents provided for or required hereunder.

 

§5.4.115: QUALIFICATION AS AN APPLICANT.
Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person, including any authorized agent, who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement, provided that in all instances the owner(s) of fee title of the real property shall join in the application or the development agreement shall be conditional upon the close of escrow vesting fee title to the property in the Developer. The Director may require an applicant to submit proof of interest in the real property and of the authority of any agent to act for the applicant. The qualified applicant and any successors-in-interest shall be referred to as “Developer.”

§5.4.120: REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
The Director shall endorse on the application the date it is received. The Director shall review the application and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for purposes of processing. If the Director finds that the application is complete, the Director shall accept it for filing. The Director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the agreement proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. The Director shall also indicate whether or not the staff recommends approval of the agreement as proposed or in an amended form.

 

§5.4.125: NOTICE; PUBLIC HEARING.
 

(a)       Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held by both the Planning Commission and the City Council on the City’s intention to consider adoption of a development agreement.

 

(b)       Notice. The Director shall give notice of the City’s intention to consider adoption of a development agreement in the manner provided in subsection (d) and of any other concurrent public hearing required by law.

 

(c)       Form of Notice. The form of the notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement shall contain:

 

(1)       The date, time and place of the hearing;

 

(2)       A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description of the property, in text or by diagram, that is the subject of the hearing;

 

(3)       The identity of the hearing body; and

 

(4)       Other information required by specific provision of this Chapter or which the Director considers necessary or desirable.

 

(d)       Time and Manner of Notice. The time and manner of giving notice shall be by:

 

(1)       Publication or Posting. Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, or if there is none, posting at least (10) days prior to the hearing in at least three (3) public places in the City; and

 

(2)       Mailing. Mailing of the notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to:

 

(i)        All persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within minimum three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement;

 

(ii)       All persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning the subject real property and to the Developer responsible for the proposed development agreement; and

 

(iii)      Each local agency expected to provide water, fire, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential services or facilities to the subject property, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected.

 

(e)       Additional Notice. The Planning Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, may direct that notice of the public hearing shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by state law.

 

(f)        Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or this Chapter does not affect the authority of the city to enter into a development agreement.

 

(g)       Declaration of Existing Law. The notice requirements set forth in subsections (c) and (d) are declaratory of existing law (California Government Code §65864, et seq.). If state law prescribes different notice requirements, subsequent to the adoption of this regulation, notice shall be given pursuant to such state law.

 

§5.4.130: RULES GOVERNING CONDUCT OF HEARING.
The public hearing shall be conducted as nearly as may be in accordance with such procedural standards as may be adopted for the conduct of zoning hearings. Each person interested in the matter shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Developer has the burden of proof at the public hearings on the proposed development agreement.

 

§5.4.135: DETERMINATION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
After the hearing by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the City Council. The recommendation shall include the Planning Commission’s determination whether or not the proposed development agreement:

 

(a)       Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the General Plan, the San Leandro Zoning Code, and any applicable specific plan;

 

(b)       Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the zoning district in which the real property is located;

 

(c)       Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practice;

 

(d)       Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; and

 

(e)       Will adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values.

 

The recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation.

§5.4.140: DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL.
 

(a)       After a public hearing, the City Council may accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission. It may, but need not, refer back to the Planning Commission matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing for report and recommendation. The Planning Commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the City Council.

 

(b)       The City Council may not approve the development agreement unless it makes the determination set forth in §5.4.135(a) to (e) above. The City Council, in its sole discretion, may deny the development agreement on the grounds that in its opinion the proposed agreement is not in the best interest of the public.

 

(c)       If the property is located outside the City limits, the application for a development agreement shall be acted upon by the City only if the property is within the City’s sphere of influence or planning area boundaries. If so, the agreement shall be conditional upon the property being annexed to the City and shall specify the time period for completion of annexation. If annexation does not occur within the specified time period, the agreement shall be null and void.

 

§5.4.145: APPROVAL BY ORDINANCE.
If the City Council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance. After the ordinance approving the development agreement is adopted, the City may enter into the agreement.

 

§5.4.150: CONTENTS OF AGREEMENT.
 

(a)       A development agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses of the property thereunder, the density and/or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes, and requirements for construction and maintenance of on-site and off-site improvements or payment of fees in lieu of such dedication or improvements.

 

(b)       A development agreement may also include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions but does not affect the Developer’s responsibility to obtain all permits or approvals required by the City’s ordinances.

 

(c)       A development agreement may include conditions and restrictions imposed by the City with respect to the Project including those conditions, restrictions and monitoring requirements proposed in an environmental impact report applicable to the Project prepared and certified under the California Environmental Quality Act, in order to eliminate or mitigate adverse environmental impacts of the Project.

 

(d)       A development agreement may provide that the Project be constructed in specified phases, that construction shall commence within a specified time, and that the Project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.

 

(e)       A development agreement may include a requirement for the Developer’s payment of operational costs of public services and for the Developer’s agreement to be included within a Mello-Roos District or other comparable district for financing ongoing operational costs of public services for the Project.

 

(f)        If the development agreement requires Developer’s financing of necessary public facilities, it may include terms relating to subsequent reimbursements over time for such financing.

 

(g)       All development agreements shall contain an indemnity and insurance clause requiring the Developer to indemnify and hold the City harmless against claims arising out of the development process, including all legal fees and costs.

 

(h)       A development agreement is a contract that is negotiated and voluntarily entered into by City and Developer and may contain any additional or modified conditions, terms or provisions agreed upon by the parties, including sanctions for failure to meet requirements.

 

(i)        A development agreement may include conditions relating to financial guarantees for performance of obligations thereunder.

 

§5.4.155: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION.
 

(a)       Unless otherwise provided in a development agreement, either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into.

 

(b)       The procedure for proposing and adopting an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of a development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance.

 

(c)       Where the City initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the Developer of the City’s intention to initiate such proceedings at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the City’s providing the public notice required by §5.4.125.

 

(d)       In the event that a development agreement should be canceled or terminated, all rights of the Developer under the development agreement shall terminate. Except as otherwise provided in the development agreement, the City may, in its sole discretion, determine to retain any and all benefits, including reservations or dedications of land, improvements constructed and payments of fess, received by the City.

 

(e)       Notwithstanding the above paragraph, any termination of the development agreement shall not prevent the Developer from constructing or completing a building or other improvements authorized pursuant to validly issued City permits or entitlements, but the City may take any action permitted by law to prevent, stop, or correct any violation of law occurring after cancellation of the development agreement.

 

§5.4.160: RECORDATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT, AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION.
 

(a)       Within ten (10) days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall submit for recording the agreement with the County Recorder.

 

(b)       If the parties to the agreement or their successors-in-interest amend or cancel the agreement or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement for failure of the Developer to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall record the notice of such action with the County Recorder.

 

§5.4.165: ANNUAL REVIEW.
 

(a)       The City Council or, upon delegation by the City Council to the Director, the Director shall review the development agreement at least every twelve (12) months following the date of the agreement. The Director shall begin the review proceeding by giving thirty (30) days’ written notice that the City intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement to the Developer.

 

(b)       The City Council or, if review authority has been delegated to the Director, the Director shall conduct a review of the development agreement during which the Developer must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon the Developer. The City Council or Director shall determine, upon the basis of substantial evidence, whether or not the Developer has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement.

 

(c)       The City Council or, if review authority has been delegated to the Director, the Director finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the Developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period shall be concluded. If the City Council or Director finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the Developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the City Council or Director may modify or terminate the agreement.

 

§5.4.170: EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
 

(a)       Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the City rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the property, density and design, improvement and construction standards, parking requirements, setback requirements, architectural and design controls, and specifications applicable to development of the property shall be those City rules, regulations and official policies in force on the effective date of the development agreement.

 

(b)       A development agreement shall not prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations and policies applicable to the property as set forth in the development agreement.

 

(c)       A development agreement shall not prevent the City from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent land use permit or authorization for the Project on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies.

 

§5.4.175: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
Shall any provision of this Chapter or a subsequent development agreement be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be either invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this Chapter and development agreement shall remain in full force and effect unimpaired by the holding, except as may otherwise be provided in a development agreement.

 

§5.4.180: JUDICIAL REVIEW; TIME LIMITATION.
 

(a)       Any judicial review of an ordinance approving a development agreement shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure §1085; and judicial review of any City action taken by the City pursuant to this Chapter, other than the initial approval of a development agreement, shall be writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure §1094.5.

 

(b)       Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision of the City taken pursuant to this Chapter shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of the decision.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 85-111, 06/17/1985 [§§5.4.100-5.4.705]; Resolution No. 92-121, 05/18/1992 [§§5.4.100-5.4.180]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§5.4.105-5.4.135, 5.4.165]

Chapter 5 Application Processing
§5.5.100: GENERAL.
This chapter shall apply to those applications submitted in accordance with the Zoning Code and the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Leandro.

 

§5.5.110: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW APPLICATIONS.
Development review applications shall be processed within the time limits specified in Chapter 4.5 of the State Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.).

 

§5.5.120: INCOMPLETE APPLICATION SUNSET PROVISIONS.
All applications that remain incomplete and inactive for a minimum 6-month period shall have a written 30-day warning notification forwarded to the applicant. If no action is taken by the applicant regarding the application within 30 days thereafter, the application shall automatically be withdrawn and closed.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 5, Chapter 5, Community Development: Sidewalk Repair Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 1, Engineering and Transportation: Sidewalk Repair Program, during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2017-105, 07/17/2017 [§§5.5.100-5.5.120]

Chapter 6 Cannabis Product Manufacturing Pilot Program
§5.6.100: GENERAL.
Cannabis Product Manufacturing is a controlled land use that requires a special license from the State of California. This identifies the criteria for the application, review and approval of Conditional Use Permits for Cannabis Product Manufacturing This shall apply to all Conditional Use Permit applications for Cannabis Product Manufacturing in conjunction with the Zoning Code.

 

§5.6.110: ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.
Applications shall be from those applicants who intend to apply for or have already received a Cannabis Manufacturing License from the State of California. Speculative or third party applications shall be disqualified from consideration.

 

§5.6.120: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
A Conditional Use Permit application for Cannabis Product Manufacturing shall be accepted for processing only when the following mandatory fees and documentation are provided at the time of application submittal:

 

(a)       A completed application form with an original signature of the applicant(s) and property owner(s), as prescribed by the Community Development Department, including the following:

 

(1)       Applicant and Property Owner Information:

 

(i)        The legal business name of the applicant and the applicant’s tax identification number;

 

(ii)       The name(s) under which the cannabis manufacturing business will operate (“Doing Business As”);

 

(iii)      The applicant’s contact information, including name, title, mailing address, phone number, and email address;

 

(iv)      The ownership structure of the applicant as filed with the California Secretary of State (e.g., limited liability company, joint partnership, S-Corporation). An applicant that is a foreign corporation shall include in its application the certificate of qualification issued by the Secretary of State of California;

 

(v)       The name(s), title, address and phone number of the current property owner(s);

 

(vi)      The name, title, address and phone number of any manager or management company responsible for the property or facility on behalf of the property owner(s).

 

(2)       Identification of other cannabis licenses the applicant holds or has applied for in other jurisdictions.

 

(3)       The Assessor’s Parcel Number (APN) of the project location and physical address (if any).

 

(b)       The required deposit for a Conditional Use Permit, as per the City’s current fee schedule, and any other concurrent application(s).

 

(c)       Twenty (20) printed and bound copies of the following shall be provided at the time of application:

 

(1)       A detailed Project Description that identifies the following information:

 

(i)        A description of the proposed project and intended manufacturing use;

 

(ii)       The type of Cannabis Manufacturing License being sought from the State of California (e.g., Type N, Type P, Type 6, or Type 7);

 

(iii)      A description of the project location and property details, including proposed and existing square footage of the manufacturing facility, lot coverage calculations, floor area ratio (FAR), roof height, landscaped area, and other pertinent information pertaining to the property.

 

(iv)      Parking calculations and anticipated total number of intended employees.

 

(2)       A detailed Operational Plan that identifies the following information:

 

(i)        Proposed hours of operation and/or shift scheduling;

 

(ii)       A description of the type of equipment used for manufacturing;

 

 

(iii)      A description of any hazardous materials used, including volatile solvents or gases used for extracting, and their storage methods;

 

(iv)      A description of security measures, including physical and procedural measures taken to secure the facility, inventory, and employees;

 

(v)       A description of measures taken to control or destroy unsold or damaged inventory and cannabis waste;

 

(vi)      The anticipated gross annual revenue from all sales of products manufactured at the manufacturing premises;

(vii)     A list of State licensed transportation and distribution providers serving the facility, if known;

 

(viii)    Anticipated number and frequency of deliveries serving the facility;

 

(ix)      Any other pertinent information involving the operation of the facility.

 

(d)       Three (3) copies of a Title Report for the subject property prepared within three (3) months of the time of application.

 

(e)       Ten (10) full size sets (ARCH D or ANSI D) and fifteen (15) half size sets (ARCH B or ANSI B) of Project Plans drawn to scale, prepared and stamped by a licensed architect and/or civil engineer. Site Plans shall be submitted bound, rolled, or folded. The plans shall include pages of the following:

 

(1)       Existing and Proposed Site Plan. Show, label, and dimension the property lines, sidewalks, curbs, all structures with a roof, the outline of buildings, ingress and egress points, paving, parking, walls/fences, trash enclosures, adjacent buildings, and contours (where relevant).

 

(2)       Stormwater Control Plans (C.3). Provide Stormwater Control Plans for the project site in accord with Alameda County’s Clean Water Program technical guidance. Plans shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer.

 

(3)       Conceptual Landscaping Plans. Identify existing and proposed landscaping for the project site, including all tree, shrub, and groundcover species and materials, plant sizes, and water use calculations in accord with the State of California’s Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance. Conceptual landscaping plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect.

 

(4)       Existing and Proposed Floor Plans. A scaled diagram of the premises to be permitted, showing boundaries, dimensions, entrances and exits, interior partitions, walls, rooms, windows, and common or shared entryways. The plans shall identify all areas where commercial cannabis activities will be conducted. Plans shall be prepared by a licensed architect.

 

(5)       Existing and Proposed Elevations. Show, label, and dimension all details for window types, trim, eaves, roof materials, exterior materials, fencing, trash enclosures, mechanical equipment, and screening. Provide color elevations of proposed building(s). For new construction, a color and materials board and color renderings shall be required.

 

(f)        A Traffic Generation Report prepared and stamped by a licensed transportation engineer. The report shall identify the estimated number of trips generated by the proposed use and summarize existing conditions on surrounding roadways.

(g)       A Noise Study or statement prepared by a qualified professional such as an acoustical engineer. The study shall identify and analyze potential sources of noise related to the proposed use and provide acoustically feasible abatement measures as necessary.

 

(h)       An Odor Control Mitigation Plan or statement describing assumed conditions and any necessary measures taken to monitor, control, and/or mitigate odors that may be generated from the manufacturing process.

 

(i)        A digital copy of all required application exhibits shall be provided in an accessible format.

 

§5.6.130: INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS.
Following City review of an application, if an applicant fails to submit any required documentation within sixty (60) calendar days from the date of written notification from the City, the application shall be deemed abandoned and closed. No time extensions or exceptions shall be granted.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 5, Chapter 6, Community Development: Procedures for Payment of Commissions to Real Estate Brokers, was repealed and deleted by Resolution No. 93-249, 12/06/1993.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2017-082, 06/19/2017 [§§5.6.100-5.6.150]; Resolution No. 2020-021, 03/02/2020 [§§5.6.100-2.6.130]

Chapter 7 General Plan Conformance Compliance
§5.7.100: CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 65402 REQUIREMENT.
Pursuant to the requirement of California Government Code Section 65402, no real property shall be acquired by dedication or otherwise for street, square, park or other public purposes, and no real property shall be disposed of, no street shall be vacated or abandoned, and no public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized until the location, purpose and extent of such acquisition or disposition, such street vacation or abandonment, or such public building or structure have been submitted to and reported upon by the Planning Commission as to conformity with the City’s adopted General Plan. The Planning Commission shall render its report as to conformity within forty (40) days after the matter is submitted to it, or such longer period of time as may be designated by the City Council.

 

§5.7.105: EXEMPTIONS.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65402(a) the City Council determines that the provisions of that section shall not be applicable to the following property transactions:

 

(a)       The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes;

 

(b)       Acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening; or

 

(c)       Alignment projects; and

 

Provided such dispositions for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening, or alignment projects are of a minor nature.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 89-154, 07/17/1989 [§§5.7.100-5.7.105]

TITLE 6 FINANCE
Chapter 1 Late Payment Charges
Chapter 2 Utility User Tax Exemption
Chapter 3 {Reserved}
Chapter 4 Fees
Chapter 5 {Reserved}
Chapter 6 City Vehicle Use Policy
Chapter 7 Real Property Transfer Tax
Chapter 8 Policy Governing Employee Use of Purchasing Cards
Chapter 9 Policy for Employee Computer Purchase Program

Chapter 1 Late Payment Charges
§6.1.100: IMPOSITION OF LATE PAYMENT CHARGES.
The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to impose a late payment charge or charges in the amount set forth herein upon those delinquent accounts receivable specified below:

 

(a)       Community Development Service Fees;

 

(b)       False Alarm Fees;

 

(c)       Marina Berthing Fees;

 

(d)       Sewer Service Fees;

 

(e)       Property Rental Charges;

 

(f)        Engineering Service Fees;

 

(g)       Building Inspection Fees.

 

§6.1.105: AMOUNT OF LATE PAYMENT CHARGES.
The amount of late payment charge shall be three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the outstanding balance per month for those accounts receivable delinquent for thirty (30) days or more, with the following exceptions:

 

(a)       Marina Berth Rental                                                            10% of monthly rental rate

 

(b)       Sidewalk Fees                                                0.50% of outstanding balance per month

 

(c)       Underground Utilities Fees                            0.59% of outstanding balance per month

 

§6.1.110: FINDING OF COST.
It is the finding of the City Council that the imposition of a late payment charge in the amount set forth herein is commensurate with the administrative costs and fiscal impact associated with non-payment of accounts receivable.

 

§6.1.115: EFFECTIVE DATE.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be effective for all accounts receivable delinquent for thirty (30) days.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 80-172, 08/04/1980 [§§6.1.100-6.1.115]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§6.1.100, 6.1.105, 6.1.115]

Chapter 2 Utility User Tax Exemption
§6.2.100: ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTAIN EXEMPTION.
The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to implement a system to provide exemptions from the Utility User Tax for qualifying residential users.

 

§6.2.105: ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
The following eligibility criteria are established for the specified exemptions:

 

(a)       Successful application for and acceptance in Pacific Gas & Electric Company’s (PG&E) California Alternate Rates For Energy (CARE) Program, with eligibility criteria and verification as required by PG&E.

 

(b)       Successful application for and acceptance in Pacific Bell’s Universal Lifeline (Lifeline) Program, with eligibility criteria and verification as required by Pacific Bell.

 

§6.2.110: FILING.
The exemptions pursuant to this Chapter are effective until such time as applicant no longer qualifies for PG&E’s CARE program or Pacific Bell’s Lifeline program, PG&E or Pacific Bell terminates said programs, or until June 30, 2005. The City Council shall have the authority to extend said program for an additional period of time after review of the fiscal impacts of said exemptions.

 

§6.2.115: NON-APPLICABILITY.
This Chapter shall not apply to any person who otherwise would receive from any public agency the amount of tax referred to in §6.2.105 imposed upon such person for the purpose of paying such tax.

 

§6.2.120: TERM OF EXEMPTIONS.
The PG&E exemption shall be for a term beginning October 1, 2001, and ending June 30, 2005. The Pacific Bell exemption shall be for a term beginning September 1, 2002, and ending June 30, 2005.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 6, Chapter 2, Finance: Subsidies, was repealed and deleted by Resolution No. 87-85, 05/18/1987.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2001-107, 07/02/2001 [§§6.2.100-6.2.115]; Resolution No. 2002-71, 05/20/2002 [§§6.2.100-6.2.120]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§6.2.110-6.2.120]

Chapter 3 {Reserved}

Chapter 4 Fees
§6.4.100: FEES.
The following fees have been established by the City Council pursuant to various provisions of the San Leandro Municipal Code (SLMC), San Leandro Administrative Code (SLAC), or the general laws of the State of California.

 

§6.4.105: EFFECTIVE DATE.
The fees in this Chapter shall be effective on the first day of the fiscal year following adoption or on the date as set forth in the enacting resolution.

 

§6.4.110: FISCAL YEAR 2019-20 ADOPTED FEES.
 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

CITY WIDE

 

 

1.

 Reproduction Work

 

 

 

A. Public Records, General

$2.00 (first 10 pages) $0.10 per additional page

SLAC 6.4.100

 

B. Audio Recordings

 

 

 

— City Council Meetings

$2.00 per meeting

 

 

C. San Leandro Municipal Code Book

$125.00

 

 

D. San Leandro Municipal Code supplement service

$20.00/year

 

2.

Filming Project Fees:

 

SLAC 32.1.100

 

A. Application Fee

$150.00

 

 

B. Daily Filming Fee

$50.00

 

 

C. Encroachment Fee

$65.00

 

 

D. Personnel Fee:

 

 

 

— Police

Current hourly overtime rate with minimum of 4 hours per officer.

 

 

— Other City staff:

Direct Costs (1) for services within normal working hours. Overtime rate charged for services provided outside of normal operational hours.

 

3.

Subpoena Fees

 

CA Gov’t Code

 

A. Records

$15.00

 

 

B. Personal appearance of City employees

$275.00

 

 

C. Personal appearance of police officers

$275.00

 

4.

Residential Parking Permit Program

 

 

 

Note: Fees are Annual and are to be charged on a calendar year basis and shall not be pro rated.

 

 

 

A. Regular Permits

$20 for first permit

 

 

1. Additional Permits (each)

$40/each for additional permits

 

 

B. Visitor Permits

$15 (good for 14-days)

 

5.

Legal Services Cost Recovery Fee

Community Development Department applications and other Cost Recovery eligible legal services performed by the City Attorney’s Office will be charged the following rates:

 

 

 

$250-$400/HR – Attorney time

 

 

 

$150.00/hr. – Paralegal time

 


 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

6.

Service fee for credit card transactions processed by the City

A maximum of 2½% of total credit card transaction amount

 

(1) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 14.80% for indirect overhead charges and 52.23% for staff support charges.

CITY CLERK

 

 

1.

Private Subscriptions - for mailing and handling of Council Book

$240.00/per year (prorated quarterly)

SLAC 6.4.100

2.

Fire and Closing Out Sales Application Fees

$60.00 filing fee for 60 days

SLMC 4-8-220

3.

Appeals Fee

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Non-refundable appeal processing fee for administrative decisions

$75.00

 

 

B. Non-refundable appeal processing fee for Board of Zoning Adjustments, Planning Commission or Site Development Sub commission. This fee is in addition to the Appeal Fees in the Community Development Department which cover the costs associated with the review and processing of the appeal.

$534.00 Cost Recovery, plus Community Development Department Planning Division Fee

 

 

C. Library Historical Commission

$287.00 Cost Recovery

 

 

D. Rent Review Board

No Charge

 

4.

Fee for the processing of an initiative petition for any municipal measure.

$200.00 Refundable if, within one year of the date of filing the Notice of Intent, the Clerk certifies the sufficiency of the petition.

CA Elections Code §9202(b)

 

 

CITY MANAGER’S OFFICE – Information Services Division

 

1.

Existing and Custom-designed GIS Data & Map Fees

 

 

 

A. Labor

Direct Costs (1)

 

 

B. Media: Bond or Vellum Paper

$0.25 per sq. ft

 

 

Semi-Gloss or Mylar Paper

$0.75 per sq. ft.

 

 

8-1/2 x 11 Paper

$0.10/per page for 10 or more pages

 

 

CD Rom

$5.00 each

 

(1)

Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 14.80% for indirect overhead charges and 52.23% for staff support charges.

 

 

 

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT – Building Regulations Division

 

1.

Plans and Specifications

See Engineering & Transportation Department Item 7, Public Work Projects

 

2.

Building Permit Fees

 

 

 

A. Filing and Issuance Fee

$128 plus valuation fees and/or other building fees as listed below

 

 

Re-Filing Fee for each resubmittal, deferred submittal, and/or revision after 1st resubmittal, or upon 2nd resubmittal for plan check on same project.

50% of Filing and Issuance Fee per occurrence

 

 

B. Permit Fee

 

 

 

Determination of Valuation for Fee-Setting Purposes: Valuation shall be based on total value of all construction work, as determined by the Building Official, including all finish work, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.

 

For new construction project valuations which the Building Official believes are understated at submittal, valuation may be determined using the most current International Code Council (ICC) valuation table modified to account for a regional construction cost modifier of 16% or the most currently available regional construction cost modifier (i.e. construction value in ICC Table * 1.16).

 

For tenant improvement, residential remodels, or other projects that do not involve new square footage project valuations which the Building Official believes are understated at submittal, valuation may be determined using, up to 50% of, the most current International Code Council (ICC) valuation table modified to account for a regional construction cost modifier of 16% or the most currently available regional construction cost modifier (i.e. up to 50% of construction value in ICC Table * 1.16).

 

Note: The Building Official may adjust the plan checking/permit fee for an individual project when costs to the City are not congruent with this fee schedule.

 

i) New Buildings, Additions, Tenant Improvements, Residential Remodels, and Combined Mechanical, Electrical and/or Plumbing Permits

 

 

 

$1 to $5,000

$197.00

 

 

$5,001 to $10,000

$197.00 for the first $5,000 plus $59.13 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $10,000

 

 

$10,001 to $50,000

$493.00 for the first $10,000 plus $17.25 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000

 

 

$50,001 to $100,000

$1,183 for the first $50,000 plus $15.77 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000

 

 

$100,001 to $500,000

$1,971 for the first $100,000 plus $12.81 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000

 

 

$500,001 to $1,000,000

$7,096 for the first $500,000 plus $4.73 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000

 

 

$1,000,001 and up

$9,460 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4.49 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof over $1,000,000

 

 

ii) Stand-Alone Plumbing Permit

 

 

 

Up to $2,000

$99.00

 

 

$2,001 to $5,000

$197.00

 

 

$5,001 to $10,000

$197.00 for the first $5,000 plus $39.42 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $10,000

 

 

$10,001 and up

$394.00 for the first $10,000 plus $13.14 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof over $10,000

 

 

iii) Stand-Alone Electrical Permit

 

 

 

Up to $2,000

$99.00

 

 

$2,001 to $5,000

$197.00

 

 

$5,001 to $10,000

$197.00 for the first $5,000 plus $39.42 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $10,000

 

 

$10,001 and up

$394.00 for the first $10,000 plus $13.14 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof over $10,000

 

 

iv) Stand-Alone Mechanical Permit

 

 

 

Up to $2,000

$99.00

 

 

$2,001 to $5,000

$197.00

 

 

$5,001 to $10,000

$197.00 for the first $5,000 plus $39.42 for each add’l $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $10,000

 

 

$10,001 and up

$394.00 for the first $10,000 plus $13.14 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof over $10,000

 

 

v) Residential 1 and 2 Family Re-roof

 

 

 

a) Main dwelling roof

$275.00 all sizes and materials

 

 

b) Detached garages and accessory structures on same property as main dwelling and done at the same time as the main dwelling roof.

$88.00

 

 

vi) Inspection of the installation of an earthquake gas shutoff valve

$33.47 with no Filing & Issuance Fee

 

 

vii) Residential Seismic Retrofit projects using “Plan set A” (for one and two family residences)

$77.00 plus Filing and Issuance Fee and other miscellaneous fees

 

 

viii) Photovoltaic Systems

 

 

 

a) Residential

 

 

 

i) Up to 15kW

$296.00

 

 

ii) each additional kW over 15kW

$16.00

 

 

b) Commercial

 

 

 

i) Up to 25kW

$413.00

 

 

ii) 26kW - 50kW

$620.00

 

 

iii) each additional kW (51kW - 250kW)

$7.00

 

 

iv) each additional kW over 250kW

$5.00

 

 

Note: For photovoltaic systems, total permit fees, including applicable Permit Issuance and Filing Fees, Automation Fees, Community Planning Fees, and other mandated fees shall not exceed amounts authorized via Government Code Section 66015.

 

ix) Signs

 

 

 

Sign permit fees are based on all signs being on the same property and on the same permit.

 

 

 

a) 1st Non-energized sign attached to building.

$111.00

 

 

b) Each additional sign thereafter:

$56.00

 

 

c) Pylon sign, energized or not, each:

$233.00

 

 

d) Monument sign, energized or not, each

$175.00

 

 

e) Relocation or alteration of any sign electronically or mechanically, but not including replacement of tubing, transformers and such parts subject to failure; or shop inspection by the local inspection department in lieu of a UL label (a local electrical inspection department label of approval shall be required), each

$88.00

 

 

x) Demolition

 

 

 

a) Commercial/Residential Demolition up to 3,000SF

$296.00

 

 

b) Each Additional 10,000SF

$197.00

 

 

C. Plan Checking Fee

 

 

 

Plan checking fee shall be paid at the time of application for a building permit. The plan checking fee is in addition to the building permit fee and shall be as follows:

 

 

 

i) Plan Check Fee, if applicable

80% of building permit fee

 

 

ii) For Master Plans (i.e. identical buildings built by the same builder on the same lot or in the same tract and for which building permits are issued at the same time)

A full plan checking fee shall be paid for each Master Plan when more than one building will be built and one-third (33%) of the full plan checking fee shall be paid for each production phase building at time of application.

 

 

iii) Changes, revisions, or additions to plans previously checked

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

iv) Additional plan review after the first re-check

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

v) Alternate Methods and Materials

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

vi) Energy Conservation - for all buildings and projects subject to the California Energy Commission’s conservation regulations

20% of building permit fee

 

 

D. Miscellaneous Fees

 

 

 

i) Miscellaneous Inspections

 

 

 

a) Fees for inspection not otherwise set forth herein

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

b) Fees for inspection conducted outside of normal business hours

$297.00 hourly rate; 2 hour minimum charge

 

 

ii) Investigation Fees

 

 

 

a) Investigation fee for work commenced without first obtaining permits as required by the San Leandro Municipal Code, whether or not a permit is subsequently issued

 

 

 

b) Investigation fee for conditions that are not in compliance with the San Leandro Zoning and/or Municipal Codes

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

Note: Payment of any investigation fees does not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of applicable codes in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed by law.

(1)

Note: For small tenant improvements to existing buildings and ADUs, the Chief Building Official and/or the Community Development Director may waive the Community Planning Fee at his/her discretion.

(2)

Community Planning Fee will not be charged for the following project types: permits for accessory dwelling units; stand-alone mechanical, plumbing, and electrical permits; minor residential remodels, and minor tenant improvements.

 

E. Other Fees and Charges

 

 

 

i) Technology Fee

6% of permit fee, minimum $6.87 per permit type

 


 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

ii) Community Planning Fee (for commercial, industrial & residential projects)

0.3% of total valuation of construction

 

 

Note: For small tenant improvements to existing buildings and ADUs, the Chief Building Official and/or the Community Development Director may waive the Community Planning Fee at his/her discretion.

 

 

 

iii) Strong Motion Impact Fee: State mandated tax for the Seismic Safety Commission for seismic monitoring.

 

 

 

 — Residential

0.00013 per $1.00 Valuation or fraction thereof with a $0.50 min.

 

 

 — Commercial/Industrial

0.00028 per $1.00 Valuation or fraction thereof with a $0.50 min.

 

 

iv) Building Standards Commission (SB1473) Fee: State Mandated tax for Green Building Standards collected for the State by the City.

All Residential, Commercial, and Industrial permits that use Valuation to determine permit fees: $1.00 per $25,000 valuation or fraction thereof with a $1.00 minimum.

 

 

v) Exception to Noise Ordinance

$463.00

 

 

vi) Certificate of Occupancy

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

vii) Temporary Certificate of Occupancy per 30 days

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

viii) Certificate of Compliance:

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

ix) House Moving Permit

$197.00 per hour; 1 hour minimum charge

 

 

x) Microfilm Copies

$1.20

 

 

xi) Photocopies

$0.10 per page

 

 

xii) Microfilming of Permit and Plans includes imaging fee for fire permits: (For purposes of fee charges, each permit is considered a drawing)

 

 

 

 — 8-1/2 x 11 or 11 x 14 drawings including fire permits

$1.90 per sheet

 

 

 — All other size drawings

$2.10 per sheet

 

 

xiii) Appeals

Direct Costs (1)

 

(1) Direct Cost = hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 100% for fringe benefits, overhead and indirect costs

(2) Community Planning Fee will not be charged for the following project types: permits for accessory dwelling units; stand-alone mechanical, plumbing, and electrical permits; minor residential remodels, and minor tenant improvements.

 

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT – Code Enforcement Division

 

1.

Administrative Citations

 

 

 

Municipal Code Violation

 

 

 

- 1st Violation

$155.00

 

 

- 2nd Violation

$310.00

 

 

- 3rd Violation

$620.00

 

2.

Re-Inspection Fee

$197.00

 

 

 

 

 

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT – Economic Development

 

1.

Development Agreements and Leases for City/Agency Owned Property

Direct Costs (1)

 

2.

Marina Leases

Direct Costs (1) (2) plus the value of the extension/assignment (3)

 

 

 

 

 

(1) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 14.80% for indirect overhead charges and 52.23% for staff support charges.

(2) Direct Costs/Planning: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 83% for indirect overhead charges and 89% for staff support charges.

(3) Based on case-by-case financial analysis and appraisals of subject facilities/improvements.

 

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT – Planning Division

 

1.

Annexation

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

2.

Appeal

 

 

 

A. Appeal to Official/Commission Other than City Council

Direct Costs (a); $5,000 deposit

 

 

B. Appeal to City Council (Add’l City Clerk Filing Fees Apply)

Direct Costs (a); $5,000 deposit

 

 

C. Appeal to Official/Commission Other than City Council

$535.85

 

 

D. Appeal to City Council (Add'l City Clerk Filing Fees Apply)

$535.85

 

3.

Conditional Use Permit/Parking Exemption/Variance

 

 

 

A. Conditional Use Permit

 

 

 

i) Residential

Direct Costs (a); $6,000 deposit

 

 

ii) Nonresidential

Direct Costs (a); $10,000 deposit

 

 

B. Variance

Direct Costs (a); $6,000 deposit

 

 

C. Parking Exceptions

Direct Costs (a); $6,000 deposit

 

4.

Conversion of residential apartment buildings to condominiums

$5,293.40 per unit plus Direct Costs

 

5.

Development Agreement

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

6.

Administrative Review and Exceptions

 

 

 

A. Non-Residential Administrative Review

$3,091.51

 

 

B. Residential Administrative Review

$2,059.43

 

 

C. Outdoor Facilities Permits

$1,030.19

 

 

D. Mobile Food Vending

$226.41

 

 

E. Wireless Telecommunication Facility

$6,868.87

 

7.

Administrative Review Requiring Hearing

 

 

 

A. Non-Residential

$6,182.08

 

 

B. Residential

$4,120.70

 

8.

Site Plan Review

 

 

 

A. Residential - Minor; Certificate of Compatibility

$2,575.47

 

 

B. Residential - Major

Direct Costs (a); $5,000 deposit

 

 

C. Residential - Additional Site Plan Review in Conjunction with Accessory Dwelling Unit

$160.69

 

 

D. Non-Residential

Direct Costs (a); $5,000 deposit

 

 

E. Non-Residential Façade Change

$686.79

 

 

F. Major View Preservation

$4,120.79

 

9.

Environmental Review

 

 

 

A. Exemption Without Initial Study (Categorical)

$686.79 (b) (c)

 

 

B. Initial Study/EIR

Direct Costs (a) (b) (c)

 

10.

Fence Modification

 

 

 

A. Single Family and Duplex

$1,030.19

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

B. Multi-Family and Non-Residential

$1,546.23

 

 

C. View Preservation

$3,089.62

 

11.

Historical Landmark Designation

$2,059.43

 

12.

Planned Unit Development

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

13.

Pre-Application Meeting

 

 

 

A. First Meeting

$0.00

 

 

B. Each Additional meeting

$516.04

 

 

C. Planning Commission or BZA Work Session

$516.04

 

14.

Public Convenience and Necessity Determination

$1878.30

 

15.

Signs

 

 

 

A. Temporary Sign Permit

$244.34

 

 

B. Standard Sign Permit

$514.15

 

 

C. Sign Program

Direct Costs (a); $5,000 deposit

 

16.

Temporary Use Permit (TUP)

 

 

 

A. TUP - Holiday, Parking Lot Sale, Car Wash, or Fundraiser

$251.89

 

 

B. TUP - All Others

$1,030.19

 

17.

Tentative Map/Subdivision/Condominium

 

 

 

A. Tentative Map

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

B. Amendment/Extension/Revision/Waiver

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

C. Conversion of Residential Apartment Buildings to Condominiums

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

D. Conversion of Non-Residential Complexes to Individual Unit or Condominium Ownership

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

18.

Zone Change/Specific Plans/General Plan Amendments

 

 

 

A. Zone Change

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

B. Zoning Code Amendment

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

C. General Plan Amendment

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

D. Specific Plan

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

 

E. Specific Plan Amendment

Direct Costs (a); $15,000 deposit

 

19.

Zone Compliance Letter

$181.00

 

20.

Zoning Approval for Business License

 

 

 

A. New Business License Zoning

$119.00

 

 

B. Business Change of Ownership

$36.00

 

 

C. Home Occupation - Application

$119.00

 

21.

Other Fees

 

 

 

A. Plan Check for Building

 

 

 

i) Alterations/Additions/Accessory Buildings - Residential

$258.00

 

 

ii) New Construction - Single Family Residential

$258.00

 

 

iii) New Construction - Multi-Family Residential

$645.00

 

 

iv) New Construction - Non-Residential

$645.00

 

 

v) Alterations/Additions - Non-Residential

$258.00

 

 

B. Public Notice Sign Deposit

$169.00 (fully refundable if sign returned)

 

 

C. Community Planning Fee (applies to all building permits)

0.3% of total valuation of construction

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

(1)

Note: For small tenant improvements to existing buildings and ADUs the Chief Building Official and/or the Community Development Director may waive the Community Planning Fee at his/her discretion.

(2)

Community Planning Fee will not be charged for the following project types: permits for accessory dwelling units; stand‐alone mechanical plumbing

 

D. Technology Fee: applies to all fees except Zoning Compliance Letter (18), Zoning Approval for Business License (19) and Other Fees (20)

6% of Permit Fee; $6.65 minimum

 

(a)

DIRECT COST DEPOSITS AND DEPOSIT REPLENISHMENT

 

 

Applicants for Full Cost Entitlement Applications shall pay for all City staff time, including legal costs, as well as any costs for consultants required to process the application. An Agreement for Payment of Fees for Application Processing shall be submitted with the project application.

 

Initial deposits, as shown on the fee schedule, will be collected and held by the City in a deposit account at the time the application is submitted. The cost of staff time and legal costs will be drawn from the deposit account. A positive account balance shall be maintained at all times during the review process. No work will be performed on a project with a negative fund balance. If the deposit is reduced below 20% of the initial deposit amount, the applicant will be notified and required to supplement the deposit account with an additional amount no less than 50% of the original amount.

 

When more than one Direct Cost application is submitted, the sum total of the initial full cost deposit amount can be reduced by 20%. Projects outside the scope of this fee schedule will be subject to a full cost reimbursement agreement which will include the identification of a work program and cost estimates for both City staff time and consultant services on a defined scope of work.

 

Funds expended for staff time shall not be dependent upon the City’s approval or disapproval of the application request. Planning Direct Costs are calculated as follows: hourly wage rate multiplied by a factor of 3.38 to account for benefits, indirect overhead charges and staff support charges. The deposit account will be held open for 90 days after project approval for City to complete any miscellaneous clean-up items and to account for all project-related costs. Any deposit amounts remaining after final project close out, will be returned to the applicant.

(b)

As may be required by the Community Development Department for project evaluation or environmental review, all payment for consultant work shall be the responsibility of the applicant and must be paid in advance.

(c)

Note for all fees: In addition to COSL fees, applicant is responsible for any applicable fees imposed by other agencies, such as county filing fees, LAFCO fees, Department of Fish and Wildlife Fees, etc.

 

ENGINEERING AND TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT

 

1.

General Encroachment

 

SLMC §5-1-225

 

A. Permit

$65.00

 

 

B.1 Inspection/Plan Review/Permit Issuance

Inspection = $129.00/hour;

Plan Check Engineer = $157.00/hour; Technical Assistance = $106.00/hour;

Senior Engineer = $192.00/hour;

Principal Engineer = $211.00/hour;

Direct Costs for Plan Check Services Consultant

 

 

B.2 Permit + Inspection Fee

$65.00 (Permit) + 1.5 hours (Minimum Inspection Time) (estimated inspection requirements = 1.5 hours determined by City Engineer)

 

 

C. Parklet Program

 

 

 

— Application Fee

$150.00

 

 

— Design Review Deposit

As determined by City Engineer

 

 

— Restoration Deposit

$2,500

 

 

— Inspection

$129.00/hour

 

 

— Plan Review

$157.00/hour

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

D. Inspection/Security/Plan Review Deposit

As determined by City Engineer to insure prompt, high quality repairs and to cover estimated inspection costs and plan review cost.

 

 

E. No Permit Penalty Fee

Double Inspection Fee and Permit Fee

 

 

F. Annual Sidewalk Repair Program - Sidewalk Inspection

Cost of work performed by the City contractor or as described in SLAC §8.1.120 “Repairs”

SLAC §8.1.120

 

G. Agreement

Direct Costs (1)

 

 

H. Overhead Banner Installation and Removal

$150.00

 

(1) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 54% for indirect overhead charges and 87% for staff support charges.

 

 

I. News Rack Permit

$55.00 + $5.50 per news rack

 

 

Maintenance Deposit

$100.00 + $5.00 per news rack

 

2.

Subdivision:

 

 

 

A. Parcel Map Waiver/Lot Line Adjustment/ or Certificate of Compliance

Direct Costs (1); $1,600 initial deposit

 

 

B. Parcel Map

Direct Costs (1); $4,000 plus $100 per lot initial deposit

 

 

C. Tentative/Final Map

Direct Costs (1)

 

 

D. Subdivision Improvement Plan Review

Direct Costs (1)

 

3.

Building Permits:

 

 

 

A. Plan Review

Direct Costs (1); $65.00 minimum

 

 

B. Agreement Preparation

Direct Costs (1)

 

4.

Large Format Copies (see also Community Development Dept.)

$10.00 for first sheet and $2.00 for each sheet thereafter plus Direct Costs (1)

 

(1) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 54% for indirect overhead charges and 87% for staff support charges.

5.

Park Facilities Development Impact Fees (2)

 

SLMC §7-13-100

 

Park Land Acquisition Fee:

 

SLAC §8.8.100

 

Single Family

$17,301

SLAC §7-1-820

 

Multi-Family

$15,122

 

 

Special Unit

$7,562

 

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

$6,554 maximum (No fee when < 750 sq. ft.)

 

 

Park Improvement Fee:

 

 

 

Single Family

$2,730

 

 

Multi-Family

$2,387

 

 

Special Unit

$1,193

 

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

$1,034 maximum (No fee when < 750 sq. ft.)

 

 

Total Acquisition and Improvement Fee:

 

 

 

Single Family

$20,031

 

 

Multi-Family

$17,509

 

 

Special Unit

$8,755

 

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

$7,588 maximum (No fee when < 750 sq. ft.)

 

(2) Park Development Fees created with Reso. 2000-064, and amended with Reso. 2005-069 & Reso.2019-073.

6.

Grading Permits:

 

 

 

A. Permit

$65.00

 

 

B. Inspection

$129.00/hour

 

 

C. Inspection Deposit

As determined by City Engineer

 

 

D. Plan Review

Plan Check Engineer = $157.00/hour;

Principal Engineer = $211.00/hour

 

 

E. Performance Bond

As determined by City Engineer

SLMC §7-12-605

 

F. Erosion and Sediment Control Bond

Estimated cost for erosion and sediment control

SLMC §7-12-610

7.

Public Works Projects:

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

A. City Standard Plans (Printed or CD)

$10.00

 

 

B. Bidder: City Projects Plans & Specification Documents purchased at City Hall

Direct Costs (rounded to nearest $5) or a minimum of $25.00

 

 

C. Bidder: City Project Plans & Specification Documents purchased via mail

Direct Costs (rounded to nearest $5) or a minimum of $25.00 + mailing costs

 

8.

Overhead Utility Conversion

 

 

 

A. Residential Development

Lesser of:

SLMC §5-3-325

 

 

i) Actual cost per linear foot of property frontage, or

Underground Utility District Master Plan

 

 

ii) $1,609.71 per dwelling unit, or

 

 

 

iii) $402.80/LF of property frontage

 

 

B. Non-Residential Development

Lesser of:

 

 

 

i) Actual cost per linear foot of property frontage, or

 

 

 

ii) $402.80/LF of property frontage

 

9.

City Property Use Application Fee

Direct Costs (1)

 

(1) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 54% for indirect overhead charges and 87% for staff support charges.

(2) Park Development Fees created with Reso. 2000‐64, and amended with Reso. 2005‐069 & Reso. 2019‐074.

(3) Impact fee for ADUs 750 sq. ft. or larger shall be charged proportionately in relation to the size of the primary dwelling unit, per CA Gov’t Code Section  65852.2

 

 

ENGINEERING AND TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT – Traffic Division

 

1.

Development Fees for Street Improvements (DFSI) (2)

 

SLMC §7-11-120

 

A. Residential:

 

 

 

— General residential

$1,532.64

 

 

— Senior housing

$764.79

 

 

— Accessory Dwelling Unit (4)

$764.79 maximum (No fee when < 750 sq. ft.)

 

 

B. Commercial:

 

 

 

— General Office

$4.25/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 361 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Medical Office

$5.96/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 257 sq. ft.)

 

 

C. Retail:

 

 

 

— General Retail

$4.76/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 322 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Personal Services

$2.55/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < sq. ft.)

 

 

D. Restaurants:

 

 

 

— Quality Restaurants

$3.41/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 449 sq. ft.)

 

 

— All Other Restaurants

$13.79/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 111 sq. ft.)

 

 

E. Financial Services

$12.76/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 120 sq. ft.)

 

 

F. Hotel/Motel

$1,038.14/room

 

 

G. Industrial:

 

 

 

— General

$1.37/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 1119 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Mini-warehouse

$0.43/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 3564 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Service Station

$10,892.82/station

 

2.

Oversized vehicles, objects, buildings:

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

A. Red-Tipping Driveway

$65.00 plus $6.50/ft for additional red-tipping > 10′

 

 

B. Public Service Directional Sign

$65.00

 

 

C. Other Services

Direct Costs (1)

 

 

3.

Davis-Doolittle Traffic Impact Fee

TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE

 

TAZ (rates are per sq. ft.)

1

2

3

4

5

6

8

 

General Residential

$0.12

$5.83

$0.28

$0.21

$0.06

$0.07

$0.78

 

Senior Housing

$0.06

$3.31

$0.15

$0.11

$0.04

$0.04

$0.43

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit (No fee when < 750 sq. ft.) (4)

$0.06

$3.31

$0.15

$0.11

$0.04

$0.04

$0.43

 

General Office

$0.22

$9.81

$0.49

$0.34

$0.10

$0.13

$1.31

 

Medical Office

$0.30

$14.09

$0.69

$0.51

$0.15

$0.20

$1.87

 

General Retail

$0.25

$11.27

$0.56

$0.38

$0.11

$0.15

$1.51

 

Personal Services

$0.12

$6.03

$0.30

$0.21

$0.06

$0.04

$0.80

 

Financial Services

$0.66

$30.20

$1.50

$1.06

$0.32

$0.41

$4.02

 

Hotel/Motel

$0.10

$4.83

$0.23

$0.17

$0.05

$0.06

$0.64

 

General Industrial

$0.06

$3.21

$0.15

$0.11

$0.04

$0.04

$0.41

 

Mini-Warehouse

$0.02

$1.00

$0.05

$0.04

$0.01

$0.01

$0.12

 

Service Station

$0.88

$40.24

$1.97

$1.42

$0.44

$0.56

$5.35

 

4.

Marina/Interstate 880 Traffic Impact Fee (3)

 

 

 

A. Residential:

 

 

 

— General residential

$770.90/unit

 

 

— Senior housing/Accessory Dwelling Unit

$260.51/unit (No fee when < 750 sq. ft.)

 

 

B. Commercial:

 

 

 

— General Office

$1.62/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 476 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Medical Office

$3.05/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 253 sq. ft.)

 

 

C. Retail:

 

 

 

— General Retail

$1.88/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 410 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Personal Services

$2.61/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 295 sq. ft.)

 

 

D. Restaurants

 

 

 

— Quality Restaurants

$3.54/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 218 sq. ft.)

 

 

— All Other Restaurants

$6.02/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 128 sq. ft.)

 

 

E. Financial Services

$13.41/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 57 sq. ft.)

 

 

F. Hotel/Motel

$691.16/room

 

 

G. Industrial:

 

 

 

— General

$1.00/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 771 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Mini-warehouse

$0.23/gross bldg. sq. ft. (No fee when < 3352 sq. ft.)

 

 

— Service Station

$2,767.81/station

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

5.

Residential Parking Program

 

 

 

A. First regular annual parking permit

$20.00

 

 

B. Second regular annual parking permit

$40.00

 

 

C. Visitor parking permit

$10.00

 

(1)

Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 54% for indirect overhead charges and 87% for staff support charges.

(2)

This fee is reviewed in February of each year to determine if adjustment is required based on changes in the Construction Cost Index as shown in the “Engineering News Record.”

(3)

Marina/ Interstate 880 Impact Fees pertain to a certain zone in the City ‐ Please contact Engineering & Transportation Department for a complete map

(4)

Impact fee for ADUs 750 sq. ft. or larger shall be charged proportionately in relation to the size of the primary dwelling unit, per CA Gov’t Code Section 65852.2

 

FINANCE DEPARTMENT

1.

Business License Related Fees:

 

SLMC 2-2-525

 

A. Duplicate License

No charge

 

 

B. Business License Listing

$1.00/page (min. $5.00; max. $50.00)

 

 

C. Business License Verification

$5.00 written response (businesses only)

 

 

D. Administrative Fee for Business License Changes

$50.00

SLMC 2-2-520

2.

Permits:

 

SLMC 4-5-210

 

A. Marina Shoreline Peddlers (Ice Cream Vendors Only)

 

 

 

— New and Renewal

$100.00/annual

 

 

B. Peddler/Solicitor:

 

 

 

— New

$25.00

 

 

— Renewal

$25.00

 

 

C. Itinerant Merchant

 

 

 

— New

$25.00

 

 

— Renewal

$25.00

 

 

D. Used Vehicle Dealers

$50.00

SLMC 4-7-210

 

E. Amusement Device Machines

$50.00/machine

SLMC 4-3-305

 

F. Bingo Not-for-Profit - New and Renewals

Business License Base Fee

SLMC 4-25-225

 

G. Cannabis Dispensary Permit

$35,000 per year

SLMC 4-33-200 (f)

3.

Parking Space Rental

 

SLAC 6-4-100

 

A. Estudillo Garage

 

 

 

— Unrestricted Parking

$35.00/month

 

 

— Low Income Parking (Employees ONLY)

$15.00/month

 

 

— Daily Parking

$2.50 per day

 

 

B. Plaza Lot

$55.00/month

 

4.

Dog License

 

SLMC 4-11-200

 

A. Unspayed/unneutered, 1 yr.

$20.00

 

 

B. Unspayed/unneutered, 3 yr. (1)

$40.00

 

 

C. Spayed/neutered, 1 yr. (2)

$10.00

 

 

D. Spayed/neutered, 3 yr. (1) (2)

$20.00

 

 

E. Penalty:

 

SLMC 4-11-510

 

— Unspayed/unneutered

$10.00

 

 

— Spayed/neutered

$10.00

 

 

F. City/County within California: Seeing-eye dog or certified hearing dog for physically handicapped

No Fee

 

 

G. Duplicate tag

$3.00

SLMC 4-11-525

5.

Pot-Bellied Pig License - spayed/neutered, 1 year

$20.00

SLMC 4-11-705

6.

Taxicab

 

SLMC 6-6-210

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

A. Application - Taxicab Business Permit Application

$100.00 - Initial

 

 

 

$50.00 - Annual Renewal

 

 

B. Additional Vehicles - Permit Amendment

$50 per amendment

 

7.

Payroll Related Fees

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Garnishment implementation fee

$1.00 per check

 

 

B. Duplicate W-2s

$5.00

 

8.

Late Payment Charges

0.75% of outstanding balance per month for accounts delinquent 30 days or more

SLAC 6.1.105

9.

Purchase of Paid or Cancelled Bonds

$5.00

SLAC 6.4.100

10.

Bond Issue

To be determined by City Council to recover administrative and related costs.

 

11.

Trailer Park Camp

$1.00 per camp site

SLMC 3-10-235

12.

Returned Check Service Charge

$25.00

SLAC 6.4.100

13.

Copy of Adopted/Adopted Budget

$130.00

 

14.

Copy of Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR)

$50.00

 

15.

Administrative Fee to Place Delinquent Accounts on Tax Bills

$20.00

SLMC 2-9-100

16.

Fee for Insufficient Information (DE6)

$20.00

 

17.

Stop Payment Service Charge

$20.00

 

18.

Wire Transfer Service Charge

$25.00

 

(1) 3-year pet licenses are purchased by pet owners at a reduced fee and, therefore, are not refundable in whole or in part nor will credit be allowed toward licenses for other owned pets.

(2) Pet owners presenting a receipt from a Veterinarian Clinic or Pet Hospital for prepayment of a spayed or neutered operation for their pet will be allowed to license their pet at the spay/neuter rate.

 

FIRE SERVICE RELATED – GENERAL

1.

Fire Prevention Fees

 

 

 

A. Fire Permit Filing and Issuance Fee

$124.00 plus applicable Fire Permit Fees

 

 

B. Fire Permit Re-Inspection Processing Fee

50% of Fire Permit filing and issuance fee

 

 

C. Fire Plan Storage

$30.00

 

2.

Permits

 

SLMC 3-3-112

 

A. Fire Code Permit Fees

$269.00

 

3.

Sprinkler Fees

 

SLMC 3-3-260

 

A. Underground/Private Service Fire Main (includes plan review, hydrostatic test, flush, & inspections <2)

$741.00 plus $18.00/hydrant or connection fee

 

 

B. Sprinkler System (system = 1 riser) (includes plan review, weld, hydrostatic test & inspections <2)

$741.00 plus $1.00 per head

 

 

C. Any extraordinary situations charged at

$135.00/hr

 

 

D. Automatic Sprinkler Tenant Improvements:

 

 

 

— Less than 20 heads

$269.00

 

 

— Greater than or equal to 20 heads

$404.00

 

4.

Fixed Fire Protection System

 

SLMC 3-3-250

 

A. Plan check, inspection and test

$269.00

 

 

B. Electronics activation (clean agent, pre action, etc.)

$404.00 plus $6.00 per device

 

 

C. Any retest or re-inspection (1)

$135.00/hr

 

5.

Fire Alarms

 

SLMC 3-3-250

 

A. Property protection, plan check and test

$135.00 plus $3.00/initiating and/or indicting device

 

 

B. Life Safety Systems

$269.00 plus $6.00 per device

 

 

C. Any retest or re-inspection (1)

$135.00/hr

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

6.

Hazardous Materials Response and Other Incident Fees

 

SLMC 3-3-300

 

A. Engine or Truck Company

$327/hr

 

 

B. Chief Officer

$109/hr

 

7.

Inspection of Multiple Family Dwellings (3 or more units)

 

CA Health & Safety Code

 

A. Annual

$135.00/hr (1)

 

8.

Miscellaneous

 

 

 

A. All other plan reviews (includes review and ordinary inspections associated with project)

65% of building permit fee (2)

 

 

B. Other Fire Prevention Services (includes any miscellaneous fire protection related activities not otherwise categorized in this fee schedule)

Direct Cost (2) (3)

 

 

C. Excessive Plan Review and Inspections

$135.00/hr

 

 

D. Fire Investigation Fee

$624.00

 

(1) 1 hour minimum.

(2) The City Manager and/or Fire Chief may adjust the plan checking/permit fee for an individual project when costs to the City are not congruent with this fee schedule.

(3) Direct Cost = hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 100% for fringe benefits, overhead and indirect costs.

 

 

 

 

HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT

 

No fees are charged by this department.

LIBRARY SERVICES DEPARTMENT

1.

Library Cards

 

SLMC 1-3-805

 

A. Non-resident San Leandro Workers

$30.00/year

 

 

B. Non-resident Family

$60.00/year

 

2.

Fines and Penalties

 

SLMC 1-3-805

 

A. Overdue Book & Magazines Fines

$.40/day; - adult; $.25/day - minor

 

 

 

Max. Fine: $10.00/Hardback books; $6.00/paperbacks & board books

 

 

B. Lost Books

Item list price

 

 

C. Overdue Video Cassette/DVD/CD

$1.00/day up to $15.00/max.

 

 

D. Lost Video Cassette/DVD/CD

Replacement costs

 

 

E. Damaged Video Cassette/DVD/CD

Charge to be assessed by staff

 

 

F. Damaged Plastic Case for Video, DVD or CD

$5.00

 

 

G. Replace Mylar Book Cover

$5.00

 

 

H. Replace Damaged or Lost Barcode

$1.00

 

 

I. Overdue Tech2Go Kit 

$1.00/day up to $15.00/max.

 

 

J. Overdue Boardgames  

$.25/day up to $10.00/max.

 

3.

Special Services

 

SLMC 1-3-805

 

A. Inter-Library Loan

$5.00/request plus postage cost or charges by lending library.

 

 

B. Video and DVD Rental

$3.00/5 days + $1.00 per day for additional days

 

 

C. FAX Service

 

 

 

— In State

$2.00/page

 

 

— Out of State

$3.00/first page; $2.00 each additional page

 

 

— International

$7.00/first page; $2.00 each additional page

 

 

D. Proctor Exam Fee

$50.00

 

4.

Meeting Facility Fees

 

 

 

USERS are classified into the following groups for the purpose of determining applicable fees and charges.

 

— Group Eligibility A:

Programs administered by or for the City of San Leandro

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

— Group Eligibility B:

San Leandro non-profit organizations with 10 or more members of whom at least 50% are San Leandro residents. (Non-profit fundraising events will be charged for actual operating costs, including staffing, utilities and security.)

 

 

— Group Eligibility C:

Non-San Leandro non-profit organizations which serve San Leandro residents. (Use of high-demand facilities limited to twice per year. Fundraising events will be charged for actual operating costs, including staffing, utilities, and security.)

 

 

— Group Eligibility D:

San Leandro resident individuals or groups using the facility for private purposes.

 

 

— Group Eligibility E:

Non-resident individuals using the facility for private purposes.

 

 

— Group Eligibility F:

San Leandro businesses with company facility located within San Leandro city limits.

 

 

— Group Eligibility G:

Non-San Leandro businesses, commercial groups, non-profit organizations, and all other non-resident groups.

 

 

RENTAL FEES are determined by group eligibility and facility used. Operations costs, liability insurance fees, and security fees may also be applicable. Minimum rental is two hours. Hourly rates are not prorated for parts of an hour.

 

Facility:

 

Hourly Rental Rates for Group Eligibility

 

A. Community Library Center:

 

A

B*

C*

D

E

F

G

 

— Trustees Room, Mary Brown Room; Conference B or Conference C

See Hourly Rental Rate Schedule

N/A

N/A

N/A

$50

$75

$75

$85

 

— Lecture Hall, Estudillo Room, Karp, or Senior Facility

See Hourly Rental Rate Schedule

N/A

N/A

N/A

$100

$120

$120

$140

 

— Kitchen (flat rate)

See Hourly Rental Rate Schedule

N/A

N/A

N/A

$75

$85

$95

$110

 

— Karp/Estudillo combination

See Hourly Rental Rate Schedule

N/A

N/A

N/A

$150

$200

$200

$250

 

B. Casa Peralta Grounds:

See Hourly Rental Rate Schedule

N/A

N/A

N/A

$150

$200

$200

$250

 

— Kitchen (flat rate)

See Hourly Rental Rate Schedule

N/A

N/A

N/A

$80

$100

$110

$120

 

 

 

*Resident Rates will be charged during peak weekend hours

 

 

OTHER FEES:

(Fees are the same for all categories)

 

 

— Attendant on Duty

$25.00/hr

 

 

— Opening/Closing Fee (when needed)

$25.00/hr

 

 

— Liability Insurance

Fees determined for each use.

 

 

— San Leandro Police Dept. Security

Fee determined by current overtime rates for police personnel.

 

 

— Private Vendor Security

Fee determined by current hourly rates, nature of event, and number of participants.

 

 

— Utilities

Fee determined by average current hourly costs.

 

 

— Portable Dance Rental

$100.00

 

 

— Meeting Room Damage Deposit

$50.00 - $250.00, depending upon room size

 

 

Equipment Rental

Fees based on current replacement costs.

 

 

 

 

 

 

CANCELLATION PENALTY:

(Rooms)

 

 

If cancelled more than 90 days prior to event:

Full refund of deposit and fees.

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

If cancelled between 90 days and 30 days prior to event:

Forfeit full damage deposit.

 

 

If cancelled between 30 days and 10 days prior to event:

Forfeit full damage deposit and 1/2 of all fees collected.

 

 

If cancelled less than 10 days prior to event:

Forfeit all deposits and fees collected.

 

 

Change/Amendment/No Show Fee     

Changes to reservations (date/time/location) including "no shows" made within 30 days of the rental date will be charged a $25 administrative fee.

 

 

POLICE DEPARTMENT

1.

Fingerprint (LiveScan) Fee

$25.00 for residents

SLAC 6.4.100

 

 

$50.00 for non-resident

 

2.

Concealed Weapon Permit:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Background Investigation Fee:

 

 

 

Upon application for license

$150.00

 

 

Upon issuance of license

$90.00 plus State fee (1)

 

 

B. Renewal Fee

$50.00

 

3.

Gun Dealer’s Permit:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. New

$150.00 Plus State fee (1)

 

 

B. Renewal

$100.00

 

4.

Firearms Storage Fee

$40.00 per firearm

SLAC 6.4.100

5.

Massage/Acupuncture Permits:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. New Establishment

$100.00 plus State fee (1)

 

 

B. Renewal Establishment

$50.00

 

(1) As part of the application process, applicants must undergo a psychological evaluation at a cost of $150, which shall be borne by the applicant.

 

C. Masseur/Masseuse/Acupuncturist Permit

$25.00 – Permit Fee, plus

SLMC 4-23-400

 

 

$32.00 – Fingerprint (LiveScan) & Background Check, plus

 

 

 

$20.00 – Police Dept. Administrative Fee

 

6.

Secondhand Dealers/Junk Dealers/Pawnbrokers:

 

SLMC 4-9-230

 

A. New

$100.00 plus State fee (1)

 

 

B. Renewal

$60.00

 

(1) As part of the application process, applicants must undergo a psychological evaluation at a cost of $150, which shall be borne by the applicant.

7.

Fortunetelling:

 

SLMC 4-15-210

 

A. New

$25.00 plus State fee

 

 

B. Renewal

$25.00 plus State fee

 

8.

Taxicab:

 

 

 

A. Owner Fingerprint & Background Check

$175.00 plus $20.00 Police Dept. Admin Fee

SLMC 6-6-215

 

B. Driver Permit Application, Annual

$50.00 Permit Fee, plus (2) and (3)

SLMC 6-6-310

 

 

$32.00 – Fingerprint & Background Check, plus

 

 

 

$20.00 – Police Dept. Administrative Fee

 

 

C. Driver Permit Re-Issuance (within 6 mos.)

$20.00

SLMC 6-6-340

(2) As part of the application process, applicants must submit proof of a current drug test showing negative results and two identical and current passport size color photographs.

(3) As part of the Police Department’s inspection of taxi cabs, verification of the City Council approved (5/2/11) flag drop rate of $3.00, $2.60 mileage rate and $26.00 wait fee/hour will be conducted to ensure compliance with SLMC 6-6-400, effective June 1, 2011.

9.

Tobacco Retailer’s Annual Permit Fee

$500.00

SLMC 4-36-500

10.

Police Reports:

 

SLAC 11.2.110

 

A. Letter of clearance, verification, lost property, etc.

$25.00

 

 

B. Crime Analysis

$50.00

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

C. Accident Reports

$10.00 (1-10 page report); $0.10 per additional page

 

 

D. Police Reports/Arrest Reports

$2.00 (1-10 page report); $0.10 per  additional page

 

11.

Animal Service Fees:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Animal pickup

$50.00/pickup

 

 

B. Veterinarian pickup:

 

 

 

— For 1 – 10

$125.00

 

 

— Over 10

$12.50 ea. to max. of $300.00

 

 

C. Animal Redemption

$40.00

 

 

D. Animal Permits

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

1. Animal Permit (New-Includes changes to permit)

$15.00

 

 

2. Animal Permit (Renewal)

$15.00

 

 

3. Beekeeping Permit (New)

$15.00

 

 

4. Beekeeping Permit (Renewal)

$15.00

 

12.

Tape recordings of telephone and/or radio communications — incident related records for public release

$50.00

SLAC 6.4.100

13.

Intoxicated Driver:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Property Damage

Actual cost of damage to City property

 

 

B. Emergency Response

$77.00/hr.

 

14.

Vehicle Release

$200.00

SLAC 6.6.100

15.

Vehicle Repossession

$15.00

 

16.

Vehicle Verification:

 

 

 

— At City Hall

$13.00

 

 

— At Home or Business

$25.00

 

17.

False Alarm Response:

 

SLMC 4-6-400

 

A. Third response within 90 days

$75.00

 

 

B. Fourth and subsequent responses

$175.00

 

18.

Photographs:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Color photographs

 

 

 

— 8 x 10

$5.00

 

 

— 4 x 6

$4.00 (per print)

 

 

B. Black and white photographs

 

 

 

— 8 x 10

$16.00

 

 

C. Duplication of CDs & DVDs

$25.00 per CD or DVD

 

19.

Parade Permits (Special Events):

 

 

 

A. Permit

$50.00

SLAC 1.4.100 (a)

 

B. City service support (i.e. personnel assistance, barricade services or special refuse services), excluding City sponsored civic functions.

Direct costs in excess of $500.00, per event

SLAC 1.4.100 (b)

20.

Carnival Permit

$100.00

SLAC 6.4.100

21.

Block Party Permit

$30.00

 

22.

Background Investigation for Certification of Employee of Firearm Dealer

$40.00

SLMC 4.14.420

23.

Vehicle Registration Violation

$13 - at City Hall

 

 

Correction Verifications

$25 - at home or business

 

24.

Parking Citation Fines:

 

 

 

— CPO Parking Violation

$65.00

SLMC 3.1.200(h)

 

— Parking on Street for Repairs

$90.00

SLMC 6.1.270

 

— Posted Private Property

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.400

 

— Not Curbing Wheels on Hill

$40.00

SLMC 6.1.425

 

— Oversize Vehicle (Commercial in Residential)

$125.00

SLMC 6.1.430(d)

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

— Off-Street Oversize Vehicle

$125.00

SLMC 6.1.430(b)

 

— Non-Motorized Vehicle

$60.00

SLMC 6.1.430(c)

 

— Parking Within Designated Stall

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.435

 

— No Parking Area

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.500(a)

 

— Designated Street or Park by Time or Day

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.500(b)

 

— Parking Limitations/Restrictions

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.500(c)

 

— Curb Markings/Red-A/Yel-B/Whi-C/Grn-D

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.505

 

— Handicapped Stall

$350.00

SLMC 6.1.505(e)

 

— Truck-No Parking

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.600

 

— Truck-No Parking Truck Route

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.605

 

— Truck Parking Prohibited

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.610

 

— Truck Over 25 Tons Prohibited

$65.00

SLMC 6.1.615

 

— Municipal Parking Lots-Restrictions

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.800

 

— Designated Reserved Parking Spaces

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.805

 

— Obstructing Enf.-Removing Chalk Marks

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.810(a)

 

— Obstructing Enf.-Moving Vehicle to Evade

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.810(b)

 

— Parking in Excess of 72 Hours

$90.00

SLMC 6.1.820

 

— Passenger Loading Zone

$45.00

SLMC 6.1.835

 

— Parking Limitations/Golf Course

$36.00

SLMC 6.1.850

 

— Meter Expired

$45.00

SLMC 6.2.115

 

— Meter Zone Time Limit

$45.00

SLMC 6.2.120

 

— Private Property Storage

$116.00

SLMC 6.4.400

 

— Failure to Abate from Private Property

$116.00

SLMC 6.4.405

 

—Truck Route Violation for parked and moving trucks

$125.00

SLMC 6.7.210

 

— Parking on or blocking a crosswalk

$60.00

CVC 22500(b)

 

— Parking in front of a driveway

$60.00

CVC 22500(e)

 

— Parking on a sidewalk

$60.00

CVC 22500(f)

 

— Double Parking

$60.00

CVC 22500(h)

 

— Parking over 18″ from curb

$60.00

CVC 22502(a)

 

— Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant

$60.00

CVC 22514

 

— Parking within 7-1/2 feet of Railroad Track

$60.00

CVC 22521

 

— Abandoned vehicle

$300.00

CVC 22523(a)

 

— Electric Vehicle Charging Station (EVCS) Parking Stall

$45.00

SLMC 6.2.405

25.

Traffic Control:

 

 

 

— Driving over or across newly laid pavement, surfacing, painting

$75.00

SLMC 6.1.240

 

— Driving over any street barrier, sign, marker for closed street

$75.00

SLMC 6.1.245

 

— Unauthorized placement of barrier or sign

$50.00

SLMC 6.1.255

 

— Unlawful riding of skateboard, roller-skates, coasters, toy vehicles or similar device on undesignated City Property

$50.00

SLMC 6.1.265

 

— Unlawful for operator to drive across property not intended for use as a public right of way as means of effecting shortened route

$50.00

SLMC 6.1.285

 

— Refusal or failure to comply with Police Officer/Parking Aide’s traffic control instructions

$100.00

SLMC 6.1.300

 

— Failure to remove ignition key from unattended vehicle

$50.00

SLMC 6.1.830

26.

Commercial Enforcement:

 

 

 

a. Transportation Permit Violation - No Permit

$200.00

SLMC 6-8-110

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

b. Transportation Permit - Annual

$90.00

SLMC 6-8-110 & 6-8-115

 

c. Transportation Permit - Repetitive

$90.00

SLMC 6-8-110 & 6-8-115

 

d. Transportation Permit - Single Trip Only

$16.00

SLMC 6-8-110 & 6-8-115

 

e. Overweight Vehicle Permit Violation - No Permit

$100.00

SLMC 6-9-110

 

f. Overweight Vehicle Permit - Annual

$200.00

SLMC 6-9-110 & 6-9-125

27.

Special Event/Oversized Loads requiring Police special services

Direct costs (4)

 

28.

Municipal Code Violations:

 

SLMC 1-12-200 (c)

 

a. 1st Violation

$100.00

 

 

b. 2nd Violation

$200.00

 

 

c. 3rd Violation (treated as a misdemeanor)

$1,000.00

 

29.

Peddler/Solicitor/Itinerant Merchant

$32.00 - fingerprint & background check

SLAC 6-4-100

 

 

$20.00 - Police Dept. Administrative Fee

 

30.

Curfew Violations:

 

SLMC 1.12.140, 4-1-305—4-1-320

 

a. 1st Violation

$50.00

 

 

b. 2nd Violation within 12 months of first violation

$100.00

 

 

c. 3rd Violation and additional offenses within 12 months of the 2nd violation

$200.00

 

 

 

 

 

POLICE DEPARTMENT – Community Standards Division

1.

Second Inspection/Notice of Violation

$110.00 plus Direct Costs (4)

SLMC 3.1.100-210

2.

Third Inspection/Notice to Abate or Notice of Pending Citation

$110.00 plus Direct Costs (4)

 

3.

Citation or Administrative Hearing

$325.00 plus Direct Costs (4)

 

4.

Each Additional Hour

$50.00/hr. plus Direct Costs (4)

 

5.

Legal Fees for Administrative Hearings and Judicial Actions

$110.00/hr. plus Direct Costs (4)

 

6.

Storage of Illegal Signs

$100 for up to 4 months

SLMC 4.13.110

(4) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 14.8% for indirect overhead charges and 52.2% for staff support charges.

 

PUBLIC WORKS SERVICES DEPARTMENT

1.

Equipment Rental:

Rental Rates are based on current replacement value of $10 for every $20,000 vehicle value.

 

 

Aerial Lift - Large

$74.50

 

 

Aerial Lift - Small

$54.50

 

 

Asphalt Grinder

$55.00

 

 

Backhoe

$41.00

 

 

Cargo Body

$21.50

 

 

CCTV Truck

$99.00

 

 

Chipper, Brush

$12.50

 

 

Compressor, Air

$9.00

 

 

Crane Truck

$83.00

 

 

Dump Truck/Diesel, 5/8 yd.

$47.00

 

 

Dump Truck, 2 yd.

$18.50

 

 

Dump Truck, 3 axle

$62.50

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

Fifth Wheel Tractor

$106.50

 

 

Fork Lift

$10.50

 

 

Loader

$80.00

 

 

Man Lift

$38.00

 

 

Patch Truck

$140.50

 

 

Pickup Truck

$17.00

 

 

Rodder

$172.00

 

 

Roller

$35.50

 

 

Root Pruner

$16.00

 

 

Sedan

$11.00

 

 

Sewer Truck

$115.00

 

 

Spray Emulsion Rig

$6.00

 

 

Spreader, Asphalt Box

$25.50

 

 

Street Sweeper

$137.50

 

 

Street Sweeper, light

$24.00

 

 

Stump Cutter

$28.00

 

 

Tractor

$7.50

 

 

Tractor Loader

$16.25

 

 

Trailer

$8.50

 

 

Trash Truck

$54.50

 

 

Trencher

$12.00

 

 

Utility Van

$36.50

 

 

Van

$16.50

 

 

Water Tank Truck

$46.50

 

2.

Emergency Call-Out:

 

 

 

A. Administration fee

$100.00

 

 

B. City Personnel Charges

Direct Costs (1)

 

(1) Direct Costs: Hourly personnel charge plus a factor of 33% for benefits, 14.80% for indirect overhead charges and 52.23% for staff support charges.

3.

Parking Meter Rates:

 

 

 

A. Three Hour Meters (Zone 1)

 

 

 

— 10 minutes

$0.25

 

 

— 20 minutes

$0.50

 

 

— 30 minutes

$0.75

 

 

— 40 minutes

$1.00

 

 

— 50 minutes

$1.25

 

 

— 60 minutes

$1.50

 

 

B. Three Hour Meters (Zone 2)

 

 

 

— 20 minutes

$0.25

 

 

— 40 minutes

$0.50

 

 

— 60 minutes

$0.75

 

 

C. 30 Minute Meters

 

 

 

— 10 minutes

$0.25

 

 

— 20 minutes

$0.50

 

 

— 30 minutes

$0.75

 

 

D. Electric Vehicle Charging Station (EVCS)

 

 

 

— First 4 hours

$1.00/hour

 

 

— For fifth (5th) and successive hours during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except for holidays

$5.00/hour

 

 

— For fifth (5th) and successive hours on weekends and holidays and during the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday

$1.00/hour

 

4.

BBQ Rental

$150.00/day

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

5.

Tree Planting:

 

 

 

New Tree

$100.00

 

 

Concrete Cutout (up to 4′ x 4′)

$50.00

 

6.

Barricades:

 

 

 

Block Party Deposit

$100.00 for 8; $34.00 each additional

 

 

Block Party Drop-off and Pickup Services

$60.00

 

 

Unreturned Barricades

$34.00 each

 

7.

Shopping Cart Fee

$21.00

SLMC 4.19.125

8.

Solid Waste & Recycling:

 

 

 

— Diversion Plan (formerly Waste Management Plan)

107.00

 

 

— Plan Review

162.00

 

 

Receptacles:

 

 

 

— Receptacle Deposit for Community Events

$300 for 15; $60.00 each additional

 

 

— Unreturned Receptacles

$60 each

 

 

— Receptacle Cleaning

$100.00

 

 

PUBLIC WORKS SERVICES DEPARTMENT – Marina

 

San Leandro Marina:

 

 

 

A. Miscellaneous Rates

 

 

 

— Security Live Aboard Permit

$194.60 per month

 

 

— Towing

$100.00 per hour – with a ½ hour minimum

 

 

— Pumping

100.00 per hour – with a ½ hour minimum

 

 

— Mooring Line Replacement

$10.00 per line

 

 

— Lien Charge

$108.00 per occurrence (maximum permitted by State Law)

 

 

— Lien Processing Charge

$160.00 per occurrence

 

 

— Electronic Key Purchase

$20.00

 

 

— Impound Rates

$30.00 per day

 

 

B. Berth Rental Rates:

Monthly Rental

 

 

— Open Berths:

$9.60 per foot

 

 

24 ft. length

$230.40 per month

 

 

28 ft. length

$268.80 per month

 

 

32 ft. length

$307.20 per month

 

 

36 ft. length

$345.60 per month

 

 

40 ft. length

$384.00 per month

 

 

44 ft. length

$422.40 per month

 

 

48 ft. length

$4460.80 per month

 

 

60 ft. length

$576.00 per month

 

 

— Covered Berths:

$12.50 per foot

 

 

40 ft. length

$500.00per month

 

 

48 ft. length

$600.00 per month

 

 

60 ft. length

$750.00

 

 

— Late Rate

10% of monthly rental rate per each month late

 

 

C. Transient Berthing:

 

 

 

— Under 30 ft. – 59 ft. length

$20.00 per night

 

 

— 60 ft. length and up

$40.00 per night

 

 

D. Boat Launch Ramp Rates:

 

 

 

— Daily

$10.00

 

 

— Annual

$100.00

 

 

E. Dry Storage Rate

$77.50 per space per month

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

PUBLIC WORKS SERVICES DEPARTMENT – Environmental Services Section

1.

Hazardous Materials Storage

 

SLMC 3-3-300

 

A. Annual fees for storage of combustible liquids, corrosives, flammable gases, flammable liquids, flammable solids, nonflammable gases, organic peroxides, other regulated materials, oxidizers, poisonous gasses, poisonous materials (1)

Quantity Range 1 $ 132.00

 

 

Quantity Range 2 $266.00

 

 

Quantity Range 3 $382.00

 

 

Quantity Range 4 $499.00

 

 

Quantity Range 5 $623.00

 

 

B. Annual Fees for Storage of Radioactive Materials

$184.00

 

 

C. Aboveground Tank Installation Permit (2)

 

 

 

• First Tank

$972.00

 

 

• Each Additional

$324.00

 

 

D. APSA Facility Annual Fee

 

 

 

Qualified Facility (Tier I/Tier II)

$162.00

 

 

Non-Qualified Facility (full SPCC)

$285.00

 

(1)

Quantity Range 1 Less than or equal to 500 pounds, 55 gallons, or 2,000 cubic feet at STP.

Quantity Range 2 Greater than 500 pounds, 55 gallons, or 2,000 cubic feet at STP, but less than or equal to 5,000 pounds, 550 gallons or 20,000 cubic feet at STP, respectively.

Quantity Range 3 Greater than 5,000 pounds, 550 gallons, or 20,000 cubic feet at STP, but less than or equal to 50,000 pounds, 5,500 gallons or 200,000 cubic feet at STP, respectively.

Quantity Range 4 Greater than 50,000 pounds, 5,500 gallons, or 200,000 cubic feet at STP, but less than or equal to 500,000 pounds, 55,000 gallons, or 2,000,000 cubic feet at STP, respectively.

Quantity Range 5 Greater than 500,000 pounds, 55,000 gallons, or 2,000,000 cubic feet at STP.

(2)

Includes plan review, field inspections, and permit processing. Additional time will be charged at the current hourly rate.

2.

Accidental Release Program:

 

SLMC 3-3-300

 

Additional Review by City Staff

$162.00/hour

 

 

Additional Review by Third Party

Direct Costs plus + 10%

 

 

Annual Fee:

 

 

 

Program 1

$632.00

 

 

Program 2

$822.00

 

 

Program 3

$1,066.00

 

 

Program 4

$1600.00

 

3.

Underground Hazardous Materials Storage

 

SLMC 3-3-300

 

A. Annual Operating Permit: Each Tank

$139.00

 

 

B. New Tank Installation (2)

 

 

 

• First Tank

$2,915.00

 

 

• Each Additional

$324.00

 

 

C. Tank Removal, Repair, Alterations (2)

 

 

 

• First Tank

$1,620.00

 

 

• Each Additional

$258.00

 

 

D. Minor Repairs and Alterations Hourly Rate

$162.00/hour

 

(2)

Includes plan review, field inspections, and permit processing. Additional time will be charged at the current hourly rate.

4.

Hazardous Waste On-Site Treatment:

 

CA Health & Safety Code; Title 27

 

Annual Fees:

 

 

 

• Permit-by-Rule

$1,205.00

 

 

• Conditional Authorization

$514.00

 

 

• Conditional Exempt

$139.00

 

5.

Hazardous Waste Generators

 

CA Health & Safety Code; Title 27

 

A. Annual Fees for Generators of Hazardous Waste (3)

$184.00 - CESQG

 

$369.00 - SQG

 

$662.00 - LQG

 

$184.00 - UWG

 

$92.00 - CESQG 0

 

(3)

CESQG – Conditionally Exempt Small Quantity Generator – less than 100 kilograms of hazardous waste per month.

SQG – Small Quantity Generator – more than or equal to 100 kilograms but less than 1,000 kilograms of hazardous waste per month.

LQG – Large Quantity Generator – more than or equal to 1,000 kilograms of hazardous waste per month

UWG – Universal Waste Generator

CESQG 0 – Zero waste count due to onsite treatment and/or recycling resulting in off-site shipment not counted as hazardous waste.

6.

CalEPA CUPA Surcharge Fee

As required by State of California

CA Health & Safety Code; Title 27

7.

File Review:

 

SLAC 6.4.100

 

A. Photocopying

See City-Wide

 

 

B. Copies of Site Lists

$157.00/list

 

8.

Plan Review:

 

SLMC 3-3-100

 

A. City Staff Hourly Rate

$162.00/hr.

 

 

B. Outside Contractor

Direct Costs plus + 10%

 

9.

Wastewater Pretreatment:

 

 

SLAC 12.5.110(e)

 

A. All Users

 

SLMC 3-15-510

 

Service Charge – Per Connection

 

 

 

— Weekly Activity

$1,831.00 per month

 

 

— Semi-Monthly Activity

$915.00 per month

 

 

— Monthly Activity

$458.00 per month

 

 

— Bi-Monthly Activity

$229.00 per month

 

 

— Quarterly Activity

$153.00 per month

 

 

— Semi-Annual Activity

$76.00 per month

 

 

— Annual Activity

$38.00 per month

 

 

— Biennial Activity

$20.00 per month

 

 

B. Service Users

 

 

 

Sampling Charge and Routine Analysis – Per Sample

 

 

 

— Composite Samples (4)

$1,064.00

 

 

— Grab Samples (4)

$440.00

 

 

— Other Analyses

Cost + 10%

 

 

Permit Fee (Triennial)

$1,521.00

 

(4)

Includes lab analysis for service charge parameters.

 

C. Compliance Users:

 

 

 

Sampling Charge – Per Sample

 

 

 

— Composite Samples

$915.00

 

 

— Grab Samples

$355.00

 

 

Lab Analysis

Cost + 10%

 

 

Permit Fee (Triennial)

$913.00

 

 

D. Violation Follow-Up:

 

 

 

— Composite Samples

$1,515.00

 

 

— Grab Samples

$955.00

 

 

— Other Analyses

Cost + 10%

 

 

E. Special Discharge Permit (Annual)

$913.00

 

10.

Miscellaneous Services:

 

 

 

A. Site Visits (No Sampling)

$314.00

 

 

B. City Staff

$162.00 per hour

 

 

PUBLIC WORKS SERVICES DEPARTMENT – Waste Water Discharge Fees

1.

Monthly User Charges

 

 

 

A. For Classification A Users (Residential):

 

 

 

• Single-Family Unit

$38.80 Each

 

 

• Multiple-Family Unit

$27.40 Each

 

 

• Accessory Dwelling Unit

$27.40 Each

 

 

B. For Classification B Users (Commercial & Institutional):

 

 

 

Connection

$6.70 Each

 

 

Commercial:

 

 

 

Auto Services

$9.11/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

Bakery, Wholesale

$7.33/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

Laundries

$5.22/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

Markets/Foods

$8.95/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

Mixed Use

$7.60/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

Restaurants

$8.47/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

All Other

$4.10/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

Institutional:

 

 

 

Schools

$3.62/100 Cubic Feet

 

 

C. For Classification C Users (Industrial & Other Large Users):

 

 

 

Loading Charge – based on the total discharge volumes for the billing period.

 

 

 

Connection

$6.70 Each

 

 

Volume

$3,481.00/million gallons

 

 

BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand)

$481.00/thousand pounds

 

 

SS (Suspended solids)

$816.00/thousand pounds

 

2.

Connection Fees

 

 

 

Dwelling units:

 

 

 

• Single-Family Unit

$3,988.00 Each

 

 

• Multiple-Family Unit

$3,327.00 Each

 

 

• Accessory Dwelling Unit

$3,327.00 Each

 

 

Converting an existing apartment building to condominium units

$179/Unit

 

 

Non-residential users shall be assessed connection fees based on the estimated average day of their peak month discharge according to the unit cost schedule below:

 

 

 

Volume

$22.40/gallons per day

 

 

BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand)

$954.00/pounds per day

 

 

SS (Suspended solids)

$1,010.00/pounds per day

 

 

A connection fee adjustment shall be made at the end of one year of service for all non-residential users to reflect the actual wastewater discharge based on monitored wastewater discharged or metered water usage adjusted for volume not discharged to the sanitary sewer system. If the estimated wastewater discharge is low, an additional connection fee shall be assessed. If the estimated wastewater discharge is high, the City shall issue a refund to the user.

 

 

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION

CURRENT FEE

REFERENCE

 

RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT

1.

Facility/Parks/Pools/Fields Rental Fees

 

 

 

USERS are classified into the following groups for the purpose of determining applicable fees and charges.

 

— Group Eligibility A:

Programs administered by or for the City of San Leandro.

 

 

— Group Eligibility B:*

San Leandro non-profit organizations with 10 or more members of whom at least 50% are San Leandro residents.

 

 

— Group Eligibility C:*

Non-San Leandro non-profit organizations which serve San Leandro residents.

 

 

— Group Eligibility D:

San Leandro resident using the facility for private purposes.

 

 

— Group Eligibility E:

Non-resident individuals using the facility for private purposes

 

 

— Group Eligibility F:

San Leandro businesses with company facility located within San Leandro city limits.

 

 

— Group Eligibility G:

Non-San Leandro businesses, commercial groups and non-profit organizations.

 

*

Resident fees charged for all facility and picnic area use during peak weekend hours (Fridays after 5pm, Saturdays, Sundays) and holidays.

Rental fees are determined by group eligibility and facility used. Operational costs, setup & cleanup time, minimum rental hours, liability insurance fees, and security fees may also be applicable. Minimum rental is two hours. Hourly rates are not prorated for parts of an hour.

 

A. Facilities

 

 

Marina Community Center:

MARINA COMMUNITY CENTER FEES

 

 

A

B*

C*

D

E

F

G

 

Patio Conference Room

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$12

$12

$40

$61

$61

$71

 

Multipurpose Room A, B, C, Presentation Room

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Kitchen (Flat Rate)

Flat Rate Coincides with Duration of Room Rental

N/A

$100

$100

$100

$150

$150

$175

 

Kitchen (Hourly Rate)

Hourly Rental Rate - for hours used in addition to the flat rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Titan Auditorium

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$58

$58

$175

$263

$263

$306

 

Senior Community Center:

SENIOR COMMUNITY CENTER FEES

 

 

A

B*

C*

D

E

F

G

 

Main Hall

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$58

$58

$175

$263

$263

$306

 

1/2 Main Hall A (Not Available on Saturday)

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$30

$30

$93

$140

$140

$163

 

1/2 Main Hall B (Not Available on Saturday)

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$30

$30

$93

$140

$140

$163

 

Kitchen (flat rate )

Flat Rate Coincides with duration of Room Rental

N/A

$100

$100

$100

$150

$150

$175

 

Kitchen (Hourly Rate)

Hourly Rental Rate - for hours used in addition to the flat rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Activities Room

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Meeting Room C

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Meeting Room D

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Arts & Crafts Room

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Health & Fitness Room

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$30

$30

$96

$140

$140

$163

 

Computer Lab

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$40

$40

$120

$175

$175

$204

 

 

HALCYON PARK BUILDING

 

Halcyon Park Building

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

 

WASHINGTON MANOR BUILDING

 

Washington Manor Park Building

Hourly Rental Rate

N/A

$24

$24

$65

$96

$96

$112

 

Additional Fees for Facility Rentals:

(Fees are the same for all categories)

 

Opening/Closing Fee (when needed)

$35

 

Liability Insurance

Fees determined for each use.

 

San Leandro Police Dept. Security

Fee determined by current overtime rates for police personnel.

 

Private Vendor Security

Fee determined by current hourly rates, nature of event, and number of participants.

 

Meeting Room Damage Deposit

Titan Auditorium $625; All Other Rooms $125

 

Overtime Fee

Reservations that exceed the scheduled rental time may be billed at twice the hourly rental rate applicable to their applicable room for additional time used.

 

Change/Amendment Fee

Changes to reservations (date/time/location) made within 30 days of the rental date will be charged a $25 administrative fee.

 

Cancellation Policy for Facilities:

 

If cancelled more than 90 days prior to event:

Full refund of deposit and fees minus a $25 administrative fee

 

If cancelled between 90 days and 30 days prior to event:

Forfeit full damage deposit.

 

If cancelled between 30 days and 10 days prior to event:

Forfeit full damage deposit and one half (1/2) of all fees collected.

 

If cancelled less than 10 days prior to event:

Forfeit all deposits and fees collected.

 

 

 

B. Parks

PARK DAY FEE

 

 

A

B*

C*

D

E

F

G

 

Capacity - Under 40

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bonaire Park - Area 5

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Cherry Grove Park - Areas 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Grover Cleveland Park - Front Area, Playground Area

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Halcyon Park - Areas 2, 3, and 4

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Marina Park - Areas 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Mulford Point Areas 1, 2, 3, and 4

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Memorial Park - Rear Area*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Root Park

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Siempre Verde Park, Areas 1 and 2

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Stenzel Park - Areas 1, 2, and 3

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Washington Manor Park - Areas 2, 3, 4, 5, 6*, 7, and 8*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$60

$90

$90

$105

 

Capacity 40-75

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bonaire Park - Pods 1 & 2* and Pods 3 & 4*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Cherry Grove Park - Area 2

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Floresta Park - Lawn Area*, Playground Area*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Halcyon Park - Areas 1* and 5*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Marina Park - Heron Area, Mallard Area*, Behind Seagull Area, and

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Area 19 (Pescadero Point)

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Memorial Park - Front Area*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Thrasher Park*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Toyon Park*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$136

$205

$205

$239

 

Capacity 75-150

 

Bonaire Park - All Pods*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$190

$287

$287

$335

 

Chabot Park*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$190

$287

$287

$335

 

Marina Park - Otter Area*, All Mulford Point Area

N/A

N/A

N/A

$190

$287

$287

$335

 

Washington Manor Park - Area 1*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$190

$287

$287

$335

 

Capacity 150+

 

Marina Park - Seagull Area*

N/A

N/A

N/A

$245

$368

$368

$430

 

Additional Fees for Parks:

 

Park Special Event Fee (Groups 350+)

$250

 

Vehicle Access Fee for Permitted Parks Only: Allows permitted vehicles to load and unload within the park

$30

 

Overcapacity Fee: Allows for estimated attendance to exceed the set capacity for a picnic area. Attendance cannot exceed double the set capacity.

$25

 

Inflatable Fee

$5

 

Cancellation Fee: A non-refundable fee will be charged for changes or cancellations within 30 days.

$25

*

Resident fees charged for all facility and picnic area use during peak weekend hours (Fridays after 5pm, Saturdays, Sundays) and holidays

 

C. Pools

 

All Facility Buy-Outs, must provide own pool insurance or purchase through Gales Creek (inquire when reserving pool)


 

 

SAN LEANDRO BOYS & GIRLS CLUB POOL

 

San Leandro Boys & Girls Club Pool Buy Outs:

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

 

— 1 to 75 Participants

90 Minute Rate

N/A

$90

$90

$90

$135

$135

$158

 

— 76 to 99 Participants

90 Minute Rate

N/A

$140

$140

$140

$210

$210

$245

 

— More than 100 Participants

90 Minute Rate

N/A

$180

$180

$180

$270

$270

$315

 

 

FARRELLY POOL

 

Farrelly Pool Buy Outs:

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

 

— Party Package-Space for 3hours and the per person rate; Maximum capacity 40 people per area

3 Hour Rate

N/A

$110

$110

$110

$166

$166

$192

 

— Area A and B (additional per person fee required)

3 Hour Rate

N/A

$60

$60

$60

$90

$90

$106

 

— Whole Facility Buy-out (1-150)

2 Hour Rate

N/A

$671

$671

$671

$991

$991

$1,151

 

— Whole Facility Buy-out (151-300)

2 Hour Rate

N/A

$991

$991

$991

$1,471

$1,471

$1,711

 

— Whole Facility Buy-out (1-150) ADDITIONAL HOURS

Additional Hours - 60 Minute Rate

N/A

$335

$335

$335

$495

$495

$575

 

— Whole Facility Buy-out (151-300) ADDITIONAL HOURS

Additional Hours - 60 Minute Rate

N/A

$409

$409

$409

$606

$606

$705

 

 

SAN LEANDRO FAMILY AQUATICS CENTER

 

San Leandro Family Aquatic Center Buy Outs:

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

 

— Event Room-No Pool Usage & Non-Rec Swim hours; Max. capacity=40 seated,70 standing

60 Minute Rate

N/A

$76

$76

$76

$114

$114

$133

 

— Party Package-Space for 3 hours and the per person rate; Maximum capacity 40 people per area:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— Event Room (additional per person entrance fee required)

3 Hour Rate

N/A

$300

$300

$300

$390

$390

$436

 

— Areas A, B and C (additional per person entrance fee required)

3 Hour Rate

N/A

$250

$250

$250

$340

$340

$386

 

— Whole Facility Buy Out (1-150)

2 Hour Rate

N/A

$671

$671

$671

$991

$991

$1,151

 

— Whole Facility Buy Out (151-300)

2 Hour Rate

N/A

$991

$991

$991

$1,471

$1,471

$1,711

 

— Whole Facility Buy Out (1-150) ADDITIONAL HOURS

Additional Hours - 60 Minute Rate

N/A

$335

$335

$335

$495

$495

$575

 

— Whole Facility Buy Out (151-300) ADDITIONAL HOURS

Additional Hours - 60 Minute Rate

N/A

$409

$409

$409

$606

$606

$705

 

D. Field/Facility Rentals

 

A field or facility may be rented by groups or individuals for the exclusive use upon payment of a specified service fee. Groups wishing to use field facilities for tournaments, leagues or more than three (3) practices or games must have insurance. Arrangements must be made when reserving the facility. Participants must comply with any and all regulations as established by the City of San Leandro. Field fees are for each 1 hour use period.

 

Damage Deposit:

 

Stenzel #1- 4, Washington Manor Middle School Soccer & Softball Field, Thrasher Park Field, Muir Soccer Field, Washington Manor Park #1 & #2

$300.00 per season

 

San Leandro Ball Park

$500.00 per season


 

Field Rental:

FIELD RENTAL

 

Category C through G User Groups/Organizations:

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

 

— Field Rental

Hourly Rate

N/A

N/A

$20

$20

$30

$30

$35

 

— Add lights (additional to field rental fee)

Hourly Rate

N/A

N/A

$25

$25

$38

$38

$44

 

—Add field preparation, with bases (additional to field rental fee)

Day Rate

N/A

N/A

$37

$56

$56

$64

$ 64

 

San Leandro Ball Park - (games only, no practice):

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— Field rental (with prep and bases)

Hourly Rate

N/A

N/A

$54

$80

$80

$94

$94

 

— Add lights (additional to field rental fee)

Hourly Rate

N/A

N/A

$25

$25

$38

$38

$44

 

— Add score booth (additional to field rental fee)

Day Rate

N/A

N/A

$20

$20

$32

$32

$36

 

— Kitchen Fee (additional to field rental, prep and bases)

Day Rate

N/A

N/A

$30

$30

$32

$32

$36

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tournament Fees:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Youth Rate

Per Day Per Field *

N/A

$150

$150

$150

$225

$225

$263

 

Adult Rate:

Per Day Per Field *

N/A

$325

$325

$325

$488

$488

$569

 

* Additional Fee: Current hourly staff cost if required for tournament

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Soccer Fees:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Muir Soccer Field (games only), Washington Manor Middle School Soccer Field, McCartney Field, Stenzel Field, Washington Manor Park

 

All fields are available for youth play

 

Adult Groups/Leagues may only play at Muir Soccer Field (games only)

 

 

 

 

 

SOCCER FEES

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

 

Category B User Groups/Organizations:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SL Youth Organizations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— Field Rental

Hourly Rate

N/A

$10

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

 

— Add lights (additional to field rental fee)

Hourly Rate

N/A

$7

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

 

Category C through G User Groups/Organizations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— Field Rental

Hourly Rate

N/A

N/A

$37

$37

$56

$56

$64

 

— Add lights (additional to field rental fee)

Hourly Rate

N/A

N/A

$25

$25

$38

$38

$44

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E. Tennis Courts

 

A field or facility may be rented by groups or individuals for the exclusive use upon payment of a specified service fee. Groups wishing to use field facilities for tournaments, leagues or more than three (3) practices or games

 

— Individual and League Play

$9.00 per hour per court

 

— Tournament Play

$9.00 per hour per court

 

FOR ALL OTHER RECREATION FEES AND PROGRAMS, SEE CURRENT RECREATION PROGRAM GUIDE

 

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 83-272, 12/19/1983 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 87-248, 12/07/1987 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 88-54, 04/04/1988 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 90-111, 06/18/1990 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 91-109, 06/17/1991 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 91-251, 12/02/1991 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 92-165, 06/15/1992 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 92-205, 07/06/1992 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 92-242, 08/17/1992 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 93-122, 06/14/1993 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 94-8, 01/18/1994 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 94-59, 04/04/1994 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 94-80, 05/16/1994 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 94-94, 06/13/1994 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 94-142, 08/01/1994 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 95-33, 03/06/1995 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 95-98, 06/05/1995 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 95-107, 06/12/1995 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 95-213, 11/06/1995 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 96-94, 06/10/1996 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 97-51, 05/19/1997 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 98-60, 06/15/1998 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 99-74, 06/07/1999 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2000-64, 06/05/2000 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2000-79, 06/05/2000 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2000-80, 06/05/2000 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2001-49, 03/19/2001 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2001-78, 06/8/2001 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2001-205, 12/17/2001 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2002-41, 04/01/2002 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2003-016, 01/21/2003 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2003-094, 04/07/2003 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2004-039, 04/12/2004 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2004-114, 07/19/2004 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2005-059, 05/16/2005 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2005-069, 06/06/2005 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2005-121, 08/01/2005 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2005-128, 09/06/2006 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§6.4.105]; Resolution No. 2006-041, 05/01/2006 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2006-119, 11/06/2006 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2006-129, 12/04/2006 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2007-067, 05/21/2007 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2007-123, 09/17/2007 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2008-045, 05/05/2008 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2009-058, 05/04/2009 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2009-080, 06/15/2009 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2009-133, 10/05/2009 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2010-045, 05/03/2010 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2010-070, 06/21/2010 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2010-084, 07/06/2010 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2011-082, 05/02/2011 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2011-143, 07/18/2011 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2011-206, 12/19/2011 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2012-036, 05/07/2012 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2012-128, 12/17/2012 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2013-024, 03/04/2013 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2013-055, 05/06/2013 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2013-113, 09/03/2013 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2014-036, 05/05/2014 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2014-103, 09/15/2014 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2015-011, 01/20/2015 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2015-054, 03/02/2015 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2015-088, 05/04/2015 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2016-047, 05/02/2016 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2017-060, 05/01/2017 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2018-034, 05/07/2018 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2018-089, 07/16/2018 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2018-105, 09/04/2018 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2018-106, 09/04/2018 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2019-073, 05/06/2019 [§6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2019-123, 07/15/2019 [§6.4.110]; Resolution No. 2020-044, 05/18/2020 [6.4.100]; Resolution No. 2020-058, 06/01/2020 [6.4.100]

Chapter 5 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 6, Chapter 5, Finance: Refuse Fees, was removed during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 6 City Vehicle Use Policy
§6.6.100: {RESERVED}.
 

§6.6.105: {RESERVED}.
 

§6.6.110: {RESERVED}.
 

§6.6.115: {RESERVED}.
 

§6.6.120: {RESERVED}.
 

§6.6.125: MILEAGE ALLOWANCE.
The City shall reimburse employees for the business use of personal automobiles at the standard mileage rate permitted under the Internal Revenue Service federal tax laws. Annually on January 1, the Finance Director shall notify employees of the current applicable rate.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1986.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§6.6.100-6.6.125]

Chapter 7 Real Property Transfer Tax
§6.7.100: CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS.
Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to Title 2, Chapter 3 of the San Leandro Municipal Code (“Real Property Transfer Tax”) shall be governed by the provisions hereof.

 

§6.7.105: GROUNDS FOR REFUND.
No claim for refund shall be filed unless the taxpayer has paid the tax under protest. Any taxes paid under protest and prior to delinquency shall be refunded on order of the Finance Director if they were:

 

(a)       Paid more than once;

 

(b)       Erroneously or illegally collected;

 

(c)       Erroneously or illegally assessed or levied.

 

§6.7.110: PROTEST.
Any taxpayer contending that taxes heretofore paid should be refunded shall file a protest of said taxes with the Finance Director within thirty (30) days of paying said taxes. The Finance Director shall prepare and make available appropriate forms for filing protests. The protest shall be in writing specifying the amount of refund claimed and the grounds therefor. For purposes of this chapter, the tax is paid on the date the document subject to taxation is recorded.

 

§6.7.115: DETERMINATION.
Within six (6) months of filing any protests, the Finance Director shall evaluate and determine the sufficiency of any protest. The Finance Director shall serve by mail notice of the determination made. If the protest is upheld, the Finance Director shall refund the taxes paid as well as penalties, if any, thereon. If any payments may be refunded but no protest is filed within the time allowed, the payment shall be transferred to the general fund.

 

§6.7.120: APPEAL.
Any party aggrieved by the determination of the Finance Director relative to a refund claim may appeal in writing to the City Manager within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of the Finance Director’s determination under §6.7.115.

 

§6.7.125: FINAL DETERMINATION.
The City Manager shall consider such appeal and affirm, modify or reverse the determination of the Finance Director. The determination of the City Manager shall be final.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively.

Chapter 8 Policy Governing Employee Use of Purchasing Cards
§6.8.100: POLICY GOVERNING EMPLOYEE USE OF PURCHASING CARDS.
It is the policy of the City of San Leandro to provide Purchasing Cards to employees, subject to the conditions set forth in this policy, when such provision would enhance an employee’s ability to perform assigned job duties, and when it is determined to be in the City’s best interest. The employee’s Department Head and the Finance Director are responsible for certifying that there is a demonstrated need for an employee to have a purchasing card. Requests for purchasing cards should be submitted to the Purchasing Supervisor using the appropriate form.

 

Violations of this policy will result in the immediate removal of the Purchasing Card and possible disciplinary action, up to and including termination.

 

Regulations governing use of Purchasing Cards:

 

(a)       Purchasing Cards shall only be provided to City of San Leandro employees.

 

(b)       An employee must sign and agree to the stipulations of the Employee Purchasing Card Agreement prior to receipt and use of a Purchasing Card.

 

(c)       The only person entitled to use the Purchasing Card is the person whose name appears on the card.

 

(d)       Employees must promptly report a lost, misplaced or stolen Purchasing Card to the issuing bank and Purchasing Supervisor.

 

(e)       The Purchasing Card may be used only for City of San Leandro business-related small purchases as defined in Section 1-6-300 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, and authorized travel and training expenditures.

 

(f)        The Purchasing Card limit may be increased in the case of an emergency as specified in Section 1-6-310 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(g)       Employees shall retain all Purchasing Card receipts, enter each transaction into the City’s financial software system, and reconcile the receipts with the monthly bank statement.

 

(h)       The City reserves the right to monitor use of Purchasing Cards. Employees should neither expect nor assume any privacy regarding Purchasing Card transactions.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2003-148, 06/16/2003 [§6.8.100]

Chapter 9 Policy for Employee Computer Purchase Program
§6.9.100: POLICY FOR THE EMPLOYEE COMPUTER PURCHASE PROGRAM.
It is the policy of the City of San Leandro to provide a computer purchase program for employees and City Councilmembers. Interested employees and City Councilmembers must read the packet of information regarding eligibility for the Employee Computer Purchase Program and follow the procedures for applying and participating in the Program. When eligible Program Participants are accepted, they must then complete and submit the required agreement and forms as directed in the “Employee Computer Purchase Program Packet.”

 

§6.9.105: OBJECTIVE.
The objective of the Employee Computer Purchase Program (EPCC) is to elevate the computer literacy of regular (permanent) full- or part-time City Employees and City Councilmembers (the “Program Participants”) through encouraging the purchase and use of home computers and software.

 

§6.9.110: PHILOSOPHY.
The philosophy is that, if Program Participants can more readily purchase computer equipment for home use, they will use the equipment more frequently. Many people learn more easily and effectively in a more relaxed environment, and home computers will allow Program Participants to practice and explore without impeding their normal workload. Program Participants will become more adept at the use of City-compatible hardware and software, thereby improving valuable computer skills and work productivity.

 

§6.9.115: ELIGIBILITY.
All regular (permanent) full- or part-time City employees who have completed their initial probationary period and City Councilmembers are eligible for a loan under the program. Program Participants must agree to comply with the requirements and provisions of the plan. Program Participants are eligible to finance acquisition of only one computer every three (3) years. Program Participants will be eligible to finance upgrades to their existing system and additional software through this plan at any time.

 

§6.9.120: LOAN LIMITS.
Each Program Participant is eligible to borrow, interest free, a maximum of $3,000. The minimum amount of a loan will be $500. The loan balance cannot exceed $3,000 for one individual at any time. Once a loan is initiated by a Program Participant, the Participant may not reenter the purchase program until three (3) months after the obligation has been paid. For a purchase over $3,000, the Program Participant is responsible for the cost difference, payable directly to the vendor.

 

§6.9.125: LOAN REPAYMENT.
Loan repayment will be made through payroll deductions on a semimonthly basis and will start on the first paycheck after payment to the vendor is made. The maximum repayment schedule is 48 pay periods (2 years). The minimum payment will be $20.00 per pay period. If a Program Participant terminates employment with the City before the loan is paid in full, the remaining balance will be deducted from the Participant’s final paycheck (including wages, accrued sick leave, accrued vacation payoff, and for any other compensation available). The obligation owed to the City will have first priority over any other paycheck deductions. If the Program Participant’s paycheck is insufficient to repay the loan in full, the City will issue to the Program Participant an invoice for the remaining amount, payable in full within fifteen (15) working days.

 

§6.9.130: AGREEMENT.
A written agreement between the City and the Program Participant is required. The loan agreement will outline the responsibilities of the Participant, terms of the agreement, payroll deduction arrangements, and other conditions of the plan.

 

§6.9.135: LIMITATIONS.
Loans will be made to Participants on a lottery-type basis until the loan pool is depleted. As funds become available through loan repayments, additional loans will be processed from a first-come, first-served waiting list. Lottery and waiting list positions may not be purchased or swapped between Participants. After notification of eligibility, applicants will have two (2) weeks to make purchase decisions. If no decision is reached within two (2) weeks, the applicant will be dropped off the list or will be placed at the bottom of the list.

 

§6.9.140: MAXIMUM PARTICIPATION.
The total amount outstanding to all Participants under this program at any given time will be $234,000 or less. This program may be suspended at any time at the discretion of the City.

 

§6.9.145: RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT.
Each Participant in the plan agrees that the equipment and software made available under this plan will be restricted to the Participant’s own use and that of his or her immediate family. Any reassignment or transfer of the equipment violates the agreement, cancels the right to participate in the plan, and requires immediate payoff of any outstanding loan balance. The Participant agrees to maintain the equipment in good working order during the term of the loan.

 

§6.9.150: INSURANCE.
Participants in this plan must ensure that their home or renter’s insurance policy provides adequate protection of their equipment. The City will not assume any liability for damage or theft of equipment or software.

 

§6.9.155: PROCEDURE.
 

(a)       Applicant submits a completed program interest form to the Finance Department.

 

(b)       Applicant waits for notification from the Finance Department that his or her lottery or waiting list position is available for eligibility.

 

(c)       Applicant obtains an application from the Finance Department after notification of eligibility is received.

 

(d)       Applicant obtains a quotation(s) from vendor(s) for the costs of hardware and software to be purchased through this plan. All quotations received should be valid for a minimum of 45 days and should include a three-year warranty on the PC hardware.

 

(e)       Applicant submits the completed application together with the quotation(s) from the vendor(s) to the Finance Department. The Finance Department forwards system configuration information to the Information Services Division for a determination on configuration eligibility.

 

(f)        Finance Department verifies employment and prepares a loan agreement (including obtaining the Participant’s signature) once the configuration is approved by Information Services.

 

(g)       Finance Department issues payment to vendor(s).

 

(h)       Participant can then pick up hardware and software from the vendor(s).

 

§6.9.160: SYSTEM CONFIGURATION REQUIREMENTS.
The Information Services Manager will provide minimum hardware and operating system requirements for an eligible system under this plan at the time the Packet is requested to ensure ongoing compatibility with the work environment during the life of the loan.

 

All PC hardware is to be provided by a single vendor (a second vendor may be used for the purchase of the printer and/or software), must include a three-year warranty, and must be purchased new from a reputable, existing public business.

 

Equipment may not be purchased for or supported by another City employee, family member, or vendor affiliation that could be construed as a conflict of interest. It is strongly recommended that the system be a nationally recognized brand name. All system configurations are subject to review by Information Services.

 

Mail order systems must be pre-approved. Game software (not bundled with the system or multimedia package) or gaming peripherals, such as joysticks or control paddles, must be purchased outside of this plan.

 

§6.9.165: SPECIAL ORDERS.
Although this program is designed to encourage the use of the previously listed equipment configuration, in some cases there may be a special need for equipment that is not included on the City’s list. The City will consider special equipment orders on a case-by-case basis. The criteria for approval will focus on whether the proposed special purchase will improve the Participant’s computer literacy skills as they pertain to work. (Participants who have moderate functional computer skills but not technical skills should consider the problem of debugging hardware glitches of special equipment. If the Participant has ample technical help at home, this may not be a problem; if not, the City strongly encourages the use of the standard equipment configurations.) If approved, the Participant will be offered the same benefits and terms as the standard program.

 

§6.9.170: OTHER CONDITIONS.
The City will not act as the primary consultant or be responsible for making system recommendations for acquisition. The City will not be responsible for troubleshooting or fixing system bugs, breakdowns, or problems. The City will not provide training specifically for home computer use. The City loan will cover only state sales tax; any portion of sales tax above the state tax will be the Participant’s responsibility. Proof of sales tax paid must be provided for all purchases, even for out-of-state mail-order purchases.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 10, Chapter 7, Human Resources: Policy for Employee Computer Purchase Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 6, Chapter 9, Finance: Policy for Employee Computer Purchase Program, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for Title 10, Chapter 7: Resolution No. 2001-126, 07/16/2001 [§§10.7.100-10.7.170]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§6.9.100-6.9.170]

TITLE 7 RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES
Chapter 1 Rules and Regulations for the Use of Public Parks and Recreational Facilities

Chapter 1 Rules and Regulations for the Use of Public Parks and Recreational Facilities
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL REGULATIONS
§7.1.100:
No person, firm, corporation, partnership, club, associations or other organization shall, without the written consent of the City of San Leandro, except as provided in Title 4, Chapter 5 of the San Leandro Municipal Code:

 

(a)       Sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise of any kind, solicit sales, funds, contributions or donations of any kind, conduct of any business, trade or occupation.

 

(b)       Cut, mark, paint, damage or deface any tree, fence, wall, building, apparatus or other structure, or fasten thereto any poster, circular, or other object.

 

(c)       Use sound amplifying equipment that exceeds the City’s noise limits as detailed in Section 4-1-1100, known as the “Noise Ordinance,” of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

(d)       Consume or be in possession of any open container of any alcoholic beverage in any City park or open space area, as detailed in Section 4-1-705 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

§7.1.105:
No person shall disrupt park or recreational activities, or interfere with public use and enjoyment of park or recreational facilities.

 

ARTICLE 2 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
§7.1.200: SIGNS.
Signs shall be posted within the park or recreational facility to notice the regulations stated in §7.1.205 below.

 

§7.1.205: REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this section shall be cumulative and are not intended to replace any otherwise available regulations. No person shall:

 

(a)       Climb any tree, bush, fence, building or equipment except play apparatus or other structure designed for that purpose.

 

(b)       Drive, putt or hit any golf ball except upon areas designed for that purpose.

 

(c)       Play hardball-baseball except in areas designated for that purpose.

 

(d)       Ride or drive any bicycle, motorcycle or other vehicles on any playfield, court or pedestrian walkway.

 

(e)       Enter or remain except at such times as public use is permitted.

 

(f)        Park or leave standing any vehicle except at such times as public use is permitted.

 

(g)       Drive a vehicle at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour, except where otherwise posted.

 

(h)       Cause or permit any restrained dog to come within or remain within thirty (30) feet of a picnic table.

 

(i)        Skate with roller skates or skateboards in, upon or along with north or south parking lots located at Marina Park.

 

(j)        Feed, or cause the feeding of, or leave food for any feral or undomesticated animal.

 

(k)       Use the designated skateboard area at Thrasher Park for riding a skateboard or in-line skates without wearing a helmet, knee pads and elbow pads suitable to provide protection in the event of falls or collisions.

 

(l)        Allow any animal under his or her care or custody to enter onto any ball park or playing field approved for organized play, subject to exceptions for disabled persons requiring the assistance of an animal and special events with prior approval of the City Manager.

 

(m)      Use tennis courts except for their intended purpose.

 

ARTICLE 3 PARK OPERATING PROCEDURES
§7.1.300: AVAILABILITY.
In an effort to insure maximum public accessibility to all community and neighborhood parks in San Leandro, all non-reservable park facilities are on a first come, first served basis during periods when parks are open to the public.

 

§7.1.305: PARK HOURS.
Park operating hours are hereby established for the following designed parks:

 

(a)       All parks, except Chabot Park and San Leandro Shoreline Recreation Area, shall be open to the public daily from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. from October 31 through April 30 and from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. May 1 through October 30.

 

(b)       Chabot Park shall be open to the public daily as follows:

 

 

January

7:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.

February - March

7:00 a.m. - 7:00 p.m.

April

7:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.

May - Labor Day

7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.

Day after Labor Day to October

7:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.

October

7:00 a.m. - 7:00 p.m.

November - December

7:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.

 

(c)       The San Leandro Shoreline Recreation Area shall constitute that property owned by the City of San Leandro bounded on the north by Marina Boulevard and on the prolongation of Marina Boulevard to San Francisco Bay, on the east by the eastern boundary of the Marina Golf Course, the Driving Range, the Tony Lema Golf Course and the Shoreline Trail, on the south by San Lorenzo Creek and on the west by the navigable waters of the San Francisco Bay.

 

(d)       The San Leandro Shoreline Recreation Area shall be open to the public daily from one-half hour before sunrise to 10:00 p.m. and the park shall be closed to all persons and no person shall be permitted to remain at the park (except as permitted in paragraph (e) below) between 10:00 p.m. in the evening and one-half hour before sunrise in the morning of the following day.

 

(e)       The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to Marina berths, patrons of restaurants or other concessions, customers of the golf course, boatworks or brokerage, members of the San Leandro or Spinnaker Yacht Clubs, employees, invitees or licensees of the foregoing.

 

(f)        Signs stating the closing hours and exceptions thereto shall be conspicuously posted at all entrances to the San Leandro Shoreline Recreation Area.

 

Public use of parks at times other than herein specified is not permitted without prior written approval from the Recreation and Human Services Department.

 

§7.1.310: PARK RESERVATIONS.
City park facilities may be reserved by obtaining a permit from the Recreation and Human Services Department.

 

§7.1.315: FEES.
All parties shall be required to comply and pay the appropriate rental fees set forth in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 7, Fire, was removed and former Title 22, Chapter 2, Recreation and Parks: Rules and Regulations for the Use of Public Parks and Recreational Facilities, was editorially renumbered to be Title 7, Chapter 1, Recreation and Human Services: Rules and Regulations for the Use of Public Parks and Recreational Facilities, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for former Title 22, Chapter 2: Resolution No. 82-196, 07/19/1982 [§§22.2.100-22.2.310]; Administrative Order, 08/22/1995 [§22.2.200(k)]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§7.1.100-7.1.315]; Resolution No. 2008-152, 12/15/2008 [§7.1.100(d)]; Resolution No. 2009-076, 06/01/2009 [§7.1.205(l)]; Resolution No. 2010-139, 11/15/2010 [§7.1.205(m)]

TITLE 8 ENGINEERING AND TRANSPORTATION
Chapter 1 Sidewalk Repair Program
Chapter 2 Substitution of Subcontractors
Chapter 3 Traffic Warrants for Stop Signs
Chapter 4 {Reserved}
Chapter 5 Substandard Residential Driveways
Chapter 6 Residential Parking Permit Program
Chapter 7 Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program
Chapter 8 Park Facilities Development Impact Fee
Chapter 9 Disposal Procedure for Surplus Real Property
Chapter 10 Development Fee for Street Improvements
Chapter 11 Reimbursement of Sewer Lateral Reconnections to City Sewerage System
Chapter 12 Bicycle Rack Program
Chapter 13 Parklets Program
Chapter 14 Employee Parking Permit Program

Chapter 1 Sidewalk Repair Program
§8.1.100: APPLICABILITY.
The procedures set forth herein shall be applicable to the repair of, and allocation of costs for, concrete improvements in the public right-of-way.

 

§8.1.105: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Occupant. “Occupant” means the property owner, renter, or tenant occupying a subject residential, industrial or commercial property.

 

(b)       Property Owner. “Property owner” means the owner of the residential, industrial or commercial property abutting the public right-of-way on which damaged or deteriorated concrete improvements are located.

 

(c)       Sidewalk Inspector. “Sidewalk Inspector” means the City Engineer or designee.

 

§8.1.110: DETERMINATIONS.
All determinations of the Sidewalk Inspector shall be final and conclusive as the matters decided. Failure of any person to receive notice shall neither invalidate any determination nor prevent the imposition of costs upon any property for improvements. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement and not conflict with the provisions of Chapter 22, Division 7, Part 3 of the California Streets & Highways Code and Title 5, Chapter 1 (Encroachments) of the San Leandro Municipal Code. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to impose a mandatory duty upon the City or any employee, officer or agent thereof, nor shall they be construed to create any liability against the City not otherwise provided by law.

 

§8.1.115: CONTRIBUTION BY CITY.
The City finds and determines that while it possesses the legal authority to impose upon benefiting properties the full cost of concrete improvements made to the public-right-of-way abutting said benefited property, that in the circumstances set forth in §8.1.120 hereof it desires to contribute a portion of such costs. The City reserves the right to determine otherwise and make no contribution.

 

§8.1.120: REPAIRS.
Subject to the procedure established by Chapter 22, Division 7, Part 3 of the California Streets & Highways Code (§5600) and upon determination by the City Council, the costs for repair of concrete in the public right-of-way shall be allocated as follows:

 

(a)       Sidewalk Damage—Street Tree Related. Damage to the public sidewalk resulting from a tree planted in the public right-of-way.

 

(1)       ¼″ to ½″ Vertical Offset [All Offsets Measured at Their Highest Point]. The City will, at its cost, root prune the tree involved.

 

(2)       ½″ to 1 ½″ Vertical Offset. The City will, at its cost, root prune the tree involved and patch or grind the affected area.

 

(3)       1 ½″ or Greater Vertical Offset. The City will, at its cost, place a temporary patch on the affected area. The City will repair the affected area by removal and replacement. The time within which such repair is undertaken shall be determined by the City’s Sidewalk Inspector. The City’s Sidewalk Inspector will determine the area of the sidewalk required to be repaired, and the City will bear fifty percent (50%) of the cost of those repairs. Any additional repairs or improvements requested by the property owner must be made at the property owner’s expense.

 

(b)       Sidewalk Damage, Non-Street Tree Related.

 

(1)       ½″ to 1 ½″ Vertical Offset. The City will, at its cost, patch the affected area.

 

(2)       1 ½″ or Greater Vertical Offset. The City will, at its cost, place a temporary patch on the affected area. The City will repair the affected area by removal and replacement. The time within which such repair is undertaken shall be determined by the City’s Sidewalk Inspector. The City’s Sidewalk Inspector will determine the area of the sidewalk required to be repaired, and the property owner shall bear one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of those repairs. Any additional repairs or improvements requested by the property owner must also be made at the property owner’s expense.

 

(c)       Parkway Strip Improvements.

 

(1)       Where the parkway strip (the area between the sidewalk and curb) has been paved with concrete, the concrete is displaced or otherwise damaged, and if the City requires a concrete parkway strip, it shall be considered as sidewalk and the allocation of costs shall be provided in this section.

 

(2)       If the City does not require that the parkway strip be concrete, the property owner will be given the option of removing the improvements and filling the void with topsoil. If the property owner fails to perform such work, the City will do so and assess the property owner for the full cost of that work.

 

(d)       Curb and Gutter Improvements. Curb and gutter improvements which require repair will be treated as sidewalk for the purpose of determining the limits of the repairs and the cost of such repairs.

(e)       Property Backing on Public Right-of-Way. Where the rear portion of a subject property abuts public right-of-way with damaged concrete improvements and there is no means of direct access from the rear of the property to the public right-of-way, the City shall pay the costs of repair unless the damage is the result of conditions on the private property or the actions of the property owner.

 

(f)        Curb Returns. All damage in a curb return shall be repaired at no cost to the property owner.

 

§8.1.125: NOTICE TO OCCUPANT.
In addition to any notice required to be given pursuant to the applicable provisions of the California Streets & Highways Code, whenever the City patches the sidewalk or root prunes a street tree to prevent further damage to the sidewalk, it shall deliver to the occupant a notice of the work completed, the condition necessitating the work, and a statement that the occupant is responsible for notifying the City of any change in the condition of the improvements.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 5, Chapter 5, Community Development: Sidewalk Repair Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 1, Engineering and Transportation: Sidewalk Repair Program, during the 2005-06 republication. Former Title 5, Chapter 5 was codified administratively in 1986. Legislative history for former Title 5, Chapter 5: Resolution No. 2003-125, 06/02/2003 [§5.5.120(a)(3)]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§8.1.100-8.1.125]; Resolution No. 2007-092, 07/02/2007 [§8.1.120(a)(3)]

Chapter 2 Substitution of Subcontractors
§8.2.100: GENERAL.
The Engineering and Transportation Director is authorized to give at least three (3) working days notice to a subcontractor listed in the original bid of a prime contractor awarded the contract for a public works project in the event such prime contractor requests the City’s approval of a substitution of another subcontractor in such listed subcontractor’s place, and to consent to such substitution in any case in which such substitution is permitted by law and is in the best interests of the City. Should such listed subcontractor protest such substitution, the Engineering and Transportation Department shall immediately advise the City Manager who shall have the matter set for hearing at the next regular meeting of the City Council.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 9, Public Works: Substitution of Subcontractors, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 2, Engineering and Transportation: Substitution of Contractors, during the 2005-06 republication. Resolution No. 70-5, 01/19/1970, was codified into former Title 12, Chapter 9 administratively in 1984.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§8.2.100]

Chapter 3 Traffic Warrants for Stop Signs
§8.3.100: GENERAL—TWO-WAY STOP.
Two-way stop signs are appropriate where there is a need to control the right-of-way at an intersection with noticeable traffic conflicts. Typically, the signs are installed on local streets where they intersect collector or arterial streets.

 

§8.3.105: WARRANTS FOR INSTALLATION—TWO-WAY STOP.
 

(a)       Two-way stop sign installation may be considered if any one of the following conditions exist:

 

(1)       Traffic Volume.

 

(i)        Total vehicular volume on the major street must be at least 1,000 vehicles per day or 100 vehicles per hour during the peak hour on an average day, and

 

(ii)       Total vehicular volume on the minor street must be at least 500 vehicles per day or 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour on an average day.

 

(2)       Accidents. Three or more of a type susceptible to correction by stop signs within a 12-month period.

 

(3)       Visibility. Critical approach speed is less than 10 miles per hour.

 

(4)       Through Street Conditions. A street intersecting an adopted through street.

 

(b)       Two-way stop sign installation may be considered if any two of the following conditions exist:

 

(1)       Traffic Volume.

 

(i)        Total vehicular volume on the major street must be at least 500 vehicles per day or 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour on an average day, and

 

(ii)       Total vehicular volume on the minor street must be at least 250 vehicles per day or 25 vehicles per hour during the peak hour on an average day.

 

(2)       Accidents. Two or more of a type susceptible to correction by stop signs within a 12-month period.

 

(3)       Visibility. Critical approach speed is less than 15 miles per hour.

 

(4)       Unusual Conditions.

 

(i)        High speed – the 85 percentile speed on the major street exceeds 25 mph, or

 

(ii)       Unusual conditions such as school, playground, fire station, steep hill, etc.

 

§8.3.110: GENERAL—FOUR-WAY STOP.
Generally, a four-way stop is reserved for use at the intersection of two through streets where volume of traffic on each street is approximately equal. A four-way stop may be used as an interim traffic control measure prior to signalization.

 

§8.3.115: WARRANTS FOR INSTALLATION—FOUR-WAY STOP.
Four-way stop sign installation may be considered if any of the following conditions exist:

 

(a)       Traffic and Pedestrian Volumes.

 

(1)       A minimum hourly average (for any eight hours) volume of 300 vehicles entering the intersection from all approaches on an average day. In addition, the vehicular volume entering the intersection from the minor street or streets for the same eight hours must average 1/3 of the total volume entering the intersection (100 per hour minimum), or

 

(2)       A minimum hourly average (for any eight hours) volume of 300 vehicles entering the intersection on the main approach and a pedestrian volume of at least 100 pedestrians per hour crossing the main street during the same eight hours.

 

(b)       Accidents. Five or more of types susceptible to correction by stop signs within a 12-month period, with satisfactory observance and enforcement of less restrictive control.

 

(c)       Visibility. The straight line sight distance on one or more approaches of the major street for vehicles or pedestrian crossing the intersection is less than 150 feet.

 

(d)       Residential Area. Volume warrants to be reduced to 60% of the values above if all of the following conditions are met:

 

(1)       Both streets have residential frontage with existing 25 mph speed limits.

 

(2)       Neither street is an adopted through street.

 

(3)       Both streets are two-lane streets.

 

(4)       No existing stop sign or signal is located on the more heavily traveled street within a distance of 600 feet.

 

(5)       Intersection has four legs, with streets extending 600 feet or more away from the intersection on at least three sides.

 

(6)       Installation of a four-way stop is compatible with overall traffic circulation needs for the residential area.

 

(e)       Unusual Conditions. Volume warrants to be reduced to 60% of the values above, if any unusual condition such as grades, curves, blind corners, or steep hills exist.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 10, Public Works: Traffic Warrants for Stop Signs, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 3, Engineering and Transportation: Traffic Warrants for Stop Signs, during the 2005-06 republication. Former Title 12, Chapter 10 was codified administratively in 1987.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§8.3.100-8.3.115]

Chapter 4 {Reserved}

Chapter 5 Substandard Residential Driveways
§8.5.100: GENERAL.
It shall be the policy of this City Council to encourage property owners to upgrade residential driveway approaches not meeting current City standards whenever City streets are reconstructed.

 

§8.5.200: AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER POLICY.
The City Engineer shall have the sole discretion to determine if an existing driveway is substandard and meets the prerequisites necessary to qualify under this program.

 

§8.5.300: SUBSTANDARD RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY POLICY.
The cost of replacement of substandard driveways approaches will be on an equal share basis between the City and the qualifying property owner. The property owner will be given the option to either pay his share of the driveway replacement cost upon completion of the work or defer payment of his share to the City for up to one year after completion and thereafter payments can be made over a period of five years at an annual interest rate of six percent (6%). Qualifying low-income property owners may be eligible to receive grant funds, if available. Property owner participation in the City’s program to upgrade substandard residential driveways shall be on a voluntary basis.

 

If the property owner elects to complete his driveway approach construction utilizing the property owner’s contractor, the rebate for the cost of the work will be fifty percent (50%) of the total cost to the property owner, or fifty percent (50%) of the current unit cost of the City’s Annual Sidewalk Repair Program, whichever is less. Receipts must be provided for all reimbursable costs.

 

§8.5.400: PROCESS.
Whenever the City undertakes street reconstruction, the City will inspect residential driveways within the limits of construction. A driveway will be eligible under this program when it does not conform to the current City standard; and, where the pavement elevation at the gutter has been significantly lowered in the course of street reconstruction.

 

Driveways altered by the construction of non-permitted concrete, asphalt, wood, or other unauthorized materials will not qualify under this program, unless the conditions found in the aforementioned paragraph also exist.

 

All residential properties will receive written notice containing details of the upcoming street reconstruction.

 

Property owners will also be advised whether or not the replacement of their driveway qualifies for cost sharing under this program.

 

Property owners will also be informed that following the completion of the street reconstruction work, that use of appurtenances in the street gutter (e.g., wood, concrete, or metal ramps) to adjust for grade differences between the street and driveway will not be allowed in accordance with San Leandro Municipal Code, §5-1-200. This notification is necessary to minimize the potential for flooding and pavement water damage as a result of gutter blockage.

 

§8.5.500: TIME LIMITS FOR PARTICIPATION.
Eligibility for this cost-sharing program is for a limited time. The eligibility period for this program is as follows:

 

(a)       Start of Eligibility Period. Twelve (12) months prior to the award of the associated street rehabilitation project construction contract.

 

(b)       End of Eligibility Period. Three (3) months after the initial acceptance of the associated street rehabilitation project construction contract.

 

§8.5.600: SUSPENSION OF PROGRAM.
This program may be suspended by the City Manager when insufficient funding is available for its implementation.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 13, Public Works: Substandard Residential Driveways, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 5, Engineering and Transportation: Substandard Residential Driveways, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for former Title 12, Chapter 13: Resolution No. 2001-34, 02/20/2001 [§§12.13.100-12.13.400]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§8.5.100-8.5.500]; Resolution No. 2011-149, 07/18/2011 [§§8.5.200-8.5.600]

Chapter 6 Residential Parking Permit Program
§8.6.100: INITIAL PROCESS.
The addition of a neighborhood to the City’s Residential Parking Permit Program may be initiated by the City Council or City Manager or by petitions as specified in the City’s Residential Parking Permit Ordinance.

 

§8.6.105: PETITION PROCESS.
Area residents requesting that a neighborhood to be added to the program must submit a petition on a form to be supplied by the City’s Engineering and Transportation Department pursuant to the requirements of the City’s Residential Parking Permit Program. Only residents that are adult property owners in the proposed residential parking area are qualified to submit petitions. The residents must define the boundaries of the area with guidance from the City’s Engineering and Transportation staff. The minimum area to be considered is four (4) contiguous block faces unless exceptional circumstances warrant a smaller area as determined by the Engineering and Transportation Department. The residents shall submit a petition to the Engineering and Transportation Department with signatures by adult property owners representing at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the addresses within the proposed program area. The proposed hours of permit parking shall be determined by the Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

(a)       The petition shall contain a description or a map showing the proposed residential parking permit area.

 

(b)       Said description or map shall be followed in the petition by a statement describing the residential parking permit program and the current residential permit fees.

 

(c)       The statement shall be followed by a signature, printed name, address, and date of signing of the application by a number of adult property owners including at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the addresses within the proposed program area.

 

(d)       All petitions shall be the same as the standard petition form developed by City staff. Any petition form different from the standard petition form shall be deemed invalid.

 

§8.6.110: CONDITIONS OF PROPOSED AREA.
In the proposed residential parking permit area, at least eighty percent (80%) of the block fronts with unlimited on-street parking must be residentially zoned, and at a minimum, seventy-five percent (75%) of all unlimited on-street parking spaces within the proposed area must be occupied during any two (2) one-hour periods between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or unlimited on-street parking is projected to be impacted by parking spillover from a more congested residential parking permit area.

 

§8.6.115: APPROVAL PROCESS.
A public hearing with notification to properties within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed area shall be held by the Planning Commission pursuant to the Commission’s authority set forth in Section 1-3-1005 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, to review proposals relating to traffic circulation. After receiving the Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall consider a resolution establishing a residential parking permit area.

 

§8.6.120: INITIATION OF ENFORCEMENT.
At least sixty percent (60%) of the households must purchase permits before signs identifying the program and establishing the area are installed.

 

§8.6.125: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PERMITS.
Each household may be entitled to purchase a maximum of two (2) annual parking permits.

 

§8.6.130: VISITOR PERMITS.
Each household may be entitled to purchase visitor permits.

 

(a)       The Finance Department shall issue visitor permits in accordance with Section 6-2-335 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. A visitor permit shall be of limited duration, but shall otherwise grant to the holder all the rights and privileges of regular residential parking. Visitor permits shall be fourteen (14) day visitor permits.

 

(b)       The Finance Department is authorized to establish rules and regulations, consistent with this Chapter, concerning the issuance and display of visitor permits to permit holders.

 

(c)       An eligible applicant for a visitor permit shall be any person eligible to obtain a residential parking permit pursuant to criteria set forth in Section 6-2-300 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

§8.6.135: FEES.
The annual fee shall be charged on a calendar year basis and shall not be pro-rated. Annual fees for regular permits shall be twenty dollars ($20) for the first permit and forty dollars ($40) for a second permit. Fourteen (14) day visitor permits shall be fifteen dollars ($15) each. Subsequent changes of fees shall be established by the City Council upon recommendation of the Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 14, Public Works: Residential Parking Permit Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 6, Engineering and Transportation: Residential Parking Permit Program, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for former Title 12, Chapter 14: Resolution No. 2003-023, 02/03/2003 [§§12.14.100-12.14.135]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§8.6.100-8.6.135]

Chapter 7 Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program
§8.7.100: GENERAL.
The Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program (NTCP) is designed to address speeding and cut-through traffic in residential neighborhoods. The City receives more requests than can be accommodated each year. Therefore, this program is in place to provide minimum criteria that must be met for a roadway to be considered in the NTCP and also identifies prioritization criteria used to prioritize roadways to receive traffic calming measures.

 

Detailed design requirements and procedures will be as described in the Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program Handbook. This handbook will be maintained and updated by the Engineering and Transportation Department.

 

§8.7.105: MINIMUM CRITERIA FOR QUALIFICATION.
A roadway may qualify for the Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program if all of the following conditions exist:

 

(a)       The roadway is a local residential roadway, a residential collector roadway, or a collector roadway as defined in the San Leandro General Plan’s Transportation Element.

 

(b)       If the roadway is a local residential roadway, the critical speed must be at least 32 miles per hour (mph) or the average daily traffic volume must be at least 1,000 vehicles per day (vpd).

 

(c)       If the roadway is a residential collector roadway, the critical speed must be at least 34 miles per hour (mph) or the average daily traffic volume must be at least 2,000 vehicles per day (vpd).

 

(d)       If the roadway is a collector roadway, street segments of selected collectors must contain more than 95% residential properties as determined by the Engineering and Transportation Department. The segments identified shall use the prioritization criteria of a residential collector roadway as defined in (c).

 

§8.7.110: PRIORITIZATION CRITERIA.
If a roadway meets the minimum criteria, it may be prioritized amongst all of the other qualifying roadways based on the following points system:

 

 

(a)       Critical (85th Percentile) Speed.

 

Local Street

Residential Collector Street

Points

32 mph

34 mph

1

33 mph

35 mph

2

34 mph

36 mph

3

35 mph

37 mph

4

36 mph

38 mph

5

37 mph

39 mph

6

38 mph

40 mph

7

39 mph

41 mph

8

40 mph

42 mph

9

41 mph

43 mph

10 maximum

 

(b)       Average Daily Traffic Volume.

 

Local Street

Residential Collector Street

Points

1000-1100

2000-2200

1

1101-1200

2201-2400

2

1201-1300

2401-2600

3

1301-1400

2601-2800

4

1401-1500

2801-3000

5

1501-1600

3001-3200

6

1601-1700

3201-3400

7

1701-1800

3401-3600

8

1801-1900

3601-3800

9

1901 and above

3801 and above

10 maximum

 

(c)       Collision History. One point for each collision susceptible to correction by traffic calming over the past three (3) years. (5 points maximum)

 

(d)       Pedestrian Generators. One point for each park, recreation facility or other public facility that is a significant pedestrian generator within the neighborhood boundary as determined by the Traffic Engineer. Elementary, middle and high schools will be weighed double points in the category. (5 points maximum)

 

§8.7.120: APPROVAL REQUIREMENT.
In order to ensure effective use of City resources, it is prudent to obtain both resident and property owner approval of any proposed traffic calming measures. A designated traffic calming area will be divided into two sub-areas at the discretion of Engineering and Transportation staff. The areas are as follows:

Focus Area (Improvement Area) – This area is the principal street(s) where traffic calming has been requested and where the majority of the traffic calming improvements will be implemented.

 

Influence Area (Neighboring Area) – This area includes the streets surrounding the Focus Area where traffic may be marginally influenced or altered as a result of implementing the traffic calming improvements.

 

There are two requirements for implementation of the NTCP, which are as follows:

 

(a)       Residents and property owners within the Focus Area must authorize the implementation of the NTCP by return ballot. Acceptance of the program requires a response by at least fifty percent (50%) of the issued ballots with a minimum approval rating of sixty-seven percent (67%).

 

(b)       Once a final traffic calming plan is recommended, both the residents and the property owners must approve the plan by ballot. Approval shall be based upon the Composite Voting System shown in the figure below. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the issued ballots must be returned from the Focus Area to constitute a valid vote. The response from the Influence Area will be evaluated using a Protest Vote method. The Protest Vote method will count no-votes and compare them to the entire Influence Area to determine the approval percentage.

 



 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 15, Public Works: Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 7, Engineering and Transportation: Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for former Title 12, Chapter 15: Resolution No. 2003-154, 07/07/2003 [§§12.15.100-12.15.120]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§8.7.100-8.7.120]; Resolution No. 2007-131, 10/01/2007 [§8.7.120]; Resolution No. 2011-129, 06/20/2011 [§8.7.105]

Chapter 8 Park Facilities Development Impact Fee
§8.8.100: GENERAL.
The purpose of the Park Facilities Development Impact Fee set forth by the enacting resolutions is to finance park facilities to reduce the impacts caused by future development in the City. Title 7, Chapter 13 of the San Leandro Municipal Code establishes the Park Facilities Development Impact Fee (“Park Impact Fee”) applicable to development within the City and provides for these administrative guidelines that sets forth the amount of the fee, the types of development projects on which the fee is imposed and the time for payment.

 

§8.8.105: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Commercial. “Commercial” shall mean any development constructed or to be constructed on land having a Commercial or Professional District land use designation as described in Article 6 of the City of San Leandro Zoning Code (“Zoning Code”). Commercial land uses include, but are not limited to: apparel and clothing stores; auto dealers and malls, auto accessories stores; banks and savings and loans; beauty salons; book stores, discount stores and centers; dry cleaners; drug stores; eating and drinking establishments; furniture stores and outlets; general merchandise stores; hardware stores; home furnishings and improvement centers; hotels and motels; Laundromats; liquor stores; restaurants; service stations; shopping centers; supermarkets; and theaters.

 

(b)       Development. “Development” shall mean the construction, alteration or addition of any residential building or structure within the City of San Leandro.

 

(c)       Facilities. “Facilities” shall include those facilities that are described in the Report and in the Findings of the enacting resolution. “Facilities” shall also include comparable alternative facilities should later changes in projections of development in the region necessitate construction of such alternative facilities; provided that the City Council later determines in accordance with applicable law that:

 

(1)       There is a reasonable relationship between development within the City and the need for alternative facilities;

 

(2)       The alternative facilities are comparable to the facilities listed in the Report of the enacting resolution; and

 

(3)       Revenue from fees charged pursuant to this Chapter will be used only to pay new development’s fair and proportionate share of the alternative facilities.

 

(d)       Fee. “Fee” shall mean the charge or charges imposed on Development to fund the Facilities to ensure that such Development pays its fair share of facilities needs generated by such Development pursuant to this Chapter and applicable law.

 

(e)       Industrial. “Industrial” shall mean any development constructed or to be constructed on land having a Zoning Code designation for the manufacture, production, assembly, or processing of consumer goods and/or other space uses incidental to these activities. Industrial land uses include but are not limited to: assembly; concrete and asphalt batching plants; contractors’ storage yards; fabrication; lumber yards; manufacturing; outdoor stockyards and service yards; printing; processing; warehouse and distribution; and wholesale and heavy commercial uses.

 

(f)        Mixed Development. “Mixed Development” shall mean a development that includes more than one of the types of development defined in this Section. Mixed Developments may combine residential types of development, non-residential types of development, or a combination of residential and non-residential types of development.

 

(g)       Single-Family. “Single-Family” shall refer to any dwelling unit appropriate to a Residential Single-Family District as described in Article 5, Section 2-500 of the Zoning Code.

 

(h)       Office. “Office” shall mean any development constructed or to be constructed on land having a Zoning Code designation for general business offices, medical or professional offices, administrative or headquarters offices, offices for large wholesaling or manufacturing operations, and research and/or development and other space uses incidental to these activities. Office land uses include, but are not limited to: administrative headquarters; business parks; finance offices; insurance offices; legal offices; medical and health services offices and office buildings; professional and administrative offices; professional associations; real estate offices; research and/or development offices and travel agencies.

 

(i)        Multi-Family. “Multi-Family” shall refer to any dwelling unit other than a Single-Family unit, Special Unit, or Accessory Dwelling Unit.

 

(j)        Special Unit. “Special Unit” shall refer to any dwelling unit that is not a Single-Family unit or is not a Multi-Family unit or is not an Accessory Dwelling Unit or a Secondary Dwelling Unit that meets the Zoning Code definition or a Senior Housing Project established for independent elderly adults that do not require daily care and supervision as well as assisted living facilities where the residents are able to enjoy local parklands or participate in senior-oriented park facilities or centers.

 

(k)       Accessory Dwelling Unit. “Accessory Dwelling Unit” is hereby defined in Part II, Article 5, Division 3, Section 2-576 of the San Leandro Zoning Code.

 

§8.8.110: PARK IMPACT FEE IMPOSED.
 

(a)       A Fee shall be charged and paid for each Single-Family, Multi-Family, Special Unit and Accessory Dwelling Unit within the City when the Certificate of Occupancy for the unit is issued.

 

(b)       For each Mixed Development a composite Fee shall be charged and paid in accordance with (a), above, for each Single-Family, Multiple-Family, Special Unit and Accessory Dwelling Unit within a Mixed Development.

(c)       The Fee shall not be charged for non-residential developments (Commercial or Industrial), nor shall the Fee be charged for non-residential developments within Mixed Developments.

 

§8.8.115: AMOUNT OF FEE.
The amount of the Fee shall be as listed in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

§8.8.120: EXEMPTIONS FROM FEE.
The Fee shall not be imposed on any of the following:

 

(a)       Any alteration or addition to a residential structure, except to the extent that a residential unit is added to a Single-Family residential unit or another unit is added to an existing Multi-Family residential unit;

 

(b)       Any replacement or reconstruction of an existing residential structure that has been destroyed or demolished; provided that, the building permit for reconstruction is obtained within one year after the building was destroyed or demolished, unless the replacement or reconstruction increase the square footage of the structure by fifty percent (50%) or more.

 

§8.8.125: USE OF FEE REVENUE.
The revenues raised by payment of the Fee shall be placed in a separate, interest bearing account to permit accounting for such revenues and the interest, which they generate. Such revenues and interest shall be used only for the Facilities and the purposes for which the Fee was collected, which are the following:

 

(a)       To pay for acquisition of the Facilities;

 

(b)       To pay for design, engineering and construction of and property acquisition for, and reasonable costs of outside consultant studies related to, the Facilities;

 

(c)       To reimburse the City for the Facilities constructed by the City with funds from other sources including funds from other public entities, unless such funds were obtained from grants or gifts intended by the grantor to be used for the Facilities;

 

(d)       To reimburse developers that have designed and constructed any of the Facilities with prior City approval and have entered into an agreement, as provided in §8.8.155 below; and

 

(e)       To pay for and/or reimburse costs of program development and ongoing administration of the Fee program, including, but not limited to, the cost of studies, legal costs, and other costs of updating the Fee.

 

§8.8.130: STANDARDS.
The Standards upon which the need for the Facilities is based are the standards of the City, including the standards contained in the General Plan and those City standards reflected in the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

§8.8.135: PERIODIC REVIEW.
During each fiscal year, the City Manager shall prepare a report for the City Council, pursuant to California Government Code Section 66006, identifying the balance of Fee revenues in the Fee account and identifying the improvements to which the Fee has been applied during the previous fiscal year.

 

§8.8.140: 5-YEAR REVIEW.
For the fifth fiscal year following the first deposit into the Fee account, and every five years thereafter, the City Council shall make findings with respect to the purpose of the Fee as described in California Government Code Section 66001(d).

 

§8.8.145: SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS AND REVISION OF THE FEE.
The Fee set herein is adopted and implemented by the City Council in reliance on the Record identified above. The City may continue to conduct further study and analysis to determine whether the Fee should be revised. When additional information is available, the City Council may review the Fee to determine that the Fee amounts are reasonably related to the impact of development within the City. In addition to the inflation adjustments pursuant to §8.8.150, below, the City Council may revise the Fee to incorporate the findings and conclusions of further studies and any standards in the General Plan or the Master Plan, as from time to time amended by the City.

 

§8.8.150: FEE ADJUSTMENTS.
Beginning July 1, 2006 and each July 1 thereafter, as follows, the City Manager shall adjust the amount of the Fee to account for inflation, according to the San Francisco Bay Area Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers or the Construction Cost Index, whichever is higher at the time of adjustment.

 

§8.8.155: CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTED FACILITIES.
The City and a developer may enter into an improvement agreement to allow the developer to construct certain of the Facilities. Such an agreement is totally discretionary on the part of the City. Such agreement shall provide for security for the developer’s commitment to construct the Facilities and shall refer to this Chapter for credit and reimbursement. If the City enters into such an agreement with a developer prior to construction of one or more of the Facilities, the City shall provide the developer a credit in accordance with the following:

 

(a)       Credit Amount. The credit shall be in the amount of the lowest bid received for construction of the facility, as approved by the City Engineer. However, in no event shall a credit pursuant to this provision exceed the current facility cost. For the purposes of §8.8.155, such current facility cost shall be the amount listed in the Report for that particular facility as subsequently adjusted pursuant to §8.8.145 and §8.8.150 of this Chapter prior to issuance of the building permit for that facility. Once issued, credit pursuant to §8.8.155 shall not be adjusted for inflation or any other factor. Credit provided pursuant to §8.8.155 is not transferable.

 

(b)       Application of Credit. Credit pursuant to §8.8.155 may be applied by developers against the Fee applicable to a particular project until the credit is exhausted or an excess credit results. The total credit shall be divided by the number of units (for a residential project) to determine the amount of credit which can be applied against the Fee for each unit and, if the credit per unit is less than the Fee per unit, the developer shall pay the difference for each unit. If a credit pursuant to §8.8.155 is less than the Fee applicable to a particular non-residential development project, the developer shall pay the City the balance in cash.

 

(c)       Reimbursement for Excess Credit. Reimbursement for excess credit shall only be from remaining unspent Fee revenues. Once all the Facilities have been constructed or acquired and to the extent Fee revenues are sufficient to cover all claims for reimbursement of Fee revenues, including reimbursement for excess credit, developers with excess credit shall be entitled to reimbursement, subject to such developers:

 

(1)       Certifying in writing to the City that the cost of constructing the facility which resulted in an excess credit was not passed on to homeowners, and

 

(2)       Indemnifying the City from landowner claims for reimbursement under Government Code Section 66000 et seq. and Section 66001 in particular.

 

§8.8.160: CREDIT CONCERNING QUIMBY ACT DEDICATIONS AND/OR FEES PAID.
If a developer has dedicated land and/or paid a fee in lieu of dedication for a residential subdivision project under a City ordinance adopted pursuant to the Quimby Act (“Quimby Act Ordinance”), and such residential subdivision project is later subject to imposition of the Fee, such developer shall be entitled to a credit against the Fee in accordance with the following:

 

(a)       The amount of credit shall equal the park land acquisition element of the Fee applicable to the particular residential subdivision project and in effect at the time for payment of the Fee pursuant to this Chapter.

 

(b)       The park improvement element of the Fee applicable to the particular residential subdivision project in effect at the time for payment of the Fee pursuant to this Chapter shall continue to apply, notwithstanding any dedication of land and/or payment of a fee in lieu of dedication for the particular residential subdivision project pursuant to the Quimby Act Ordinance.

 

§8.8.165: EFFECTIVE DATE.
In accordance with California Government Code Section 66017, the Fee shall be effective sixty (60) days from the effective date of the enacting resolution.

 

§8.8.170: SEVERABILITY.
Each component of the Fee and all portions of this Chapter are severable. Should any individual component of the Fee or any portion of this Chapter be adjudged to be invalid and unenforceable by a body of competent jurisdiction, then the remaining Fee components and/or Chapter portions shall be and continue in full force and effect, except as to those Fee components and/or Chapter portions that have been adjudged invalid.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Resolution No. 2005-069, 06/06/2005, was codified into this Chapter during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§8.8.100-8.8.170]; Resolution No. 2019-074, 05/06/2019 [§§8.8.105 and 8.8.110]

Chapter 9 Disposal Procedure for Surplus Real Property
§8.9.100: APPLICABILITY.
The procedures set forth herein shall be applicable to the disposal of real property owned by the City of San Leandro and determined to be surplus and excess property no longer necessary for public purposes. The provisions of these rules shall not apply to the abandonment of streets or the vacation of easements owned by the City of San Leandro and governed by the statutes of the State of California or the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 4 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, nor shall the provisions of these rules apply to the termination, rejection, or abandonment of offers or dedication pursuant to §66477.2 of the California Government Code.

 

§8.9.105: DETERMINATION OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY.
 

(a)       All using agencies or department within the City of San Leandro shall submit to the City Manager a report showing any real property in the possession, custody or control of such using agency or department that is no longer used and is otherwise surplus and excess for the needs of the agency or department. If such real property is not required for any other public use, the City Manager shall declare it surplus and prepare or cause to be prepared a written estimate of its market value.

 

(b)       Prior to disposal of surplus real property by public sale the City Manager shall provide notice to public agencies in the manner prescribed by §§54220 et seq., of the California Government Code.

 

§8.9.110: MANNER OF DISPOSAL.
 

(a)       With the consent of the City Council, the City Manager may dispose of any surplus real property which has an estimated market value of less than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) without advertising for bids.

 

(b)       If the surplus real property has an estimated market value of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) or more, the City Manager shall dispose of the property in the manner set forth herein.

 

(c)       Surplus real property may be disposed of in any other manner which may be approved by the City Council by resolution.

 

§8.9.115: CITY PERSONNEL PROHIBITED.
No City official, officer, or employee shall bid, or be financially interested in any bid for surplus real property sold in accordance with these rules.

 

 

§8.9.120: SALE PROCEDURE.
The conveyance of surplus real property by the City shall be by quitclaim of all right, title and interest in said property held by the City of San Leandro to the highest responsible bidder who submits a responsive bid pursuant to the following procedures:

 

(a)       A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once ten (10) days before the opening of the bids in a newspaper of general circulation in the City printed and published within the County of Alameda. Notice inviting bids shall include a legal description of the subject property, a vicinity map showing the general location of the subject property, the time and place of opening of bids, specifications for bids, a statement that transfer of the surplus real property shall be by quitclaim deed.

 

(b)       Sealed bids, including a ten percent (10%) bid deposit, shall be submitted to the City Clerk.

 

(c)       At the time and place fixed in the notice of bidders, all sealed proposals which have been received shall be publicly opened, examined and declared by the City Clerk.

 

(d)       In sole discretion, the City Manager may reject any and all bids presented.

 

(e)       After opening bids the City Clerk shall call for oral bids. If, upon the call for oral bidding, any responsible person offers to purchase the property, upon the terms and conditions specified and for a price exceeding by at least five percent (5%) of the highest written proposal, then the responsible oral bid which is the highest shall be accepted. Final acceptance shall not be made, however, until the oral bid is reduced to writing and signed by the offerer and a cash deposit in the amount of the ten percent (10%) of the bid is tendered.

 

(f)        Unless otherwise specified in the notice to bidders, sale of surplus property shall be made for cash.

 

§8.9.125: DEED—ADDITIONAL COSTS.
Upon receipt of the amount of the highest bid, the City Manager shall execute a quitclaim deed on behalf of the City for the real property. All incidental and ancillary costs including but not limited to escrow fees, commissions, title and recording fees shall be borne exclusively by the purchaser.

 

§8.9.130: FUNDS.
The amount received for any property sold pursuant to these rules shall be credited to the appropriate fund as the City Manager may determine.

 

§8.9.135: EFFECT ON VALIDITY.
Nothing in these rules shall affect the validity of any transfer of title to real property.

 

§8.9.140: FORMS.
The forms on the following pages for Notice to Bidders (Appendix A) and Resolution Accepting Bids (Appendix B) may be used.

 

APPENDIX A

 

CITY OF SAN LEANDRO, STATE OF CALIFORNIA

 

NOTICE TO BIDDERS

OF

SALE OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY

 

 

1.         The City of San Leandro has determined that the real property described in Exhibit A which is attached hereto is surplus and no longer necessary for public purposes. Said real property is generally located at (DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY).

 

2.         The City of San Leandro desires to sell the herein described property to the highest responsible bidder by quitclaim deed. The City makes no representations regarding this property, including but not limited to its size, zoning, utility service or accessibility. While the subject property was acquired in fee by the City of San Leandro in connection with (DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT), the City of San Leandro makes no warranties express or implied with regard to title of this property.

 

3.         Sealed bids, subject to the conditions named herein, addressed to the City of San Leandro, will be received at the office of the City Clerk up to 11:00 a.m., (DATE BIDS DUE), at which time they will be publicly opened and read. The right is reserved as the interests of the City may require, to reject any and all bids, to waive any informality in bids, and to accept or reject any items of any bid.

 

4.         The City further reserves the right to accept oral bids from responsible bidders exceeding by at least five percent (5%) the highest written bid.

 

5.         All incidental or ancillary fees associated with the transfer of this property by quitclaim deed, including but not limited to title insurance, escrow fees, commission, notaries, recording fees and the like shall be borne exclusively by the purchaser without recourse to the City.

 

6.         A Bid Deposit shall be placed in an envelope attached to the outside of the sealed proposal. The Bid Deposit shall be in one of the following forms: cashiers check, certified check, or bidder’s bond executed by an authorized corporate surety. Checks or bonds shall be in an amount equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the bid.

 

Dated:

________________________

Name, City Clerk

 

APPENDIX B

 

IN THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN LEANDRO

 

RESOLUTION NO.

 

RESOLUTION ACCEPTING HIGHEST BID FOR SALE OF

SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY AND AUTHORIZING CONVEYANCE THEREOF

(LD NUMBER AND PROPERTY DESCRIPTION)

 

Recitals

 

        The City of San Leandro bid on (DATE BIDS OPENED), publicly open, examine, and declare all sealed proposals or bids for the sale of that surplus property owned by the City of San Leandro and described in the Notice to Bidders of Sale of Surplus Property, dated (DATE OF NOTICE TO BIDDERS).

 

        Said proposals were submitted to the City Manager who has recommended that the proposal hereinafter mentioned is the highest and best bid.

 

        NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of San Leandro does RESOLVE as follows:

 

        That said City Council hereby rejects all of said proposals or bids except that mentioned herein and hereby accepts the bid of (SUCCESSFUL BIDDER) at the price named in its bid on file in the office of the City Clerk. And it is further

 

        RESOLVED, that the City Manger is hereby authorized to execute all deeds necessary to effectuate the conveyance of the subject real property.

 

 

        Introduced by Councilmember ______________ and passed and adopted this ____day of ________, ____, by the following called vote:

 

Members of the Council:

 

AYES:

 

NOES:

 

ABSENT:

 

 

ATTEST:        __________________________

                        Name, City Clerk

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 24, Chapter 1, Surplus Property: Disposal Procedure, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 9, Engineering and Transportation: Disposal Procedure for Surplus Real Property, during the 2005-06 republication. Former Title 24, Chapter 1 was first codified administratively in 1984.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§8.9.100-8.9.140]

Chapter 10 Development Fee for Street Improvements
§8.10.100: LAND USE DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Residential.

 

(1)       “General Residential” shall mean single-family houses, apartments and condominiums.

 

(2)       “Senior Housing” shall mean housing specially designed for and limited to seniors, including independent living, congregate care, and residential care project.

 

(b)       Commercial.

 

(1)       “General Offices” shall mean business, professional and administrative offices.

 

(2)       “Medical Offices” shall mean a facility that provides diagnosis and out-patient care on a routine basis, but which is unable to provide prolonged, in-house medical/surgical care.

 

(c)       Retail.

 

(1)       “General Retail” shall mean sales of consumer goods to customers, including supermarkets, department stores, shopping center, appliance stores, auto and truck sales, bowling alleys, etc.

 

(2)       “Personal Services” shall mean establishments such as a beauty shop, barber shop, portrait studio, electronic repair, auto service and repair, Laundromats, furniture stores and child and adult care facilities.

 

(d)       Restaurants.

 

(1)       “Quality Restaurants” shall mean sit-down, full-service eating establishments with turnover rates usually of at least one hour or longer that may require reservations.

 

(2)       “All Other Restaurants” shall mean eating establishments that are not Quality Restaurants, including cafes, coffee shops and fast-food drive-in establishments.

 

(e)       Financial Services.

 

(1)       “Financial Services” shall mean business that include check cashing, deferred deposit loans and institutions such as banks, savings and loans, credit unions, security brokers and real property lending institutions.

 

 

(f)        Hotel/Motel.

 

(1)       “Hotel/Motel” shall mean places of lodging providing sleeping accommodations and possibly a restaurant or cafe contained in the same building patronized primarily by lodgers.

 

(g)       Industrial.

 

(1)       “General Industrial” shall mean light industry, industrial parks, manufacturing, assembly, warehouses and testing laboratories.

 

(2)       “Mini-Warehouse” shall mean individually rented storage units.

 

(h)       Service Station.

 

(1)       “Service Station” shall mean facilities where the primary business is the fueling of motor vehicles and ancillary facilities for maintaining and repairing automobiles.

 

§8.10.200: FEE SCHEDULE.
 

(a)       Construction Cost Index. The Development Fee for Street Improvements set forth in Title 6, Chapter 4 of the San Leandro Administrative Code shall be indexed to the Construction Cost Index (CCI) for San Francisco as published in the periodical Engineering News Record. This indexing shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council annually, with the new Fee Schedule based on the CCI for the preceding calendar year.

 

(b)       Mixed-Use Developments. Mixed-use developments will pay a fee based on the individual component uses or, if the uses are unknown, on the highest traffic generating use permitted without further building permits.

 

(c)       Other Land Uses. Land uses not fitting into any of the land use categories in the Fee Schedule will be individually analyzed and fee established by the City Manager or his designee. This analysis shall compare the trip generation rates as published in the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineer’s Trip Generation Informational Report for the proposed land use with the trip generation rates for the land use set forth in the Land Use Definitions set forth in §8.10.100. The use will be assessed a fee equivalent to that of the land use category containing a land use that most nearly matches the proposed land use’s trip generation rates.

 

 

§8.10.300: INDIVIDUAL ADJUSTMENTS.
 

(a)       Davis Street/Doolittle Drive Intersection Traffic Impact Fee.

 

(1)       A Traffic Impact Fee is imposed on all non-exempt properties within the Traffic Impact Fee Zones shown in Figure 1, attached. The amount of the fee is set forth in the Fee Schedule.

(2)       Title 7, Chapter 11 of the San Leandro Municipal Code will govern imposing and collecting the Traffic Fee.

 

(3)       This Traffic Impact Fee shall be collected until such time that the entirety of $578,156.00 indexed to the CCI has been collected.

 

(b)       Marina Boulevard/Interstate 880 Interchange Traffic Impact Fee.

 

(1)       A Traffic Impact Fee is imposed on all non-exempt properties within the Traffic Impact Fee Zone shown in Figure 2, attached. The amount of the fee is set forth in the Fee Schedule.

 

(2)       Title 7, Chapter 11 of the San Leandro Municipal Code will govern imposing and collecting the Traffic Fee.

 

(3)       This Traffic Impact Fee shall be collected until such time that the entirety of $2,540,271.24 indexed to the CCI has been collected. At the time of adoption of this section the CCI for San Francisco was 9720.42.

 

 



 

FIGURE 2

 



 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-128, 09/06/2005 [§§8.10.100-8.10.310]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§8.10.310]; Resolution No. 2010-046, 05/03/2010 [§8.10.320]

Chapter 11 Reimbursement of Sewer Lateral Reconnections to City Sewerage System
§8.11.100: GENERAL.
San Leandro Municipal Code (SLMC) Section 3-14-640 provides that the operation, maintenance, and repair of private sewer laterals are the responsibility of the property owner or User, as that term is defined in SLMC Section 3-14-200(bm). City upgrades to its public sewerage collection, disposal, and treatment system (“sewerage system”) are ongoing. To that end, this Administrative Code provision defines a procedure for private sewer lateral reconnection whenever the City determines that a main line sewer must be abandoned and a new mainline sewer constructed in an alternate location. This Administrative Code Chapter describes the process by which the City may build, upon the cooperation of an affected property owner or User, a private sewer lateral from the sewerage system to the property line (“lower lateral”) and upon completion, transfer responsibility for the new lower lateral to the property owner. This Administrative Code Chapter also describes the process by which the City will reimburse property owners for the costs to reconnect a new private sewer line (the “upper lateral”) from the Premises to the lower lateral. This Administrative Code provision does not alter a property owner’s or User’s legal obligations as provided in San Leandro Municipal Code Section 3-14-640.

 

§8.11.200: NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT.
Whenever the City undertakes the abandonment of a section of the sewerage system, affected property owners and Users will be given the following notice:

 

(a)       That the section of the sewerage system in question will be abandoned not sooner than 365 days from the date of the notice;

 

(b)       The location of an existing alternate sewer main or work to be performed by the City to construct a new sewer main to serve the property;

 

(c)       The impacts to the User or property owner’s private sewer lateral currently connected to the section scheduled for abandonment;

 

(d)       What actions the property owner or User must take to connect to the sewerage system; and

 

(e)       The process a User or property owner must follow to receive reimbursement of costs to reconnect the “upper lateral.”

 

§8.11.300: LOWER SEWER LATERAL CONSTRUCTION RESPONSIBILITY TRANSFER.
A property owner or User shall have 45 days from the date of the notice in §8.11.200 to:

 

(a)       Enter into an agreement with the City whereby the City and property owner or User agree to cooperate to locate the property’s private sewer facilities; and upon identification of such facilities,

 

(b)       Enter into a written agreement with the City by which the property owner, upon completion of construction of the new lower lateral by the City, will assume responsibility for the operation, maintenance and repair of the lower lateral. Upon execution of the agreement, the City shall construct a new lower lateral from the sewerage system to the property line.

 

§8.11.350: LOWER SEWER LATERAL FAILURE TO COOPERATE.
In the event that a property owner does not execute an agreement with the City pursuant to §8.11.300 within 45 days of the notice, City shall not construct a lower lateral to the property line. Failure to execute an agreement described in §8.11.300 shall be prima facie evidence that a property owner or User rejects the City’s offer to construct the lower lateral and to reimburse the User or property owner for any costs related to the construction of the “upper lateral.”

 

§8.11.400: UPPER LATERAL CONSTRUCTION.
The property owner or User shall be responsible for the construction of the upper lateral as defined in §8.11.100. Property owner or User shall be responsible for obtaining and paying all permits and fees associated with constructing private sewer facilities.

 

§8.11.450: PRIVATE SEWER LINE REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM.
Forty-five (45) days prior to performing any work on the upper lateral for which the property owner or User requests reimbursement, the property owner or User shall submit to the City a minimum of three (3) written proposals prepared by contractors licensed to perform such work. Within 45 days of receiving final building permit inspection approval, the User or property owner shall submit written receipts for the work performed and a copy of the final approved building permit.

 

If during the course of the work site conditions require additional work, the property owner or User will submit a request for additional authorization detailing the need for the additional work and a copy of the cost change proposal from the contractor. Approval of the additional work is at the sole discretion of the City, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.

 

The City will reimburse costs the User or property owner incurs up to the limit of the lowest submitted proposal, including building permit fees and any approved additional authorizations within 30 days of User or property owner submitting all required documentation.

 

§8.11.500: REFUSAL TO COOPERATE.
In the event a property owner fails or refuses to connect to the alternate sewerage system, the City will provide additional written notice of the proposed abandonment 270 days and 365 days from the date of the initial notification. After the date of the final notice the City may proceed to take any and all actions to abandon the original sewer line. Property owner or User assumes the risks, and shall hold the City harmless from any damages or claims associated with its failure to connect private sewer facilities to the alternate sewerage system.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2010-156, 12/20/2010 [§§8.11.100-8.11.500]; Resolution No. 2011-191, 11/21/2011 [§§8.11.100; 8.11.200; 8.11.350; 8.11.400; 8.11.450]

Chapter 12 Bicycle Rack Program
§8.12.100: GENERAL.
The Bicycle Rack Program is designated to address bicycle parking in the City-owned right-of-way throughout the City. The City receives numerous requests for bicycle racks. Therefore, this Program is in place to provide minimum criteria that must be met for a location to be considered for bicycle racks and also establishes guidelines for a Bicycle Rack Permit Program for bicycle racks that are installed by private property owners in the City-owned right-of-way.

 

§8.12.105: DEFINITIONS.
 

(a)       Bicycle Rack. Street furniture used for bicycle parking that will support one or more bicycles and enable the user to lock the frame and wheels of the bicycle to prevent theft.

 

§8.12.110: INITIATION PROCESS.
Requesting the installation of bicycle racks within the City-owned right-of-way and not on private properties may be initiated by City staff, property owners and residents. Requests are on a first-come, first-served basis.

 

§8.12.115: DESIGN AND PLAN CRITERIA.
Bicycle racks shall be installed in the City-owned right-of-way based on following criteria:

 

(a)       Minimum sidewalk width shall be 10 feet.

 

(b)       Minimum clearance to the face of curb shall be 3.5 feet.

 

(c)       Bicycle racks shall be at least 4 feet from trees, meters, benches, and other street furniture.

 

(d)       Bicycle racks shall be located within 50 feet of a main entrance.

 

(e)       An aisle at least 5 feet wide behind all bicycle racks shall be maintained.

 

(f)        Bicycle racks shall have a stable frame.

 

(g)       Bicycles shall be lockable at bicycle racks.

 

(h)       Bicycle racks shall not cover water mains or utility vaults.

 

(i)        Bicycle racks shall not create a tripping hazard.

 

(j)        Bicycle racks shall not be a potential hazard to children.

 

 

§8.12.120: RACKS INSTALLED BY CITY.
The City Bicycle Rack Program installs City standard inverted “U” bicycle racks in the City-owned right-of-way on a first-come, first-served basis. If the request is from a third party, approval from the property owner is required. The City will own and maintain standard bike racks. The City may remove or relocate any installed bicycle rack if it is not being kept within the Design and Plan Criteria in §8.12.110.

 

§8.12.125: RACKS INSTALLED BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
Property owners and citizens shall file an encroachment permit to install non-City standard bicycle racks in the public right-of-way.

 

(a)       City shall review and approve plans for fabrication and installation.

 

(b)       Property owners shall obtain an initial encroachment permit for installation and annual encroachment permits thereafter.

 

(c)       Property owners shall purchase and install approved bicycle racks.

 

(d)       City shall inspect installed bicycle racks annually.

 

(e)       Property owners shall own and maintain bicycle racks and continue to assume general liability and name the City as additionally insured on the property owner’s insurance.

 

(f)        Fees for the initial and annual encroachment permits and inspections shall be waived.

 

(g)       If the property owner fails to maintain the bicycle rack or submit annually liability insurance indicating the City as additionally insured, then the property owner would be deemed to be in violation of his encroachment permit and the remedies as described in the San Leandro Municipal Code shall be applicable.

 

(h)       The City may revoke annual encroachment permits and may demand that property owners remove or relocate any installed bicycle rack if it is not being kept within the Design and Plan Criteria in §8.12.110.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2011-195, 11/21/2011 [§§8.12.100-8.12.125]

Chapter 13 Parklets Program
§13.100: GENERAL.
The Parklet Program is designated to temporarily reclaim strips of City streets and turn them into new public parklets, plazas, and seating areas in the City-owned right-of-way throughout the City. This Program is in place to provide criteria that must be met for a location to be considered for a parklet permit and also establishes guidelines for design, construction, installation and maintenance of parklets.

 

§13.105: DEFINITION.
 

(a)       Parklet. A temporary sidewalk extension installed in the public right-of-way to enhance the pedestrian environment and to encourage non-motorized transportation.

 

(b)       Parklet Maintenance Agreement. The Agreement with the City shall serve as the signed statement by which the Permittee accepts responsibility for installation, construction, operation, liability, and maintenance of the Parklet until the responsibility is legally transferred to another entity or terminated.

 

§13.110: INITIATION PROCESS.
Pilot Program. Applications for parklet permits shall be limited to two for a period of two years from the date of approval of this section. Requests to propose the installation of a parklet within the public right-of-way may be initiated by fronting property owners and fronting business owners. Requests are on a first-come, first-serve basis.

 

§13.115: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.
All application documents, including the Parklet Maintenance Agreement, shall be on file in the Engineering and Transportation Department.

 

(a)       Application for parklet permit shall include the following components and will be evaluated by staff based on the following criteria:

 

(1)       Application form.

 

(2)       Application fee of $150.00.

 

(3)       Initial Site Plan, which shall include a description of how the parklet will be used by the community as well as photos documenting current site conditions. A scaled drawing that shows the footprint of the proposed parklet installation and twenty (20) feet on either side of the proposed parklet shall also be included. The plan shall include any existing above-ground fixtures such as tree wells, poles, fire hydrants, and bike racks. The Initial Site Plan shall also include at-grade roadway markings such as colored curbs, lane striping, parking stall markings; and at-grade utility access panels, storm drains, manhole covers, and other utility access points.

 

(4)       Construction schedule for installation of the parklet.

 

(5)       Demonstration of community concurrence through letters of support from businesses in front of and/or on either side of the proposed parklet. The applicant must also submit letters of support or petitions from the district City Councilmember, other area businesses, organizations and/or residents.

 

(b)       If a recommendation is made to approve the Parklet proposal:

 

(1)       The Engineering & Transportation Department will issue a Notice of Application for a Parklet. The applicant shall be required to post this notice in a readily visible location in front of the property where the parklet will be located for ten (10) calendar days from the date listed on the notice.

 

(2)       If there are objections from the public, the Engineering & Transportation Department shall schedule a public hearing to consider testimony about the proposed parklet.

 

(3)       The Engineering & Transportation Department Administrative Services Manager shall consider and hear all testimony in support and in opposition to the proposed parklet and shall make a recommendation to the Engineering & Transportation Department Director.

 

(4)       The Engineering & Transportation Department Director, at his or her discretion, may recommend approval or conditional approval of the permit subject to further review and final action.

 

(5)       If the application is denied, the Engineering & Transportation Department shall notify the applicant, upon which the applicant may appeal the denial of the permit by the Engineering & Transportation Department Director to the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the Director’s decision.

 

(6)       Any interested person may appeal the approval of the permit decision by the Engineering & Transportation Department Director to the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the Director’s decision.

 

§13.120: APPROPRIATE LOCATION AND DESIGN PARAMETERS.
 

(a)       The proposed parklet site should be located in at least one parking space, approximately twenty (20) feet, in from a street intersection or protected by a bollard, sidewalk bulb-out, or other similar feature, if located at the corner. Exceptions may be considered on a case-by-case basis.

 

(b)       The proposed location should be upon or adjacent to a City street with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less.

 

(c)       The proposed location’s street must have parking lanes that will not become a tow away lane during morning or afternoon peak hours.

 

(d)       The parklet should provide a minimum clearance of 12″ from the edge of any existing parking apron, where there is parallel, diagonal or perpendicular parking.

 

(e)       The Parklet shall be constructed and/or installed to conform to the applicable rules, regulations and guidelines of the San Leandro Building Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the 2010 ADA Standards. For all ADA technical requirements, please refer to “Accessibility Elements for Parklets” Standards available from the City of San Leandro.

 

(f)        A minimum of 84 inches in height must remain clear of any obstructions along the parklet’s pedestrian path of travel, entry and accessibility areas on the parklet. Obstructions may include, but are not limited to, tree branches and foliage, overhanging sign panels on posts, and/or the applicant’s addition of architectural elements to the parklet.

 

(g)       The cross slope on the parklet surface may not exceed 2.0% in any direction. Please refer to the “Accessibility Elements for Parklets” Standards as referenced above.

 

(h)       The proposed street should not have a pavement cross-slope greater than 5.0%. On a case-by-case basis, a parklet may be proposed on a pavement slope greater than 5.0%. However, additional design requirements and review will be required to make the parklet accessible. See the “Accessibility Elements for Parklets” Standards as referenced above.

 

(i)        Abandoned driveway curb cuts, sidewalk defects, empty tree wells, or other sidewalk conditions at the parklet location must be repaired and addressed as required with a City Encroachment Permit to ensure safe ingress and egress conditions.

 

(j)        At the discretion of the Engineering & Transportation Director, Parklets shall be required to have soft hit posts and wheel stops to deflect the impact from errant vehicles.

 

(k)       If a parklet deck is constructed with concrete, the concrete specific weight shall be a maximum of 200 lbs/square foot.

 

(l)        Parklets are prohibited in blue curb zones.

 

(m)      Parklets may replace yellow curb zones or motorcycle parking if there are appropriate adjacent locations for these zones to be relocated.

 

(n)       Parklets may be allowed in red, white and green curb zones if for the white and green curb zones the business that originally requested the white or green zones agrees to re-purpose that curb area for use as a parklet and in red zones if approved by the Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

(o)       Parklet structures shall not be allowed over a manhole, public utility valve or other at-grade access point in the street or sidewalk unless provisions are provided for their access.

 

§13.125: PARKLETS SUBMITTALS.
After approval of a parklet design plan and before commencing construction and installation of the parklet, applicants shall complete the following.

 

(a)       Applicant shall obtain an initial parklet permit for installation and annual parklet permits thereafter.

 

(b)       Applicant shall submit completed Parklet Maintenance Agreement and shall pay the Parklet Restoration Deposit.

 

(c)       Applicant shall provide evidence of liability insurance coverage through submittal of a Certificate of Insurance including all endorsements that name the City of San Leandro as an additional insured, with commercial general liability coverage of not less than $2 million per claim, and $4 million over the policy term. Policy must be with an insurer rated A:VII or better through the A.M. Best rating company. Evidence of insurance satisfactory to the City of San Leandro is required before issuance of a permit.

 

(d)       Applicant shall install the parklet per approved design plans and design guidelines on file in the Engineering & Transportation Department.

 

(e)       Applicant shall maintain the parklet in a clean and orderly condition. Applicant shall not permit persons or animals to live within or upon a parklet.

 

(f)        City shall inspect installed parklets upon initial installation and annually thereafter.

 

(g)       Fees for the initial and annual parklet permits and inspections shall be waived during the pilot period.

 

(h)       If the Applicant or permittee fails to maintain the parklet per the Parklet Maintenance Agreement or fails to submit annually, valid certificates of liability insurance for the coverage amounts indicated herein and insured with companies of A:VII ratings or better, and endorsements naming the City as an additional insured, then the property owner may be held responsible by the City for the parklet, including all maintenance responsibilities, liabilities and fees.

 

(i)        The City may revoke annual parklet permits and may demand that property owners remove the parklet if it is not kept consistent with the approved design plans or the permittee is not otherwise in compliance with the Parklet Maintenance Agreement.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2017-058, 04/17/2017 [§§13.100—13.125]

Chapter 14 Employee Parking Permit Program
§8.14.100: INITIAL PROCESS.
The addition of a designated employee parking permit area to the City’s Employee Parking Permit Program may be initiated by the City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director pursuant to any administrative guidelines adopted by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

§8.14.105: ESTABLISHMENT AND REVOCATION OF AN EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT AREA.
The City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director may establish a designated employee parking permit area in a location that satisfies the requirements of any administrative guidelines established by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director. A designated employee parking permit area that has been added to the City’s Employee Parking Permit Program may be revoked by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director utilizing administrative guidelines established by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

§8.14.110: EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT.
(a)       The City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director shall issue employee parking permits with a term not to exceed one year to employees that comply with the requirements set forth in this Chapter and any relevant administrative guidelines established by the City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

(b)       An employee parking permit shall only be issued to an applicant who can demonstrate that he or she is currently an employee of the designated employee parking permit area, as determined by the City Manager or Engineering and Transportation Director, for which the permit is to be issued.

 

(c)       Proof of motor vehicle ownership or vehicle use and control and valid registration shall be demonstrated in a manner acceptable to the City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director. Permits are not valid for non-motorized vehicles (i.e., trailers).

 

(d)       The City Manager may limit the number of permits issued to any person if such limitation would further the goals of the Employee Parking Permit Program.

 

§8.14.115: EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMIT ONLINE APPLICATION AND QUALIFICATIONS.
(a)       Applicants seeking an employee parking permit for a designated employee parking permit area must create an account using the City’s online permitting system to purchase an employee parking permit.

 

(b)       Applicant(s) must provide the following to qualify for an employee parking permit:

 

(1)       Proof of employment, as defined by the City Manager and or the Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

(2)       Proof of employment at a business that is eligible for a permit based on location in proximity to a designated employee parking permit area.

 

§8.14.120: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICLES REGISTERED PER PERMIT.
The maximum number of vehicles that may be registered by an employee per permit shall be established by the City Manager or the Engineering and Transportation Director.

 

§8.14.125: PARKING PERMIT FEES.
The annual fee and renewal fee for employee parking permits, or any other parking permit designated by the City Council, shall be established by City Council resolution.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2018-090, 07/16/2018 [§§8.14.100—8.14.125]

TITLE 9 LIBRARY
Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Chapter 2 Meeting Room Regulations

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 9, Chapter 1, Library Commission: Bylaws, was editorially renumbered to be Title 19, Chapter 1, Library-Historical Commission: Bylaws, on 12/04/1985.

Chapter 2 Meeting Room Regulations
§9.2.100: PURPOSE OF SENIOR MEETING ROOM.
The basic purpose of the Dave Karp Senior Meeting Facility is to serve the needs of San Leandro senior organizations.

 

§9.2.105: PREFERENCE FOR DAVE KARP SENIOR MEETING FACILITY.
Organizations that meet the requirements of §9.2.110 of the San Leandro Administrative Code, may reserve the Dave Karp Senior Meeting Facility six (6) months in advance.

 

§9.2.110: CERTIFICATION OF SENIOR ORGANIZATIONS.
In order for an organization to qualify as a senior organization, a majority of the members of that organization must:

 

(a)       Reside within the San Leandro corporate limits; and

 

(b)       Be sixty-two (62) years of age or older.

 

§9.2.115: USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN MEETING ROOMS.
All alcoholic beverages except wine and beer are prohibited in the rooms, with exception of the following:

 

(a)       Organizations must be qualified to use the rooms under general meeting room regulations.

 

(b)       Consumption of wine and beer is limited to the Estudillo Room and Dave Karp Senior Meeting Facility.

 

(c)       Food must accompany the serving of wine and beer.

 

(d)       Organizations must comply with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.

 

(e)       Organizations must provide adequate cleanup and must supervise wine and beer consumption to assure no excess consumption and no consumption by persons under 21 years of age.

 

(f)        Failure to observe all of the above regulations may result in disqualification of an organization from future use of the rooms.

 

§9.2.120: RESTRICTIONS ON GAMES AND AWARDING OF PRIZES.
To the extent permitted by the San Leandro Municipal Code and state law, games of chance shall be allowed and shall be restricted to Dave Karp Senior Meeting Facility, Estudillo Room, and Carnegie Lecture Hall.

 

To use the meeting rooms for bingo, organizations must have a bingo permit from the Finance Department, in conformance with Title 4, Chapter 25 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

No game of chance prohibited by state law shall be allowed in any meeting room.

 

§9.2.125: PUBLIC FUND RAISING ACTIVITIES.
 

(a)       “Public fund raising” is defined as “fund raising programs open to the general public.”

 

(b)       Public fund raising shall be allowed, subject to the following restrictions:

 

(1)       The activity must be non-disruptive to public library services and operations and be of general interest or benefit to San Leandro citizens.

 

(2)       The sponsors of public fund raising activities shall be required to comply and pay the appropriate fee set forth in the §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

§9.2.130: FEES AND INSURANCE.
All organizations shall be required to comply and pay the appropriate fee set forth in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 83-25, 02/07/1983 [§§9.2.100-9.2.125]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§9.2.100-9.2.130]

TITLE 10 HUMAN RESOURCES
Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Chapter 2 Political Activity of Personnel
Chapter 3 {Reserved}
Chapter 4 {Reserved}
Chapter 5 {Reserved}
Chapter 6 Policy Governing Use of Computer Systems, E-Mail and Information Security
Chapter 7 Employment of Relatives

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 10, Chapter 1, City of San Leandro 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan, was repealed by Resolution No. 2012-008, 02/06/2012. Information regarding the Deferred Compensation Program can be obtained from the City’s Finance Department.

Chapter 2 Political Activity of Personnel
§10.2.100: POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
 

(a)       It is prohibited for any person holding a position as an officer or employee to engage in any political activities of any kind while in uniform or during working hours. In addition, no political activities shall be permitted on City premises.

 

(b)       This section is adopted pursuant to authority set forth in Government Code Section 3207. This section is intended as a supplement to and not a substitute for Government Code Sections 3201-3209.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1990.

Chapter 3 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 10, Chapter 3, Automated Data Processing, was repealed by Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012.

Chapter 4 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 10, Chapter 4, City Equipment, was repealed by Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012.

Chapter 5 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 10, Chapter 5, Policy Governing Employee Use of the Internet, was repealed by Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012.

Chapter 6 Policy Governing Use of Computer Systems, E-Mail and Information Security
§10.6.100: POLICY GOVERNING USE OF COMPUTER SYSTEMS, E-MAIL AND INFORMATION SECURITY.
City computer systems are made available to employees, public officials, and in some cases consultants to improve efficiency, communications and productivity when providing services to the community. City computer systems are defined to include any City provided computer hardware (personal computers, laptops, personal digital assistants [PDAs], smart phones, mobile digital terminals, host systems, and related devices, printers, and other production peripheral equipment, scanners, the City’s network), computer software, remote access, electronic mail (e-mail) and Internet connection tools used to provide City services. Use of City provided computer systems are for official City purposes only. This policy is established to protect the City’s investment in information technology; safeguard the information contained within City computer systems; and assist in the efficient delivery of City services.

 

All City computer systems provided in accordance with this policy remain the property of the City. Users of City computer systems have no right to or expectation of privacy or confidentiality in any activity using the City computer systems, equipment, or networks. Any electronic files, documents, or records (as that term is defined in the California Public Records Act) no matter on what medium, stored, accessed, or transferred on the City’s computer systems are not private to the user and are potentially disclosable under the California Public Records Act.

 

(a)       E-Mail System.

 

(1)       The E-Mail System shall be used for the transmission of communications and documents only and shall not be used for the storage of information or records. The E-Mail System is provided by the City to Users as a convenient and efficient method for rapidly communicating transitory information in an electronic format.

 

(2)       The forwarding of E-Mails from City computer systems or through City provided E-Mail accounts by employees or public officials to any personal or other E-Mail account that is not a City provided email account that belongs to, or is managed by the employee or public official is strongly discouraged. A violation of this policy may subject an employee to disciplinary action. Users are cautioned that any E-Mail sent or forwarded from a City computer system or email account to a personal email account may subject that entire personal account to disclosure pursuant to a public records request. An email sent from a personal email account to a City email account or City computer system is a public record subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act.

 

(3)       No User shall attempt to disguise the origin of any E-Mail, unless authorized by the Chief of Police for a criminal investigation.

 

(4)       E-Mail messages located in a User’s Inbox, Sent Items and Deleted Items folders will be automatically deleted by Information Technology from all computer devices and systems on the 120th day after sending or receipt, whether deleted by the User or not. All email will be archived and retained for 24 months.

 

(5)       E-Mail messages that must be retained in accordance with the City’s Records Retention Schedule or by law should be moved to a User’s Outlook Cabinet or saved and placed in the appropriate subject file, either electronically or in hard copy.

 

(b)       Use.

 

(1)       City employees and public officials are responsible for the care, security and appropriate use of City computer systems and any related equipment. Inappropriate uses may include, but are not limited to, obscenity, harassment, slander, defamation, commercial or for-profit activities, and political or campaign activities.

 

(2)       City computer systems are for use by employees, public officials, and City Manager designated persons only. Contractors, vendors and other non-City users may be granted access to City computer systems with approval from the Information Services Manager. Contractors, volunteers, and other non-City users accessing the City of San Leandro’s computer systems are subject to the same policies and guidelines as any City employee or public official.

 

(3)       City computer hardware and software will be installed, configured and supported by the City Manager’s Office, Information Technology Division only.

 

(4)       All Users shall respect copyright and license agreements and shall not distribute or download programs or materials without the legal right to do so.

 

(5)       Any City-owned computer systems provided to or used by employees and public officials of the City should be returned to the City Manager’s Office immediately upon request.

 

(c)       Unacceptable Uses. City computer systems shall not be used for:

 

(1)       Personal gain or political activity.

 

(2)       Outside business activities, fundraising, or charitable activity without the express authorization of the City Manager.

 

(3)       Libelous, offensive, or harassing statements, documents or images, including disparagement of others based on their race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, religious or political beliefs.

 

(4)       Sending or soliciting sexually oriented messages or images; accessing internet sites which are “adult-oriented” in nature, or which require the user to be over the age of 18 years, or which offer gambling services, or which contain obscene content of any nature. Employees of the Police Department are exempt when performing duties that require him or her to perform these prohibited activities.

 

(5)       Impersonation of any person or communication under a false or unauthorized name.

 

(6)       Inappropriate mass mailing or “spamming.”

 

(7)       Knowingly or maliciously introducing any invasive or destructive programs (i.e. viruses, worms, Trojan Horses) into City computer systems or networks.

 

(8)       Attempting to circumvent local or network system security measures.

 

(d)       Information Security.

 

(1)       City employees and elected officials access City computer systems with a unique identification and password. In order to protect City equipment and information, the City issued identification and passwords should not be shared or easily accessible to anyone but the individual user.

 

(2)       All devices used to connect to the City’s computer systems must be continually executing approved virus-scanning software with a current virus database. Users shall not disable any anti-virus software installed nor download any files which trigger a warning from the anti-virus software.

 

(3)       The Information Technology Division of the City Manager’s Office will back up files stored on the City’s computer networks according to the City’s network backup policies. Users shall utilize network resources to store their data files to the fullest extent possible to protect the City’s data resources. Users are responsible for ensuring that critical data not stored on network servers is backed up and stored in a safe location.

 

(e)       Public Disclosure.

 

(1)       The disclosure or exemption from disclosure of “public records” (which generally means any writing, whether electronic or paper, that contains information relating to the conduct of the public’s business) is governed by the California Public Records Act and its exemptions (California Government Code §§ 6250 et seq.). It is City policy to exempt from disclosure all records that may be exempted pursuant to specific provisions of the California Public Records Act, unless specifically waived by the City Council, or City Manager.

 

§10.6.105: AUTHORIZATION TO DEVELOP PROCEDURES FOR THE USE OF COMPUTER SYSTEMS, E-MAIL AND INFORMATION SECURITY.
The City Manager is authorized to develop and implement rules and procedures governing the use of City Computer Systems and Information Security. These rules and procedures may include acceptable use of the systems, limitations on privacy, prohibition on certain uses, and restrictions on activities that would compromise other City policies.     

 

 

Refer to San Leandro Administrative Code, Title 1, Chapter 11, City Council: Policy Governing Use of Computer Systems, E-Mail and Information Security.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2000-133, 09/05/2000 [§10.6.100]; Resolution No. 2012-013, 02/06/2012 [§§10.6.100-10.6.105]

Chapter 7 Employment of Relatives
§10.7.100.
Close family relatives shall not be employed in positions where they directly or indirectly supervise or are supervised by a close family relative. Accordingly, this policy is designed to prevent potential conflicts of interest pertaining to supervision, safety, security and/or morale. Supervisory responsibilities, in this context, denote control over assignments, promotion or pay.

 

The close family relatives covered by this policy include: spouse; domestic partner registered with the State of California; parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, step-parent, step-child, step-brother or step-sister.

 

A close family relative of a City employee is not precluded from applying for an examination, competing in an examination, being placed on an employment list or being certified to the Department Head for employment consideration. However, no appointment will be made whenever an applicant is in a close family relationship with an employee working in a department/division for which he/she is applying if such an appointment creates a supervisory conflict, as outlined in this policy and in accordance with City Charter Section 705, Nepotism, which precludes appointment of such persons to any permanent, salaried office or employment if such person is related by blood or marriage within the third degree to a Councilmember or Mayor or to the appointing officer. This policy applies to both open and promotional examinations, transfers and entry-level examinations.

 

In the event that two employees who are in a supervisory relationship become close family relatives as defined above, both family members must immediately report their familial relationship to the City. In such a situation, one of the employees shall be reassigned so as to eliminate the supervisory relationship as soon as feasible. If possible, subject to the needs of the City, the choice as to which employee is to be reassigned shall be made in writing by the affected employees.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 10, Chapter 7, Human Resources: Policy for Employee Computer Purchase Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 6, Chapter 9, Finance: Policy for Employee Computer Purchase Program, during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2012-008, 02/06/2012

TITLE 11 POLICE
Chapter 1 Rules and Regulations
Chapter 2 Access to Records
Chapter 3 Reserve Officers Rules and Regulations
Chapter 4 Abatement of Weeds and Grass

Chapter 1 Rules and Regulations
ARTICLE 1 AUTHORIZATIONS
§11.1.100: RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2-105 of the San Leandro Municipal Code provides that Department Heads may prescribe rules and regulations for the administration of their departments and the conduct of their employees, subject to the approval of the City Manager.

 

§11.1.105: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS—CONFLICT—INTERPRETATIONS.
Pursuant to the authority set forth in Section 1-2-105 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, these Police Rules and Regulations (hereinafter referred to as regulations) are adopted. Notwithstanding any general orders, special orders, memoranda, instructions, manuals and the like to the contrary, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit or supersede any provision of law relating to the duties and obligations of peace officers, nor shall these regulations be construed to enlarge the liability of any officer or the department for actions within the course and scope of such officer’s employment. The specific enumeration of unprofessional conduct does not constitute approval of unprofessional conduct harmful to the department not specifically stated herein. The use of the term “member(s)” shall be deemed to include peace officer and civilian employees of the Police Department.

 

(a)       Amendment. These regulations may be amended, revised, repealed or reenacted from time to time by written order of the Chief of Police.

 

(b)       Existing Orders. It is intended that these regulations provide general guidance for professional conduct of all peace officers and civilian employees of the department. All general orders, special orders, memoranda, instructions, manuals and the like in existence on the effective date of these regulations and not in conflict therewith, shall have the same force and effect as these regulations.

 

§11.1.110: REPORTING VIOLATIONS OF LAWS OR ORDINANCES.
Members shall report to the Chief of Police, through proper channels, such violations of these rules and regulations, or any laws and ordinances in force in the City of San Leandro, by other members of the department that may come to their attention, or of which they have knowledge.

 

§11.1.115: VIOLATION OF DUTIES—ORDERS—RULES.
Every member shall faithfully carry out and perform the duties of his rank or assignment. The failure of a member, either willfully, or through negligence or incompetence, to perform the duties of this rank or assignment, or the violation by a member of these regulations, or any instruc-

tion having the effect of these regulations may be considered cause for dismissal, demotion, suspension, loss of pay or privilege, reprimand, or any other penalty subject to the provisions of Civil Service Rules.

 

§11.1.120: AUTHORITY FOR ADMINISTRATION AND DISCIPLINE.
Section 405 of the San Leandro City Charter provides that the City Manager (a) “shall appoint, remove and discipline all administrative officers of the City, except as otherwise provided by or pursuant to this Charter;” (b) “shall approve, modify or disapprove all recommendations for appointments of, removal of and disciplinary actions to be taken against, employees by administrative officers of the City, except as otherwise provided by or pursuant to this Charter.”

 

(a)       Dismissal, Suspension, Demotion, Reduction in Pay. In accordance with the City of San Leandro Code, Charter, and Personnel Rules, the City Manager, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, may discharge, suspend, demote or reduce the pay of any non-probationary member for cause.

 

(b)       Probationary Members. In accordance with Personnel Rules and pursuant to the Code and Charter of the City of San Leandro, a probationary member may be discharged by the City Manager upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police for any reason which, in the sole opinion of the City is just and sufficient.

 

(c)       Other Personnel Actions. The Chief of Police may change duty assignments, issue or cause to be issued oral or written reprimands, counsel any member or take any other action consistent with the Code, Charter, Civil Service Rules and applicable provisions of any current memoranda of understanding relative to an affected member for the good of the department or any other good cause.

 

§11.1.125: ADMINISTRATIVE INVESTIGATION.
 

(a)       An administrative investigation is an investigation conducted to determine whether or not a member has violated any provisions of a Departmental order, rule, or regulation, or whether a member is impaired or unfit to perform the duties and responsibilities of his or her position. Administrative investigation reports, statements, etc., may be used in administrative actions involving members of the department.

 

(b)       Cooperation Required. Members who are witnesses to derelictions of employees charged shall cooperate in the conduct of any administrative investigations.

 

§11.1.130: INTERROGATIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
Interrogations of any member during the course of an investigation that could lead to formal disciplinary action shall be conducted under the following conditions and procedures and in accordance with the Peace Officer Bill of Rights. This rule shall not apply to any interrogation of a member in the normal course of duty, counseling, instruction or informal verbal admonishment by, or other routine or unplanned contact with a supervisor or any other member, nor shall this rule apply to an investigation concerned solely and directly with alleged criminal activities.

(a)       The interrogation shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a time when the member is on duty, or during the normal waking hours of the member, unless the seriousness of the investigation requires otherwise. If such interrogation does occur during off-duty time of the member being interrogated, the member shall be compensated for such off-duty time in accordance with regular department procedures, and the member shall not be released from employment for any work missed.

 

(b)       The member under investigation shall be informed prior to such interrogation of the rank, name and command of the officer in charge of the interrogation, the interrogating officers, and all other persons to be present during the interrogation. All questions directed to the member under interrogation shall be asked by and through no more than two interrogators at one time.

 

(c)       The member under investigation shall be informed of the nature of the investigation prior to any interrogation.

 

(d)       The interrogating session shall be for a reasonable period taking into consideration gravity and complexity of the issue being investigated. The person under interrogation shall be allowed to attend to his own personal physical necessities.

 

(e)       The member under interrogation shall not be subjected to offensive language or threatened with punitive action, except that an officer refusing to respond to questions or submit to interrogations shall be informed that failure to answer questions directly related to the investigation or interrogation may result in punitive action. No promise of reward shall be made as an inducement to answering any question. The employer shall not cause the member under interrogation to be subjected to visits by the press or news media without his expressed consent nor shall his home address or photograph be given to the press or news media without his expressed consent.

 

(f)        The complete interrogation of a member may be recorded. If a tape recording is made of the interrogation, the member shall have access to the tape if any further proceedings are contemplated or prior to any further interrogation at a subsequent time. The member shall be entitled to a transcribed copy of any notes made by a stenographer or to any reports or complaints made by investigators or other persons, except those which are deemed by the investigating agency to be confidential. No notes or reports which are deemed to be confidential may be entered in the officer’s personnel file. The member being interrogated shall have the right to bring his own recording device and record any and all aspects of the interrogation.

 

(g)       If prior to or during the interrogation of a member it is deemed that he may be charged with a criminal offense, he shall be immediately informed of his constitutional rights.

 

(h)       Upon the filing of a formal written statement of charges, or whenever an interrogation focuses on matters which are likely to result in punitive action against any member, that member, at his request, shall have the right to be represented by a representative of his choice who may be present at all times during such interrogation. The representative shall not be a person subject to the same investigation.

 

(i)        No member shall be loaned or temporarily reassigned to a location or duty assignment if a sworn member of his department would not normally be sent to that location or would not normally be given that duty assignment under similar circumstances.

 

(j)        No member shall be compelled to submit to a polygraph examination against his will. No disciplinary action or other recrimination shall be taken against a member refusing to submit to a polygraph examination, nor shall any comment be entered anywhere in the investigator’s notes or anywhere else that the member refused to take a polygraph examination, nor shall any testimony or evidence be admissible at a subsequent hearing, trial, or proceeding, judicial or administrative, to the effect that the member refused to take a polygraph examination.

 

(k)       No member shall have his locker, or other space for storage that may be assigned to him searched except in his presence, or with his consent, or unless a valid search warrant has been obtained or where he has been notified that a search will be conducted. This section shall apply only to lockers or other space for storage that are owned or leased by the employing agency.

 

§11.1.135: CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS.
Whenever in the course of conducting an administrative investigation there is probable cause to believe that the member under investigation has committed a criminal act, such member shall be treated as any other criminal suspect or defendant and shall be afforded all rights and privileges guaranteed under the federal and state constitutions.

 

§11.1.140: CIVIL SERVICE APPEALS.
The provisions of these rules and regulations shall not be construed to increase or decrease the rights of any non-probationary member to an appeal as a matter of right or to a hearing at the discretion of the Personnel Relations Board for actions taken against any member as provided herein.

 

§11.1.145: CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this manual shall be severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this code is declared to be unconstitutional or the applicability thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of this code and the applicability thereof to any other person or circumstance shall, with respect to all severable matters, not be affected thereby.

 

 

ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS
§11.1.200: MEMBER.
Refers to every officer and employee of the Police Department.

 

§11.1.205: NON-SWORN MEMBER.
When used alone shall mean civilian employee assigned to the Police Department in any permanent or temporary Personnel Classification.

 

§11.1.210: OFFICER.
As used herein shall mean any person appointed to the Police Department as a regularly salaried and duly sworn as a peace officer, and shall have no reference to non-sworn employees.

 

§11.1.215: COMMAND OFFICER.
Shall designate officers of the Department appointed to the rank of Lieutenant of Police or higher, or assigned by the Chief of Police to act in such rank.

 

§11.1.216: CIVILIAN MANAGER.
Shall designate a non-sworn member who holds a position equivalent to a command officer (i.e., Support Services Manager).

 

§11.1.220: SUPERVISORY OFFICER.
Shall designate officers of the department assigned by the Chief of Police to positions requiring the exercise of immediate supervision over the activities of members of the Department.

 

§11.1.221: CIVILIAN SUPERVISOR.
Shall designate a non-sworn member who holds a position equivalent to a supervisory officer (i.e., Administrative Specialist Police).

 

§11.1.225: SUPERIOR OFFICER.
As used herein shall refer to an officer of higher rank. The ranks in the San Leandro Police Department in descending order are: Chief of Police; Captain; Lieutenant; Sergeant; and Police Officer. Where two officers of the same rank are concerned, the superior officer shall be the one with greater seniority in rank, unless the other has been assigned as the officer in charge.

 

§11.1.226: CIVILIAN MANAGER AND CIVILIAN SUPERVISOR.
A civilian manager position shall be considered a non-sworn equivalent rank to Lieutenant. A civilian supervisor position shall be considered a non-sworn equivalent rank to Sergeant.

 

§11.1.230: DEPARTMENT.
As used herein shall mean the San Leandro Police Department, City of San Leandro, California.

 

§11.1.235: OPERATIONS DIRECTIVE.
Department Operations Directives are written directives issued by the Chief of Police defining policy and procedures to be used by the Department. The Operations Directive may be used to amend, rescind, or supersede any other regulations, Operations Directive or Special Orders. Department Operations Directives are permanent Department policy and remain in full force and effect until amended, rescinded or superseded by the Chief of Police.

 

§11.1.240: SPECIAL ORDER.
Department Special Orders are written directives issued at departmental and divisional level by the Chief of Police, Captain of Police, or a Commanding Officer of a Division. Special Orders are issued to establish a temporary policy or procedure on a given subject, usually for a specific length of time. Special Orders are automatically canceled when their objective has been achieved.

 

§11.1.245: ORDER.
As used herein an order is any written or oral directive issued by a superior officer to any subordinate or group of subordinates.

 

§11.1.250: MANUAL.
As used herein are detail procedure guides and policy outlines issued for reference purposes. All manuals are issued by authority of the Chief of Police and carry the weight of a Department Operations Directive.

 

§11.1.255: SHALL/WILL.
The words “shall” or “will” as used herein shall indicate that the action required is mandatory.

 

§11.1.260: MAY.
The word “may” as used herein shall mean the action indicated as permissive.

 

§11.1.265. TENSE OF WORDS.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.

 

§11.1.270: PLURALITY OF WORDS.
The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

 

§11.1.275: GENDER.
The use of the masculine gender herein shall also include, when appropriate, the female gender.

 

§11.1.280: BEGINNING OF DAY.
For record purposes the department day shall begin at 0001 hours and shall conclude at 2400 hours.

 

§11.1.285: LINE FUNCTION.
That portion of the department’s total activity that is directly concerned with the accomplishment of the departmental objectives in field operations. These units are responsible for the primary task of protection of life and property and render such services required by the public.

 

§11.1.290: STAFF AND STAFF FUNCTION.
That portion of the department’s total activity which assists the line organization in the accomplishment of the department objectives.

§11.1.295: EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY.
All members holding any command or supervisory rank within the department have authority over all members of the department of any subordinate rank. Command or supervision will ordinarily be exercised only within the scope of the member’s assignment. In an emergency, or when the good of the department so requires it, any command or supervisory member may direct or correct the activities of any subordinate member.

 

§11.1.296: RESPONSIBILITY CROSSING LINE OF AUTHORITY.
When a member has directed or corrected an activity of a subordinate member outside of the normal scope of his assignment, he shall be held fully responsible for his actions.

 

§11.1.297: SENIORITY.
Seniority is established first by rank and second by time served in rank. Where conflict occurs because of identical service or dates of appointment, the member with the higher position on the Personnel eligibility list from which appointments were made is deemed the senior.

 

§11.1.298: SENIORITY EQUAL RANK.
In situations requiring decision or control where the officers are of equal rank, the senior officer will make the decision and exercise control, unless otherwise directed by a higher authority.

 

§11.1.299: FULL AUTHORITY IN ACTING CAPACITY.
Any member assigned the status “Acting” for any command or supervisory position in the department shall have full authority and full responsibility of the command or supervisory position he is occupying.

 

ARTICLE 3 RANKS AND GENERAL DUTIES
§11.1.300: CHIEF OF POLICE.
The Chief of Police is the chief executive officer of the department and is the final departmental authority in all matters of policy, operations and discipline.

 

(a)       The Chief of Police is responsible for the organization of the department, its operations, policy and procedures, and its relations with citizens, the city government and other agencies.

 

(b)       The Chief of Police is responsible for the efficiency of all members of the department. He shall conduct inspections to assure effective compliance with his orders.

 

(c)       The Chief of Police may designate such officers of the department as he deems necessary, to act as administrative deputies in his name, and as his representatives. The Chief shall be held responsible for the actions of such deputies.

 

(d)       The Chief of Police shall keep the City Manager informed of the operations of the department by oral or written reports.

 

(e)       In the event of the absence of the Chief of Police from duty for any extended time, the Chief of Police shall designate an Acting Chief of Police, who will assume, during the absence of the Chief, all authority and responsibility vested in the Office of the Chief of Police.

 

§11.1.305: CAPTAIN OF POLICE.
A Captain of Police shall be assigned to command a Bureau of the Department, but may be assigned additional duties by the Chief of Police. A Captain of Police shall be responsible for planning, directing, controlling, and coordinating all activities of his command. The Captain of Police shall submit such verbal or written reports relating to his command, as may be required by the Chief of Police. Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Chief of Police may designate a Captain of Police to act as Chief of Police during his absence.

 

§11.1.310: LIEUTENANT OF POLICE.
The Lieutenant of Police shall be assigned as a command officer in charge of a division of the department. The Lieutenant shall be responsible for the general and individual responsibilities of all supervisory officers, and other employees under his direct control. In addition to general responsibilities:

 

(a)       He shall provide direction and control of personnel under his command to assure proper performance of duties and adherence to established rules, regulations, policies, and procedures.

 

(b)       Maintain discipline and morale within the command and shall investigate personnel complaints relating to his command, not assigned elsewhere.

 

(c)       Prepare required correspondence, reports, and records relating to the activities of his command.

 

(d)       Require that quarters, equipment, supplies and materials assigned to his command are properly used and maintained.

 

§11.1.311: CIVILIAN MANAGER.
A Civilian Manager is a non-sworn member who holds a management level position within the City of San Leandro and the equivalent of a command position within the Police Department. A Civilian Manager has all the duties, authority and responsibilities of a Lieutenant of Police as outlined above with the exception of those requiring peace officer status under the law.

 

§11.1.315: SERGEANT OF POLICE.
A Sergeant of Police is a supervisory officer who may be assigned in charge of a unit of the department. The Sergeant shall be responsible for officers and employees assigned to his unit. A Sergeant may be assigned to field or staff duties.

 

(a)       The Sergeant shall exercise direct command of his subordinates to assure good conduct, discipline, and efficiency.

 

(b)       The Sergeant shall enforce departmental rules, regulations and orders to insure compliance with departmental policies and procedures. This requires inspections of activities, personnel and equipment under his supervision. He shall institute suitable action in the event of a failure, error, violation, misconduct, or neglect of duty by a subordinate. He shall keep his supervisor abreast of the activities of his subordinates and his unit, and shall submit written reports of incidents which warrant administrative notice or further action.

 

(c)       A Sergeant shall monitor the performance and progress of his subordinates and shall, according to departmental procedures submit objective and definitive reports of such performance. He shall provide or request such training as he deems necessary for his subordinates.

 

(d)       A Sergeant shall have a working knowledge of the duties and responsibilities of his subordinates. He shall be available for assistance and instruction to his subordinates, as required.

 

§11.1.316: CIVILIAN SUPERVISOR.
A Civilian Supervisor is a non-sworn member who holds the equivalent of a police Sergeant’s position within the Police Department. A Civilian Supervisor has all the duties, authority and responsibilities of a Sergeant of Police as outlined above with the exception of those requiring peace officer status under the law.

 

§11.1.320: POLICE OFFICER.
Police Officers are ordinarily assigned as motorized. They may be assigned to other related duties or special assignment by Division Commanders, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.

 

(a)       The Police Officer is responsible for general law enforcement duties and shall be held accountable for the beat, post, or special detail to which he is assigned. He shall hold himself in readiness to answer the calls and obey the orders of his Superiors.

 

(b)       A Police Officer assigned as a specialist (i.e., detective, field evidence technician, canine handler, etc.), shall be held accountable for proper and efficient performance of the duties of such special assignment.

 

(c)       A Police Officer shall work such hours as may be designated by the Division Commander, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.

 

(d)       A Police Officer assigned to the Patrol Division shall patrol his beat diligently and faithfully and with the understanding he carries with him a responsibility for the safety of the community and his fellow officers.

 

(e)       A Police Officer shall give immediate attention to calls for assistance, complaints or other emergencies. He shall render such assistance as may be required in an efficient manner, returning to his regular duties as soon as is practicable. He shall make an appropriate and timely report of his actions as soon as practicable upon completion of the service rendered.

 

(f)        A Police Officer shall inform himself of information concerning the City of San Leandro, its public buildings, courts, churches, transportation, boundaries, recreation facilities, county, state, and federal offices within the City. He shall be available to the public to provide accurate and intelligent assistance as required.

 

(g)       A Police Officer shall attempt to dissuade any other member from any act or omission which he has reason to believe is unlawful, hazardous, in direct violation of departmental rules and regulations, highly disruptive to departmental purposes or operations, or likely to bring discredit to the department or its members. Failing to discourage such act or omission, the officer shall immediately report his conclusions and dissuasive efforts to the most readily available supervisory or command officer.

 

§11.1.325: POLICE SERVICES AIDE.
The Police Services Aide classification was established principally to release officers from considerable non-field duties.

 

(a)       A Police Services Aide may be assigned to any bureau, division or section of the Police Department. The Police Services Aide shall remain in readiness to assist the public or other agencies in as diligent and as efficient manner as possible.

 

(b)       A Police Services Aide shall work such hours as may be designated by the Division Commander, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.

 

(c)       A female Police Services Aide, when requested or directed by an officer, shall accompany such officer as matron when a female is involved in an investigation. Her duty is to protect the officer, or officers, from false accusations.

 

(d)       A female Police Service Aide, when directed to do so by an officer or supervisor, shall search female prisoners as may be necessary. Other than a search, a female Police Services Aide shall not be required to have bodily contact, such as restraining a prisoner, with females detained by the police. Actual physical restraint is the responsibility of the officer or officers involved.

 

(e)       A Police Services Aide shall diligently and efficiently perform those tasks assigned by competent authority. In addition, the Police Services Aide shall be in readiness to answer public inquiry concerning police matters as may be requested at department headquarters.

 

(f)        A Police Services Aide is subject to all department rules and regulations in the same manner as are officers and other employees of the department.

 

§11.1.330: MEMBER.
Non-sworn members, other than Police Services Aides, are appointed to the department in appropriate civil service classification.

 

(a)       Non-sworn members of the department shall work such hours as may be designated by the Division Commander, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.

 

(b)       Non-sworn members are subject to all department rules and regulations in the same manner as are officers and Police Services Aides.

 

(c)       Non-sworn members assigned to duties which require contact with the general public are representing the department and shall conduct themselves in a courteous, alert, and efficient manner.

 

ARTICLE 4 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES
§11.1.400: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF OFFICERS AND/OR MEMBERS.
Officers of the department shall at all times, within the limits of the City of San Leandro, protect life and property, preserve the peace, prevent crime, apprehend violators of the law, or take appropriate action as the situation dictates. They shall enforce the laws of the United States of America, the State of California and the Ordinances of the City of San Leandro.

 

(a)       Constitutional Rights. Members shall strive, in every facet of their duties and responsibilities, to protect the Constitutional rights of every individual.

 

§11.1.405: PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT.
Members of the department shall maintain a professional posture towards victims, complainants, witnesses or violators of the law.

 

(a)   Members shall not abuse their authority by acting in an officious or arbitrary manner.

 

§11.1.410: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS BY ALL OFFICERS.
Regardless of assignment, officers shall take prompt, proper police action with respect to violations of laws and ordinances, as observed by them, or coming to their attention.

 

§11.1.415: FAILURE TO ASSIST A FELLOW OFFICER.
No officer of the department shall fail to assist or protect his fellow officer in time of danger, or fail to take effective action where danger might reasonably be impending, except where he is actually incapacitated.

 

§11.1.420: SOLICITATION, ACCEPTANCE OF GRATUITIES.
No member shall solicit or accept any gratuities offered in recognition of the member’s position, or for services performed in the line of duty, where it may be interpreted as capable of influencing the discharge of the member’s official duties.

 

(a)       Disposition of Gratuities, Etc. Should any presents, gratuities or unauthorized compensation come into the possession of any member, it shall be immediately forwarded to the Chief of Police, accompanied by a written report outlining all circumstances connected therewith.

(b)       Merit Awards Excluded. This rule is not intended to preclude the receipt of merit awards, medals, honors, and other forms of recognition conferred by the employing agency, other agencies, and public or civic groups.

 

(c)       Social Practices Excluded. This rule is not intended to isolate members from normal social practices where gifts among friends, associates and relatives are appropriate.

 

§11.1.425: SOLICITATION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES.
No member shall use his badge, identification card, uniform or official position to solicit special privileges for himself or herself, or for any other person.

 

(a)       Solicitation of Special Discounts on Purchases. No member shall solicit or accept special discounts on purchases for himself or any person, by use of his or her official position in the department, unless such discounts are routinely given as a business practice in recognition of group purchasing.

 

(b)       Solicitation of Free or Discounted Meals. No member shall solicit free or discounted meals or drinks for himself, or any person, because of his or her position in this department. All reasonable efforts should be made to pay the full price of the meal or drink.

 

§11.1.430: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
Except as expressly authorized by the Chief of Police, all members are prohibited from engaging in any other business or occupation, which would by virtue of its demand upon the member’s rest time, hamper his ability to respond to and work diligently at his primary employment.

 

(a)       Members desiring to engage in outside employment shall submit a written application in accordance with departmental procedure. Upon reasonable request, permission to engage in such employment will not be withheld except for good cause.

 

§11.1.435: SEEKING PERSONAL PREFERMENT OUTSIDE DEPARTMENT.
No member shall for the purpose of personal preferment, advantage, transfer, advancement, or any other personal action, seek the influence or intervention of any person not an employee of the department. Reference Section 406, Article IV, City Charter.

 

§11.1.440: COURT APPEARANCE.
All members who normally work in uniform shall appear in Court, while on duty, in uniform. Uniformed members who are appearing in court while off duty, and all other members of the department shall appear in appropriate civilian attire. Civilian attire for male members shall include a suit or coat and slacks. Wearing of neckties is encouraged.

 

(a)       Manner of Testifying in Court. Members in court shall avoid any indication of bias, prejudice or anger. They shall testify in a clear and distinct manner.

 

(b)       Prompt Attendance in Court. Members required to be in court by departmental order or court subpoena shall be prompt in attendance and shall remain until excused by competent authority.

 

§11.1.445: REFUSAL TO TESTIFY.
Every member of the department, who, when required by competent authority to appear as a witness before any judicial tribunal, hearing board, investigative body, or person authorized to take testimony, refuses to testify to any material fact or subject, shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. This rule shall not be construed to require a member to incriminate himself in contravention to the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.

 

§11.1.450: REFUSAL TO TESTIFY IN DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATION.
Every member shall forthrightly and truthfully answer questions in any department personnel investigation, when ordered to do so by competent authority. Refusal is insubordinate conduct and shall subject the member to disciplinary action.

 

§11.1.455: OFFICIAL INTERVENTION IN CIVIL CASES PROHIBITED.
No officer of the department shall serve civil process nor shall he officially intervene in civil matters, except as required by law to prevent a breach of this peace, commission of a crime, or as directed by a Commanding Officer.

 

(a)       Notification of Superior on Service of Civil Subpoena. Whenever any department in the City of San Leandro is involved in a civil matter which results in the subpoena of a member of the Police Department, the member shall immediately notify his Command Officer of the service of the subpoena.

 

(b)       Improper Use of Official Position in Civil Cases. No member shall use his official position with the department as a means of coercion or intimidation of persons, businesses, or organizations with whom he may be engaged in a civil dispute, to settle the dispute or civil action in the favor of such member.

 

(c)       Instituting Civil Action, Service-Connected. Members shall notify the Chief of Police in writing immediately upon instituting any civil action arising out of their official duties.

 

(d)       Notification—Payment, Service-Connected Injury. Members shall notify the Chief of Police in writing immediately upon accepting payment for damages or personal injury incurred in line of duty.

 

(e)       Interviews with Attorneys—Investigators. For the protection of officers and the department, all interviews between members of the department, and attorneys or other persons interested in any case arising out of the departmental employment, shall take place in the presence of, or with the knowledge of a Command Officer of the department.

 

§11.1.460: PRESS RELATIONS WITH DEPARTMENT.
Members of the department shall cooperate with the working press consistent with statutory or court direction, departmental orders and policy, provided that police tactics, investigations or court prosecution of cases are not thereby jeopardized. In any case where a question of press relationship cannot be satisfactorily resolved by an employee, such case shall be referred to a Superior Officer for further decision.

 

(a)       Confidential Reports Not to be Reviewed. Where an official report or memorandum of the department has been marked or labeled “CONFIDENTIAL” by a Supervisory or Command Officer, such official report or memorandum shall NOT be revealed to any person, organization or agency without the express approval of a Supervisory, or Command Officer, preferably the officer who labeled the official report or memorandum. The label of an official report or memorandum as “CONFIDENTIAL” may be reviewed and revised, where deemed necessary, by a Superior Officer.

 

(b)       Seeking Personal Publicity Prohibited. Members shall not, either directly or indirectly, seek personal publicity, or when identified as a member of the Police Department make personal statements through the public press. All press releases concerning departmental business or activities of any type shall be made by the Chief of Police, a Police Captain, or such member as may be designated by above authority.

 

§11.1.465: RESTRICTED USE OF DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
Members shall not divulge to any person not connected with the department any information, memorandum, or official record of the department, unless required by law, departmental order, departmental policy, or order of a Command Officer. Departmental records, memorandum or reports shall be exhibited only in conformity with current law and departmental orders. (Refer to Departmental Operations Directives 87-24 and 87-34.)

 

(a)       Disclosing Police Information. Members shall not divulge any police information to which they may have access or which may come to their attention, except in the exercise of their official duties, or as provided by law or competent authority.

 

(b)       Divulging Identity of Persons Prohibited. Members shall not divulge to anyone the identity of any person giving information to the department, except as provided by law, competent authority or Operations Directive. This includes the identity of a complainant or confidential informant in any police activity.

 

§11.1.470: METHOD OF ARREST AND DETENTION.
Officers of the department shall make arrests and detentions in strict conformity with the Laws of Arrest, as defined in the California Penal Code.

 

(a)       Use of Excessive Force Prohibited. Members shall not use physical force or the threat of physical force upon the person of another for any reason, except as provided by law. No member shall use more force or restraint than is necessary for the arrest and/or detention of a person and for the safety and protection of the member or members.

(b)       Arresting Officer/Jailer Responsible for Prisoner Safety. The arresting officer or officers and jailers are responsible for the safety of the person or persons arrested or detained, so long as such person is in his custody and control. The arresting officer or jailer shall call to the attention of an appropriate Supervisor any injury, apparent illness, or other personal disability which the person or persons arrested or detained may appear to have.

 

(c)       Arresting Officer Responsible for Prisoner Property. The arresting officer is responsible for the personal property of persons arrested or detained, until such custody is relinquished to competent authority.

 

(d)       Safeguarding Weapons. Officers shall not leave firearms or other weapons, or permit such weapons or firearms to remain unattended in any location normally accessible to a prisoner or any other unauthorized person.

 

(e)       Search of Arrested Persons—Officer Safety. The arresting officer shall search, or cause to be searched, for firearms or other offensive weapons, every person lawfully taken into custody, prior to transportation in a police vehicle. In most cases, and specifically in cases where a search for weapons cannot effectively be conducted in the field, the arrested person shall be placed in mechanical restraints prior to transportation, according to departmental procedure.

 

§11.1.475: RECOMMENDING BAIL AGENCY PROHIBITED.
No member shall suggest or recommend any person or firm engaged in the business of furnishing bail to any persons desiring bail, except to the member’s immediate family.

 

§11.1.480: RECOMMENDING ATTORNEYS PROHIBITED.
No member shall recommend or counsel the retention of a specific attorney to any prisoner or other person involved in a criminal or civil case of interest to this department, except to the member’s immediate family.

 

§11.1.485: PERSONAL TRANSACTIONS WITH PRISONERS/SUSPECTS PROHIBITED.
No member shall knowingly buy or accept any article for personal disposition from any person in custody, any person suspected of criminal acts, or any associate or relative of such person.

 

§11.1.490: COMPROMISING CRIMINAL CASES.
No member shall for personal reasons or benefit interfere with any criminal court action or use his official position to arrange for any person charged or suspected of a crime to escape prosecution.

 

§11.1.495: WITHHOLDING INFORMATION.
Except as protected by the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, no member receiving or possessing any facts or information relative to a criminal offense or investigation shall, for personal reasons or self-aggrandizement, fail to promptly report such facts or information to the Bureau, Division, or Section of the department concerned.

 

(a)       Advising Another to Withhold Information. No member of the department shall advise, counsel, order, or otherwise dissuade any other member from making a lawful or proper report either on criminal investigations or departmental matters.

 

ARTICLE 5 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§11.1.500: USE OF DEPARTMENT VEHICLES.
Members shall not use any departmental vehicle except in the furtherance of their official duties. Vehicles shall be driven with care and consistent with safe driving practices and equipment longevity.

 

(a)       Transporting Persons in Department Vehicles. Transporting persons in department vehicles shall be done only in conformance with department policy or with the permission of a Supervisor or Command Officer.

 

§11.1.505: FALSE OFFICIAL REPORTS.
No member of the department shall knowingly make a false official report, either verbally or in writing, concerning any action, circumstance, report, person, or any other matter directly connected with official departmental business.

 

§11.1.510: OFF-DUTY AVAILABILITY.
Members not subscribing to a telephone and who are subject to recall or call-in for special or emergency response, shall inform the department of the means by which they may be reached when not immediately available.

 

(a)       Members’ Telephone Number and Address. Members shall keep the department informed of their current residence address and telephone number, and shall report any change of address or telephone within twenty-four (24) hours.

 

§11.1.515: PUBLIC SPEECH OR APPEARANCE.
Members shall not address public gatherings or fill speaking engagements as official representatives of the department, except in accordance with established department procedures.

 

§11.1.520: INCURRING DEPARTMENT EXPENSE.
Members shall not knowingly incur any unauthorized departmental expense or liability without the expressed approval of a Superior Officer.

 

§11.1.525: IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICER TO PUBLIC.
Officers, on official duty, shall, upon request, identify themselves immediately by giving their names and displaying their badges and credentials, unless such action is likely to jeopardize the successful completion of an official assignment.

 

§11.1.530: KNOWLEDGE OF DEPARTMENT INFORMATION.
Members shall acquaint themselves, daily when on duty, and immediately upon return from absence, with police information posted on bulletin boards, in department Operations Directives and Special Orders, wanted circulars and crime information sheets, pertinent to their assignment and themselves.

 

§11.1.535: POSTING INFORMATION ON BOARD.
All information, notices, circulars, or other material posted on the department bulletin boards shall be in conformity with City and department orders. Reference City Council Resolution No. 70-48 (Employer-Employee Relations).

 

(a)       Prohibited Materials. Members shall not defile any authorized posting, or post any material, cartoon or graffiti which is in any manner lewd, obscene, or demeaning.

 

§11.1.540: DEPARTMENT INSPECTIONS.
The Chief of Police may call for a full dress inspection of the department or of any bureau, Division, or Section thereof. All members directed to attend shall report in the uniform prescribed at the time and place specified. Failure to report for inspection shall be considered absent without leave.

 

(a)       Supervisory Inspections. Supervisory and command personnel shall conduct such inspections of the personnel under their command as may be necessary to assure the proper appearance, condition, readiness, and effectiveness of personnel and equipment.

 

§11.1.545: REPORTING INOPERATIVE EQUIPMENT.
Members shall promptly report to their immediate Superior, on the appropriate forms, any defects or damage existing in any departmental equipment, vehicle, or property assigned to them or used by them.

 

§11.1.550: REPORTING ACCIDENTS.
Members shall immediately report on appropriate forms, all accidents, vehicle or other types, in which they are involved, in accordance with current department orders or procedures and the directives of the City of San Leandro. Written reports shall contain all material facts and statements concerning the incident. Any member who knowingly omits or falsifies a material fact or statement is guilty of gross misconduct.

 

§11.1.555: IN-SERVICE TRAINING REQUIRED.
All members of the department shall attend such In-Service Training courses as required by orders, memorandums, or directives issued by competent authority.

 

§11.1.560: BUSINESS CARDS.
No members shall use personal business cards bearing his department affiliation and rank, except as authorized by department directives.

 

§11.1.565: CORRESPONDENCE.
All official correspondence sent out of the department shall be over the name and title of the Chief of Police, except when directed by competent authority.

 

(a)       Method of Correspondence. Members shall not enter into correspondence concerning their official activities, except as provided by departmental procedures.

 

(b)       Nature of Correspondence. Members identifying themselves as employees of this department and on behalf of the department, a bureau, division or section thereby, shall not criticize through correspondence, the people, policies or operations of any public agency or private enterprise without the expressed consent of the Chief of Police.

 

(c)       Improper Use of Stationery. Members shall not use department stationery or forms for any purpose other than official business.

 

§11.1.570: SUBMISSION OF REPORTS.
Members shall promptly submit written reports as required and in conformance with departmental orders and procedures or the instructions of a Superior Officer.

 

§11.1.575: CARE OF DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES.
Members shall be held responsible for the proper care of department vehicles, property, equipment or supplies assigned to or used by them. Any member, who intentionally or by gross negligence causes the loss or damage of department property, equipment or supplies, may be subject to reimbursement charges and/or disciplinary action.

 

(a)       Reporting Loss/Theft of Departmental Property. Members shall promptly provide their immediate supervisor with a written report, regarding the loss or theft of any departmental property entrusted to them, and shall take every reasonable step to prevent such loss or theft.

 

(b)       Surrender of Department Property. Members shall surrender all department property issued to them or under their control, upon termination of employment with the department, as specified by General Order.

 

(c)       Private Use of Department Property. Members shall not temporarily or permanently convert any department property, equipment or supplies to their own private use or to that of any other person.

 

(d)       Use of Department Telephone. Members shall not use department telephone equipment for personal business, or transmission of personal messages, to the extent that it interferes with their official duties, and in no case will long distance or extra message unit personal calls be made without prior supervisory authorization.

 

 

ARTICLE 6 PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITIES
§11.1.600: CONDUCT TO BE CREDITABLE.
A position of public trust demands the highest degree of integrity and professional conduct. Members of the department shall so conduct themselves, on and off-duty, in a manner which does not bring discredit upon the department or the City or discredit or dishonor upon themselves. Conduct unbecoming a police officer is that conduct, in the mind of a reasonable person and taken in the context of the law enforcement community, which discredits or dishonors the police department or injures the professional reputation and morale of its members.

 

§11.1.605: CONDUCT TOWARD THE PUBLIC.
Members shall be courteous, compassionate, and civil to the public and to one another. They shall exercise patience and discretion in the performance of their duties. They shall not allow their personal prejudices, biases, or opinions to influence their official acts or decisions.

 

§11.1.610: DEPARTMENT SEMI-MILITARY ORGANIZATION.
The Police Department is a semi-military organization in operational and personnel procedures.

 

(a)       Title of Rank to be Used in Public. Members on duty, while in the presence of the public shall address command or supervisory officers by their title of rank.

 

(b)       Military Honors to National Colors. Officers in uniform shall at appropriate time, render full military honors to the National Colors and the National Anthem. Members in civilian dress shall render proper civilian honors to the National Colors and National Anthem.

 

§11.1.615: INTOXICANTS—REPORTING FOR DUTY.
Members shall not drink any alcoholic beverage prior to reporting for duty to the extent that on-duty performance is in any way impaired or that such consumption is in any way apparent.

 

(a)       Intoxication Examination. Members whose on-duty state of sobriety is questioned by competent authority shall, upon the order of a superior officer, submit to an intoxication examination which may include a chemical analysis of the member’s blood, breath or urine.

 

(b)       Intoxicants—Drinking on Duty. No member in uniform shall drink any alcoholic beverage while on duty. No officer in plain clothes shall drink any alcoholic beverages while on duty, except when necessary in the performance of duty.

 

(c)       Intoxicants—Drinking in Uniform. No member off duty and in uniform, or in any recognizable part of the uniform dress, shall drink any alcoholic beverage in public view or in any place accessible to the public.

 

(d)       Intoxicants on Duty. Members shall not bring into or keep any alcoholic beverage on departmental premises, or transport any alcoholic beverage in department vehicles, except in performance of their duty.

 

§11.1.620: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
Members shall not use any narcotics, hallucinogens, or any other controlled substances, except when legally prescribed.

 

(a)       Reporting Use of Controlled Substances. Members shall inform their supervisory officer prior to reporting for duty, whenever any controlled substance has been prescribed for their use, or whenever any substance whatsoever is used which might impair their ability to perform their assigned functions.

 

§11.1.625: USE OF TOBACCO.
Members shall not use tobacco when making initial contacts with the public. Members shall use good judgment and common courtesy when using tobacco in the presence or view of others.

 

§11.1.630: CONTROVERSIAL DISCUSSIONS.
No members shall, while on duty, engage in a political, religious, racial or other argument which is highly disruptive to the effectiveness or discipline in the department. Nothing herein shall be construed to inhibit the exercise of First Amendment rights.

 

§11.1.635: DESTRUCTIVE CRITICISM.
No member shall maliciously perform any action, or make any statement written or verbal for publication or any other reason which is vitriolic, defamatory, or highly disruptive in nature, and which tends to bring the department or its administrative officers into disrepute or ridicule; or which destructively criticizes the department or its administrative officers in the performance of their official duties; or which is highly disruptive of the effective performance of official duties and obligations of members of the department; or which tend to interfere with or subvert the reasonable supervision, proper discipline or good order of the department. Nothing herein shall be construed to inhibit the exercise of First Amendment rights.

 

(a)       Disrespectful Conduct. No member shall manifest disrespect or insolent, mutinous, or other insubordinate attitude or conduct towards a superior officer, either by action, speech or behavior.

 

§11.1.640: POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
With the exception of appearances before any local elective or appointive body, no member shall engage in political activity during working hours, and no member shall engage in political activities on the premises of the City of San Leandro. In all other respects, the political activities of members shall be governed by the provisions of Government Code Section 3201 and sections following.

 

§11.1.645: MEMBERSHIP IN ORGANIZATIONS.
Members shall not belong to, be affiliated with, or participate in the activities of any organization, association, society, or other group (except for the Armed Forces Reserve Components listed in the California Veterans Code), the constitution or by-laws of which in any require prior consideration to itself or prevents its members from rendering proper and efficient service to the department.

 

§11.1.650: COMMERCIAL TESTIMONIALS.
Members shall not permit the use of their photographs, names, or official titles for advertising purposes; or by testimonial, recommendation, or other means participate in any advertising scheme or enterprise related to or based upon their employment with the department, without the approval of the Chief of Police.

 

§11.1.655: FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS.
Financial distress may impair an individual’s effectiveness and tends to bring discredit upon the department. Employees should avoid incurring financial obligations which are beyond their ability to reasonably satisfy from their earnings.

 

§11.1.660: SHOPPING IN UNIFORM.
Members shall not shop or conduct personal business while dressed in the readily identifiable uniform of the police department, unless required to do so in the line of duty.

 

§11.1.665: READING WHILE ON DUTY.
Members in uniform shall not read newspapers, periodicals, books or other reading material, while on duty in public view, which would imply inattentiveness to duty, except in connection with official duties.

 

(a)       Members, whether in uniform or not, shall not, except during authorized meal or refreshment breaks, devote on-duty time to reading any material that is not reasonably related to their employment.

 

§11.1.670: USE OF POLICE CREDENTIALS AND BADGE.
No member of the department shall use another member’s badge, or identification card, or name tag, without the expressed approval of a command officer, nor shall any member knowingly permit another member to use his badge, identification card, or name tag without the expressed approval of a command officer.

 

(a)       Lending Police Credentials or Badge. No member shall knowingly permit any person not appointed to the San Leandro Police Department to use a department badge, identification card, or name tag at any time.

 

§11.1.675: OBEDIENCE TO ALL LAWFUL ORDERS.
Members shall obey all lawful orders and directions issued by a member of higher rank. Such obedience shall be prompt and efficient.

 

(a)       Insubordination. The intentional failure or deliberate refusal of any member to obey any lawful order or instruction given by a member of higher rank in the department shall be deemed insubordination. The intentional failure or deliberate refusal to do or perform any act required by these Rules and Regulations or department directives, or the commission of any act prohibited by these Rules and Regulations or department directives shall also be deemed insubordination. The flouting of the authority of any member of a higher rank by manifest disrespect or disputing his orders shall likewise be deemed insubordination.

§11.1.680: THE MANNER OF ISSUING ORDERS.
The issue of orders from superior to subordinate shall be in clear understandable language, civil in tone, oral or written, and issued in pursuit of department business.

 

(a)       Issue of Unlawful Orders Prohibited. No command or supervisory employee shall knowingly issue any order or instruction which is in violation of any law or ordinance or of department Rules and Regulations.

 

(b)       Criticism of Order or Instructions. No member shall publicly, derogatorily criticize or comment concerning instructions or orders, verbal or written, they may receive.

 

§11.1.685: CONFLICT OF ORDERS.
Should any lawful order or lawful instruction issued by a superior officer conflict with any such order or instruction issued previously by another superior or with any departmental order, the officer or employee to whom such order or instruction is given shall respectfully call attention to the conflict. If the superior officer, who issued such conflicting order or instruction, does not change it to eliminate the conflict, the order or instruction shall stand and the responsibility shall be the said superior officer’s.

 

§11.1.690: APPEALS FROM UNJUST ORDERS.
Members may appeal for relief from orders which are unjust. Appeals justifying relief from orders shall be made in writing through channels to the Chief of Police. Irresponsible or capricious appeals will be considered serious misconduct.

 

(a)       Obedience of Unlawful Orders Not Mandatory. The responsibility for criminal acts is that of the individual and cannot be delegated or directed to another. Therefore, no member is required to obey orders or instructions which are contrary to the laws of the United States, the State of California, or the ordinances of the City of San Leandro. However, should a member refuse to obey such an order or instruction, such refusal is his responsibility and he shall be strictly required to justify his actions.

 

(b)       Unjust Order to be Obeyed, Then Appealed. Whenever a member receives an order or instruction that he feels to be contrary to Rules and Regulations, Department Operations Directives or Special Orders, he shall first obey such order or instruction to the best of his ability and may then proceed to appeal for relief as provided by §11.1.690.

 

§11.1.695: WORK STOPPAGE OR OBSTRUCTION.
No member shall engage in any strike, work stoppage, slowdown or abstention from duty, in whole or in part which detracts from the full, faithful and proper performance of his assigned duties and responsibilities.

 

§11.1.696: USING DEPARTMENT ADDRESS.
Members, except when provided by law, shall not use the department as a mailing address for non-service-oriented business.

 

ARTICLE 7 DUTY RESPONSIBILITY
§11.1.700: MEMBERS ALWAYS SUBJECT TO DUTY.
Members of the department shall always be subject to duty, including even those periods normally considered to be off-duty hours or rest days. In an emergency or under any unusual circumstances, a Command or Supervisory member may order a member to report for duty or remain on duty.

 

(a)       Duty Calls for Emergencies and Unusual Circumstances. Members off duty shall report for duty immediately upon receipt of and in compliance with the directions given them at the time of notification.

 

(b)       Reporting Without Notification. Members shall report without notification in the event of a major disaster, or any other emergency wherein it would reasonably be expected that the department would require the additional services of all members. If in doubt, members shall call the department to report their readiness and state their location.

 

§11.1.705: REPORTING FOR DUTY.
All members shall report for duty at the time and place, in the attire, and with the equipment specified by departmental orders or the orders of a Superior in rank, unless their absence is authorized by competent authority.

 

§11.1.710: REMAINING ON DUTY UNTIL RELIEVED.
All members shall remain at their assigned duties until the completion of their tour of duty; or until officially dismissed by someone superior in rank.

 

§11.1.715: SLEEPING ON DUTY.
Members shall remain awake, alert, and productive during the time they are on duty.

 

(a)       Member’s Responsibility. It shall be the member’s responsibility to notify his supervisor if he becomes overly fatigued or ill while on duty. Said supervisor shall evaluate the member’s reported distress and take measures appropriate to the situation.

 

§11.1.720: LUNCH OR REFRESHMENTS ON DUTY.
Members may suspend their duties, circumstances permitting, for a lunch period of authorized duration, unless otherwise directed by their Supervisor. Members may also suspend their duties, circumstances permitting, for refreshments for not more than fifteen minutes; once during the first half of their tour of duty, and once during the last half of their tour of duty. Such lunch and refreshment periods shall be subject to the inspection of a supervisor.

 

(a)       Discretion Regarding Meal/Refreshment Breaks. Members shall take meal and refreshment breaks in accordance with department procedures, and shall avoid congregating in such numbers, or under such circumstances as would tend to suggest to the public an inattentiveness to duty.

 

§11.1.725: COMMUNICATIONS DURING DUTY.
Members on duty, or when officially on call, shall be directly available by normal means of communications; or shall keep their office, headquarters, or Superior Officer informed of the means by which they may be reached when they are not immediately available.

 

(a)       Radio Communications. Members assigned to duties which normally maintain ongoing radio contact with headquarters shall not leave their vehicle or post without first advising headquarters of their location and intentions and receiving permission to do so, unless the urgency of the task precludes such prior notification.

 

§11.1.730: SERVICE REQUIREMENTS OFF DUTY.
Any member who observes, or has called to his attention, any situation wherein the department should take action, shall, as soon as is practical, notify department headquarters. He shall give his name, rank, the facts of the situation, and what action, if any, the member is taking.

 

(a)       Off-Duty Officers Performing Police Service. Officers off duty shall perform necessary police services whenever and wherever they are aware of a serious criminal offense or a present threat to life (830.1 Penal Code).

 

§11.1.735: PROMPT ATTENTION TO CALLS.
All members shall respond appropriately and without unnecessary delay to all calls for police or police-related assistance from the public or other officers or employees. While emergency calls take precedence, all calls shall be answered as soon as practicable, consistent with normal safety precautions.

 

(a)       Regard for Public Safety During Emergency Response. Although a member may be directed to, or may decide, based on the circumstances, to respond in an emergency mode under red lights and siren, said member shall respond with all due regard and caution for the safety of himself, and other motorists and pedestrians (21056 California Vehicle Code).

 

§11.1.740: MEMBERS AVAILABLE FOR DUTY.
All members of the department shall keep themselves readily available to the public at all times when on duty, except when concealment is a necessary police tactic or purpose.

 

§11.1.745: REPORTING ILLNESS OR INJURY.
Every member who is injured, whether on or off duty, or who becomes ill, shall promptly make such reports, or cause such reports to be made, as are required by Civil Service Regulations and department directives of instructions. In the case of serious illness or injury, such reports shall be made as soon as is practicable. (Reference Civil Service Rule XI - Section 2E and Operations Directives 84-1.)

 

§11.1.750: ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE.
No member shall be absent from his assigned duties without authorized leave. “Absence without leave,” is herein defined as a willful failure of a member to appear for or remain on duty at the date, time, and place specified by the member’s Supervisor to the Commanding Officer of the Unit to which the absent member is assigned.

 

§11.1.755: PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FITNESS.
All members shall maintain themselves in such physical condition and such mental attitude as will allow them to cope effectively with their assigned duties.

 

(a)       Standards and Evaluations. Members shall submit to such testing as may be prescribed by the department to measure and evaluate their physical and mental fitness for duty, and shall adhere to such fitness standards as may be adopted by the department.

 

§11.1.760: INCOMPETENCY.
General or persistent incompetency shall be grounds for dismissal. Incompetence as herein used shall mean that the members lack adequate ability, knowledge, or fitness to satisfactorily perform the duties which are within the scope of the member’s employment.

 

(a)       Incompetency may be evidenced by continued substandard performance of duty or the inability to meet and maintain performance standards following reasonable remedial or corrective measures instituted by the department.

 

(b)       Incompetency shall specifically include the inability or failure to assimilate and/or apply the laws, ordinances, and legal concepts which form the framework within which the peace officer functions.

 

§11.1.765: INEFFICIENCY.
General or persistent inefficiency shall be grounds for disciplinary action. Inefficiency as used herein shall mean that the member’s performance of work results in performance lower than that which is typically expected of a similar employee in a similar position.

 

§11.1.770: LOITERING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
Members, while in uniform, or on duty, shall not enter restaurants, taverns, theaters, or other public places, except in performance of duty or while on authorized rest breaks. Meals taken in public places should be eaten within the time limit defined in these Rules, and in public view.

 

§11.1.775: LEAVING ASSIGNED AREA WITHOUT PERMISSION.
An officer on duty as a patrol officer shall stay within the general confines of his assigned area. He shall not leave his assigned area without authorization, except when assigned or ordered in pursuit of official duty.

 

§11.1.780: PROTECTING CRIME SCENE.
It shall be the duty of all officers of the department when assigned to or assuming control at a crime scene, to keep the premises or area secure from intrusion by unauthorized persons and maintain it without change in appearance or character; to obtain witnesses for interview; and where lawful and practical, to arrest the responsible person or persons.

 

ARTICLE 8 UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS
§11.1.800: POSSESSION OF UNIFORM.
All members shall own and maintain in good order all uniform and equipment required by the Uniform and Equipment regulations of the Department.

 

(a)       Uniform and Equipment to Conform to Specifications. No member on duty shall wear any uniform or equipment or portion thereof, which does not conform with the Uniform and Equipment Regulations of the San Leandro Police Department.

 

(b)       Maintenance of Uniform and Equipment. Members shall maintain their uniforms and equipment in serviceable condition. Uniform shall be clean and pressed, and shall not be noticeably patched or worn. All shoes, leather, and metal equipment shall be polished.

 

(c)       Specifications for Uniforms and Equipment. Specifications for uniforms and equipment will be found in San Leandro Police Department Operations Directives 88-07 and 94-04.

 

§11.1.805: DISPLAY OF FIREARMS.
Officers shall not unnecessarily display their firearms in any public place, or carelessly handle a firearm at any time or place.

 

(a)       Discharge of Firearms. No officer shall discharge a firearm under any circumstances, except in connection with official law enforcement duties, and as authorized by department orders and regulations.

 

(b)       Reporting Discharge of Firearm. Any officer who discharges any firearm accidentally or intentionally, except during routine target practice, or discharges any chemical gas, shell or projectile, shall immediately notify his Superior Officer. He shall submit a written report to his Bureau Commander, through proper channels, as soon as is practical.

 

(c)       Use of Weapons or Chemicals. Officers shall not take into the field or use weapons not otherwise authorized by the department, including, but not limited to, submachine guns, rifles, or other chemical agents or weapons, except with the approval of a Command Officer or in strict accordance with departmental policy. The use of such weapons shall be under the direct supervision of a Command Officer or such officer of the department designated by the Command Officer. Aerosol chemical agents routinely carried by individual members are excluded from this rule.

 

§11.1.810: STORAGE OF WEAPON IN HEADQUARTERS.
No member shall store or place any type of firearm in the police headquarters building or surrounding area, unless the place of storage is secure, and is kept locked when unattended.

 

(a)       Locked Storage Areas. Personal lockers and departmental storage areas where firearms, all other weapons, and department property are stored, shall be kept locked when unattended.

 

§11.1.815: SELLING FIREARMS.
Officers shall not knowingly give, lend or sell any firearm to any person who does not have the legal right to possess such firearm.

 

§11.1.820: REPORT OF SERVICE FIREARMS.
All officers shall file a report with the Chief of Police listing the serial number, manufacturer, and model of all concealable firearms carried by such officer, whether on or off duty. A similar report shall be made of the handcuffs owned by officers.

 

(a)       Reporting Loss of Firearms or Handcuffs. Any loss of a service firearm of handcuffs owned by or issued to officers shall be reported in writing immediately, giving full details of the loss. Such report shall be filed with the superior of the reporting officer.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1982.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§11.1.216, 11.1.221, 11.1.425(b), 11.1.800(c)]

Chapter 2 Access to Records
§11.2.100: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
These regulations are intended to implement the provisions of §6250 et seq., of the Government Code (hereinafter referred to as the “Public Records Act” or “Act”). The authority for these regulations is contained in §6253 of the Act.

 

§11.2.105: PROHIBITED DISCLOSURE OF RESTRICTED OR CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Act, the following records shall not be released to any person except persons authorized by San Leandro Police Department Operations Directive 87-24, these rules, Section 4-1-800 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, the City Manager and City Attorney.

 

(a)       Internal Affairs complaints and investigatory reports;

 

(b)       CORPUS, CORI (as defined in Operations Directive 87-24);

 

(c)       Juvenile records;

 

(d)       Investigatory reports prepared at the request of the City Attorney and any records pertaining to pending or actual litigation;

 

(e)       Any record exempted from disclosure by the Act.

 

§11.2.110: DISCRETIONARY DISCLOSURE OF CERTAIN RECORDS.
Upon request and payment of fees therefore, the Department may release the following records whenever it determines that the disclosure of any record or information contained in a record would not endanger the safety of a person involved in an investigation or would not endanger the successful completion of an investigation or a related investigation:

 

(a)       Accident reports (routinely released following Police Department investigation);

 

(b)       Offense reports (subject to review prior to release);

 

(c)       Arrest reports (subject to review prior to release);

 

(d)       Incident reports (subject to review prior to release).

 

§11.2.115: NONDISCLOSURE OF VICTIM’S ADDRESS FOR SPECIFIED OFFENSES.
In no instance shall the address of the victim of any crime defined by Sections 261, 264, 264.1, 273a, 273d, 286, 288, 288a, or 289 of the Penal Code be disclosed.

 

§11.2.120: TIME FOR DETERMINATION TO RELEASE RECORDS.
Upon request therefore the Department shall have ten (10) days to determine whether to release the records specified in §11.2.110. A short statement of reasons shall accompany a denial of access to records. Time for determination may be extended as provided in Section 6256.1 of the Act.

 

§11.2.125: TIME, PLACE AND MANNER OF REQUEST/PAYMENT OF FEES.
Except for accident reports and other data routinely released upon request, any requests for records pursuant to §11.2.110 shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Department, Monday through Friday, between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., in person at the Public Safety Building in the San Leandro Civic Center. The fee for any record shall be established by the City Council and shall be paid prior to disclosure of records.

 

§11.2.130: SUMMARY OR COMPILATION NOT REQUIRED.
Nothing contained in these rules shall require the Department to summarize, abstract, censor, compile or abbreviate any information contained in disparate records for purposes of complying with a request for disclosure of records.

 

§11.2.135: {RESERVED}.
 

§11.2.140: DESTRUCTION OF RECORDINGS.
Pursuant to Government Code §34090.6 and Resolution No. 98-16, the Chief of Police or his designated representative is authorized to cause the ongoing destruction of routine daily taping and recording of telephone communications to and from the Police Department and all radio communications relating to the operations of the Police Department which are older than 100 days and whose retention is no longer required as evidence in any claim filed or any pending litigation. The City Attorney has given written consent for the ongoing destruction of such recordings.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1982.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§11.2.105, 11.2.135, 11.2.140]

Chapter 3 Reserve Officers Rules and Regulations
ARTICLE 1 AUTHORIZATION
§11.3.100: RESERVE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
These Police Reserves Rules and Regulations (hereinafter referred to as regulations) are adopted as a supplement to the Police Rules and Regulations contained in Chapter 1 of this Title. In the event of a conflict, the Police Rules and Regulations take precedence.

 

ARTICLE 2 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
§11.3.200: ORGANIZATION.
The Police Reserve unit is an organizational unit of the Patrol Division of the San Leandro Police Department. The Police Reserve unit is under the command of the Patrol Division Lieutenants, one of which shall serve as Program Manager. The Program Manager shall appoint a Sergeant assigned to the Patrol Division to serve as the Reserve Unit Coordinator.

 

§11.3.205: PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Reserve organization is to assist the police department in carrying out its duties and responsibilities.

 

§11.3.210: AUTHORITY.
Members of the Police Reserve shall attain all the responsibilities of a regular police officer during an emergency, or while in the performance of, or training for, those functions or duties authorized by the proper authority.

 

(a)       The above applies only after a Reserve Officer has reported for duty at the police station, and is considered to be on-duty by the Watch Commander, Patrol Sergeant, or other person in charge. On-duty status terminates at the conclusion of the Reserve Officer’s tour of duty.

 

ARTICLE 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§11.3.300: MINIMUM SELECTION STANDARDS DESIGNATED BY POST.
The minimum selection standards for a Police Reserve Officer in the State of California are designated by the POST (Police Officers Standards and Training) Administrative Manual.

 

(a)       A Reserve Officer must never have been convicted of a felony.

 

(b)       A Reserve Officer must be fingerprinted, and classifiable prints must be submitted to the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

 

(c)       A Reserve Officer must be:

 

(1)       A citizen of the United States.

 

(2)       At least 18 years old.

 

(3)       Fingerprinted (as described above).

 

(4)       Of good moral character, as determined by a thorough background investigation.

 

(5)       A high school graduate, or pass the G.E.D.

 

(6)       Found, after examination by a licensed physician or surgeon, to be free from physical, emotional or mental conditions which might adversely affect his exercise of service as a police officer.

 

(d)       Prior to appointment each Reserve must be interviewed by the Department Head or his representative.

 

§11.3.305: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT.
 

(a)       In addition to the requirements designated in the POST Administrative Manual, a Reserve must successfully complete each of the following:

 

(1)       An oral board examination.

 

(2)       A physical agility examination.

 

(3)       Module A, B1 and B2 necessary for appointment to Level 2 Reserve Officer as defined in Section 832 P.C.

 

(4)       A polygraph examination.

 

(5)       A psychiatric examination.

 

(b)       The guidelines to be used in the selection process based upon these requirements will be determined by the Reserve Program Manager.

 

§11.3.310: TELEPHONE.
A Reserve Officer must have and maintain a telephone.

 

§11.3.315: DRIVERS LICENSE.
A Reserve Officer must possess a valid California Drivers License.

 

§11.3.320: FIRST AID CERTIFICATE AND CPR CARD.
A Reserve Officer must possess a valid Basic First Aid Certificate and a valid CPR card.

 

ARTICLE 4 ORGANIZATION, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE POLICE RESERVES
§11.3.400: AUTHORIZED STRENGTH.
The total authorized strength of the Reserve Unit varies as authorized by the City Council, and generally, includes a Reserve Lieutenant, seven (7) Reserve Sergeants, and a complement of Reserve Police Officers.

 

§11.3.405: DUTIES OF THE RESERVE LIEUTENANT.
 

(a)       A Police Reserve Lieutenant shall coordinate the activities of the Unit under the direction of the Patrol Commander and Reserve Coordinator. The Reserve Lieutenant is appointed by the Chief of Police upon recommendation of the Program Manager and the Reserve Coordinator.

 

(b)       The Reserve Lieutenant shall carry out the orders that are delegated to the Reserve Unit by the Patrol Division Commander or Coordinator.

 

(c)       The Reserve Lieutenant shall see that the Reserve Sergeants and Officers maintain a high degree of efficiency, integrity and responsibility.

 

(d)       The Reserve Lieutenant shall conduct all meeting and generally supervise all Reserve activities.

 

(e)       The Reserve Lieutenant may, with the approval of the Patrol Division Commander and the Coordinator, make changes in the staff, when it is deemed necessary for benefit of the organization.

 

(f)        The Reserve Lieutenant shall delegate authority to Reserve Sergeants to carry out the objectives of the department and the Reserve Unit.

 

(g)       The Reserve Lieutenant shall see that all members of the organization have knowledge of, and adhere to, the rules and regulations governing the Police Reserve Unit.

 

§11.3.410: DUTIES OF RESERVE SERGEANTS.
 

(a)       There will be seven (7) Reserve Sergeants, one (1) Sergeant in charge of a squad of Reserves each night of the week. These Sergeants are appointed by the Reserve Lieutenant with the approval of the Program Manager and Reserve Coordinator.

 

(b)       The Reserve Sergeants shall be selected and appointed according to ability, interest, availability and willingness to accept responsibility, as determined by the Reserve Lieutenant, Patrol Commander and Coordinator. A Reserve Sergeant must be a Level I Reserve Officer (Refer to §11.3.425).

 

(c)       In addition to their line responsibilities as squad leaders, the Reserve Sergeants shall also have staff responsibilities in the area of supplies and equipment, attendance and records, processing of new applications, planning and training or other such areas designated by the Coordinator.

 

(d)       When acting as squad leader, the Reserve Sergeant shall be responsible for Reserve Officers reporting on time and properly assigning the officers.

 

(e)       The Reserve Sergeant shall see that the officers are in proper uniform and are properly groomed in accordance with the Uniform Rules and Regulations of the department.

 

(f)        The Reserve Sergeant shall assign officers to work details and special assignments.

 

(g)       The Reserve Sergeant shall see that pertinent information is disseminated to the Reserve Officers.

 

(h)       The Reserve Sergeant shall forward to the Reserve Lieutenant and/or Coordinator, notice of any violation of Departmental or Reserve rules and regulations committed by any Reserve Officer.

 

(i)        The Reserve Sergeant shall forward through the chain of command any requests, needs, problems of Reserve Officers of his squad.

 

§11.3.415:       DUTIES OF RESERVE OFFICERS.

 

(a)       All members will familiarize themselves with, conform to, abide by the San Leandro Police Department Operations Directives, Special Orders, Rules and Regulations.

 

(b)       In addition, all Reserve Officers will be familiar with, conform to, and abide by the rules and regulations of the Police Reserve Organization.

 

(c)       It will be the responsibility of the Reserve Officer to carry out the lawful orders of the superior officers of the Police Reserve Unit, the Reserve Coordinator, and all regular officers of the department.

 

(d)       The primary duty of the Reserve Officer is to assist the regular officers of the department in the performance of their duties. The Reserve Officer is, at all times, subordinate to the regular officer.

 

(e)       All Reserve Officers will be assigned a “ride night.” The Reserve Officer will report for line-up training at either swing shift or “B” shift on that ride night. The Patrol Sergeant and Reserve Sergeant will make assignments (which may include assignments other than patrol duty) consistent with POST requirements for Level I and Level II Reserve Officers.

 

(1)       The transport van will be of primary concern when assignments are made.

(2)       Each Reserve Officer reporting for duty at any time other than “B” shift, will notify the Reserve Sergeant scheduled for duty via the green log sheet.

 

(3)       A Reserve Officer may ride additional nights as long as permission is received from the Reserve Coordinator or Patrol Sergeant.

 

(4)       Reserve Officers may ride on day shift or midnight shift only with the approval of the Reserve Coordinator.

 

(f)        When reporting for duty, the Reserve Officer will be properly attired and neatly groomed in accordance with departmental Operations Directive and departmental Uniform Specifications.

 

(g)       It will be the responsibility of each Reserve Officer to:

 

(1)       Maintain a uniform.

 

(2)       Maintain all issued equipment.

 

(3)       Maintain a locker in a secure manner with a lock.

 

(h)       If a uniform item is rendered unserviceable, the Reserve Officer will notify the supply sergeant for replacement.

 

(i)        If any departmental equipment becomes lost or stolen, it shall be immediately reported to the Reserve Sergeant in writing. The Reserve Sergeant shall notify the Reserve Coordinator as soon as possible.

 

(j)        While on patrol with a regular officer, Reserve Officers will observe and assist when necessary. They will follow the regular officer’s directions at all time. The Reserve Officer will:

 

(1)       Not use the car radio unless specifically requested to do so by the regular officer. Be familiar with the numerical radio code and keep communications brief and concise. Use the radio in accordance with the departmental Radio Procedure Manual.

 

(2)       If the regular officer requests it, keep an accurate log of activity, time, address, nature of call, arrival time and departure time.

 

(3)       Not interrupt interrogations or volunteer information to subjects. If there is something the Reserve Officer feels is important to the situation, it should be communicated to the regular officer in a confidential manner away from the general public.

 

(4)       Be aware that all records, communications and incidents pertaining to the police department are confidential and not to be discussed outside the department.

 

(k)       Each Reserve Officer shall, as soon as possible, and in no case later than three (3) days, notify his squad leader and the Coordinator of any change in address or telephone number.

 

(l)        Reserve Officers shall not use the police station to loiter or congregate, except in conjunction with a pending assignment or upon the occasion of a bona fide meeting.

 

(m)      A Reserve Officer shall not use his position, his badge, or his identification card to gain special consideration to obtain credit for himself or others, or to gain free admission, discount or any gratuities.

 

§11.3.420: NEW RESERVE OFFICER.
Upon appointment, a new Reserve Officer shall be assigned to a Reserve Field Training Officer for a minimum of 200 hours, to meet POST requirements. While in training the Reserve Officer shall ride only with the assigned Field Training Officer, except as otherwise directed by the Patrol Sergeant, Reserve Coordinator, or Program Manager.

 

New Reserve Officers must qualify with the regulation sidearm and shotgun prior to riding.

 

§11.3.425: LEVEL I AND LEVEL II CLASSIFICATIONS.
The minimum requirements for Level I and Level II designations are listed below. Any Level II Officer who has completed the minimum requirements and wishes to attain Level I status, should advise the Reserve Coordinator in writing. The Reserve Coordinator will then determine whether or not the officer has met the minimum requirements for Level I status, and if the Reserve Officer’s record is consistent with the responsibilities given Level I officers.

 

(a)       POST Requirements for Non-Designated Level I. Reserve Officers must have achieved the minimum training requirements as defined in POST Administration Manual Section H-1-2(a). Prior to being assigned to duties, which include the exercise of police officer powers, Level I Reserve Officers shall satisfactorily complete training requirements of the Regular Basic Course or its equivalents (POST Administrative Manual Section D-1-3).

 

(b)       POST Requirements for Level II. Reserve Officers must have achieved the minimum training requirements as defined in POST Administration Manual Section H-1-2(b). Prior to being assigned to duties, which include the exercise of police officer powers, Level II Reserve Officers shall satisfactorily complete the POST-certified two-part Reserve Level III Module and the Level II Module (POST Administrative Manual Section D-1-3).

 

(c)       New Level I Officers. New Level I Officers will be assigned to ride with a senior Level I Officer for 40 hours of training.

 

ARTICLE 5 MINIMUM DUTY REQUIREMENTS AND ASSIGNMENTS
§11.3.500: MINIMUM ATTENDANCE STANDARDS.
Of the fifty-two (52) weeks in a year, a Reserve Officer may miss no more than eight (8) scheduled ride nights. Of these, no more than three (3) may be unexcused. The hourly requirement is a minimum of twenty (20) hours per month or two-hundred and forty (240) hours per year. The hourly minimum does not exclude the maximum allowable number of ride nights missed.

 

(a)       An unexcused absence occurs when a Reserve Officer does not notify his Reserve Sergeant, the Patrol Sergeant or the communications center (in that order) that he/she will be unable to ride as scheduled.

 

(b)       If a Reserve Officer knows in advance that he/she will be unable to ride on their scheduled night, he/she may arrange for another Reserve Officer to act as a replacement with no penalty. The Reserve Officer actually reporting for duty must notify the Reserve Sergeant who he/she is replacing.

 

§11.3.505: MINIMUM TRAINING STANDARDS.
A Reserve Officer may miss no more than three (3) of the twelve (12) monthly training meetings which are scheduled for the last Thursday of each month.

 

§11.3.510: MINIMUM EXTRA DUTY ASSIGNMENTS (SPECIAL DETAILS).
Part of the Reserve function is to assist the department with other tasks such as parades, ball games and other special details as they arise.

 

(a)       The Reserve Coordinator will appoint a Special Details Sergeant from the Reserve staff. The Special Details Sergeant will assign Reserve Officers to special details on a rotating basis from the Reserve roster. As much advance notice as is possible, will be given. Once the assignment is made, it is the responsibility of the assigned Reserve Officer to see that the detail is handled. If for some reason the assigned Reserve Officer is unable to fulfill the responsibility of the detail, a replacement officer must be found and the Special Details Sergeant notified. A Reserve Officer may turn down no more than two (2) special detail assignments per year.

 

§11.3.515: {RESERVED}.
 

Legislative History: Repealed by Order 5/83

 

§11.3.520: EQUIPMENT AND UNIFORMS.
 

(a)       The department will furnish each Reserve Officer with regularly issued uniforms and equipment.

 

(b)       The department shall pay for cleaning and alterations of uniforms and shall replace those items issued which become unserviceable. Each Reserve Officer will be allowed one (1) uniform per month to be cleaned at expense of the San Leandro Police Department. Reserve Sergeant approval is necessary if additional cleaning is required.

 

(c)       A Reserve Officer shall not wear any part of the uniform off-duty, except that the badge and/or identification card may be carried.

(d)       A Reserve Officer shall report in writing any damage to his uniform or lost or stolen equipment, immediately to the Reserve Sergeant who, in turn, shall notify the Coordinator as soon as practical.

 

(e)       All police property issued to the Reserve Officer shall be returned promptly to the department upon the resignation or termination of a Reserve Officer.

 

§11.3.525: FIREARMS.
Reserve Officers shall follow the San Leandro Police Department Operations Directive 88-07 regarding uniform regulations. Any Reserve Officer disregarding this regulation is subject to immediate dismissal and criminal charges.

 

§11.3.530: USE OF CHEMICAL AGENTS AND THE BATON.
 

(a)       Only personnel who have successfully completed the approved chemical training course will be allowed to carry chemical agents.

 

(b)       Chemical agents shall not be used as follows:

 

(1)       On a subject already under restraint

 

(2)       As punishment

 

§11.3.535: PRISONER TRANSPORT.
Since Reserve Officers are frequently called upon to transport prisoners, a thorough understanding of the proper procedures to be utilized when carrying out this important function is necessary.

 

(a)       The transporting vehicle will be carefully searched before and again immediately after a prisoner transport, for possible contraband, which, if found, will be turned over to the arresting officer who may request a written report explaining the circumstances.

 

(b)       Subjects will be searched before they are placed in the police unit for transport, and shall be handcuffed behind the back.

 

(c)       If the transporting vehicle is not equipped with a diving protective screen or glass, the second officer should sit behind the driver with the prisoner on his right.

 

(d)       It is the responsibility of the transporting Reserve Officer to complete the arrest report for any prisoner transported to the San Leandro jail.

 

(e)       When going to another jurisdiction for a prisoner pickup, in addition to the above, four (4) additional procedures should be followed.

 

(1)       Even though the prisoner being picked up may have been in custody for some time, search the prisoner carefully before handcuffing.

(2)       If the prisoner has property, sign for it after an inventory and give the prisoner a new receipt upon booking at San Leandro.

 

(3)       Prior to departure, telephone the arresting agency to confirm that the arrestee is still in custody and ready for pickup.

 

(4)       Coordinate the transportation detail with the Patrol Sergeant.

 

§11.3.540: EMERGENCY VEHICLE OPERATION.
 

(a)       Although Reserve Officers drive police vehicles equipped with emergency response equipment, they shall refrain from driving Code 3 or in any manner which violates traffic laws unless specified below:

 

(1)       Code 3 responses shall be limited to those situations where the Reserve Officer is assigned to drive Code 3 by the watch commander, patrol sergeant, regular officer, or Communications Center.

 

(b)       Reserve Officers shall not become involved in pursuit operations unless so assigned by a Watch Commander, Patrol Sergeant, or Communications Center.

 

(c)       At all time obey all traffic laws. Remember, the public views your actions as those of the department. Drive only in a manner which will bring credit upon the department.

 

(d)       Vehicles will be searched thoroughly at the beginning and end of each shift worked, and again after each prisoner transport.

 

§11.3.545: TRAFFIC STOPS.
Reserve Officers shall avoid making traffic stops unless one (1) of the following circumstances exists:

 

(a)       A serious traffic violation occurs in their presence.

 

(b)       They on-view a criminal offense.

 

(c)       They are so directed by any regular officer.

 

§11.3.550: SCHOOL AND PARK PATROL.
Reserve Officers assigned to “R” units shall patrol the schools and parks when not engaged in prisoner transports or other assigned details.

 

(a)       Schools and park buildings shall be checked on foot, Code 10.

 

(b)       As many schools and parks as possible should be checked and logged.

 

§11.3.555: SUBPOENA SERVICE.
It is the responsibility of the on-duty reserve sergeant to distribute civilian subpoenas for service. Service or attempted service shall be documented on the blue subpoena service form.

 

§11.3.560: RESPONSIBILITIES OF RESERVE OFFICERS.
Level I Reserves, while working patrol division assignments, shall be primarily responsible for manning the transport van. Their duty assignment, in descending order of importance, shall consist of prisoner transports, school and park patrol, civilian subpoena service, and assisting regular officers as assigned. Level II Reserves will only be assigned to ride with regular officers, unless otherwise assigned by the watch commander or patrol sergeant.

 

ARTICLE 6 LEAVES OF ABSENCE, SUSPENSION, AND TERMINATION
§11.3.600: LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
If an extended leave of absence (more than a month) is needed, a request shall be made in writing. If approved, the reserve shall turn in his badge and identification card to his sergeant. These items will be returned upon his return to service.

 

(a)       If the absence will extend past a three (3) month period, a resignation will be requested. The reserve shall turn in all issued uniforms and equipment. The Reserve Officer may then reapply for admission to the Reserve Unit at such time he feels he may again meet the requirements and may be accepted if there are openings in the organization at that time.

 

(b)       Not more than one (1) leave of absence may be requested a year.

 

§11.3.605: TERMINATION OF SERVICES.
Reserve officers serve at the absolute pleasure of the Chief of Police and have no right whatsoever to continued service in such position. The Chief of Police may, at any time, with or without cause, and in his sole discretion, determine, with respect to any person otherwise qualified to act in the capacity of reserve officer, that such person shall no longer be called upon to render services to the City in such capacity.

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1982.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§11.3.300, 11.3.425, 11.3.525]

Chapter 4 Abatement of Weeds and Grass
§11.4.100: SCOPE.
This Chapter specifies the height limitations for weeds and grass on vacant lots and grass on improved property for purposes of Title 3, Chapter 2 of the San Leandro Municipal Code. Except as provided herein there are no height or other limitations applicable before abatement can be required under Title 3, Chapter 2.

 

§11.4.105: VACANT LOTS.
When weeds or grass on vacant lots reach a height of eighteen inches (18″) or more they will be subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of San Leandro Municipal Code, Title 3, Chapter 2.

 

§11.4.110: IMPROVED PROPERTY.
When grass on improved property reaches a height of eighteen inches (18″) or more, it will be subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of San Leandro Municipal Code, Title 3, Chapter 2.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 7, Public Works: Abatement of Weeds and Grass, was editorially renumbered to be Title 11, Chapter 4, Police: Abatement of Weeds and Grass, during the 2005-06 republication. Former Title 12, Chapter 7 was first codified administratively in 1982.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§§11.4.100-11.4.110]

TITLE 12 PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Chapter 2 {Reserved}
Chapter 3 {Reserved}
Chapter 4 {Reserved}
Chapter 5 Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations
Chapter 6 {Reserved}
Chapter 7 {Reserved}
Chapter 8 Street Tree Policy and Procedure
Chapter 9 {Reserved}
Chapter 10 {Reserved}
Chapter 11 {Reserved}
Chapter 12 {Reserved}
Chapter 13 {Reserved}
Chapter 14 {Reserved}
Chapter 15 {Reserved}

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 1, Public Works: Garbage and Other Waste, was removed during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 2 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 2, Public Works: Fireworks Stand Permit, was repealed and moved to Title 4, Chapter 2, City Clerk: Fireworks Stand Permit, by Resolution No. 84-241, 12/17/1984.

Chapter 3 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

This chapter was reserved for Subdivision.

Chapter 4 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 4, Public Works: Displays Within the Public Right-of-Way, was consolidated with Title 1, Chapter 8, City Manager: Banner Policy, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 5 Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations
§12.5.100: DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions and the definitions contained in Title 3, Chapter 14 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

 

(a)       Accessory Dwelling Unit. An Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) is a secondary dwelling unit built on a parcel with an existing Single-Family Dwelling with complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. An ADU can take three forms: detached structure, attached structure, repurposed existing space. For the purposes of this Code, there can be only one ADU per parcel, and the existence of an ADU does not change the status of the Single-Family Dwelling. If more than one ADU is created on the lot, all ADUs convert to Single-Family Dwellings.

 

(b)       Billable Parameters. Those parameters (i.e., flow, BOD, SS, Volume, I/I) for which the treatment works is designed to treat and for which average user charge unit costs of service are calculated.

 

(c)       BOD. The biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is a laboratory test in which standardized procedures are used to determine the oxygen requirements of wastewater. The BOD test measures the oxygen required for the biochemical degradation of organic material. The test results represent the average BOD strength of wastewater discharged during a given period.

 

(d)       Capacity Rights. The flow, BOD and SS capacity purchase by a user upon obtaining a connection permit, or, if such data are not available, the peak month loadings of a user during the past five fiscal years or some prior year when it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Manager that some prior year’s peak month loadings are more representative of a user’s use of the wastewater system than occurred over the five year period.

 

(e)       Commercial User. Any non-residential user, including business activity that is not otherwise classified, and that the Manager determines introduces into the sanitary sewer system primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

 

(f)        Compliance User. An industrial user which is monitored to determine compliance with both the Federal regulations of the Clean Water Act and the City’s local wastewater discharge ordinance.

 

(g)       Industrial User. Any non-residential user who discharges industrial wastes and is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987, Office of Management and Budget, as now or hereafter amended or supplemented under, but not limited to, the following division:

 

(1)       Division A. Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing.

 

(2)       Division B. Mining.

 

(3)       Division C. Manufacturing.

 

(4)       Division E. Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services.

 

(5)       Division I. Services.

 

(h)       Industrial Wastes. The wastes from industrial processes.

 

(i)        Institutional Users. Schools, hospitals, and government facilities.

 

(j)        Flow. The volume of wastewater occurring over time.

 

(k)       Large User. An industrial user or a non-residential user discharging industrial quantities of flow, BOD, and/or Suspended Solids as determined by the Manager.

 

(l)        Manager. The San Leandro City Manager or designee.

 

(m)      MGD. Million gallons per day.

 

(n)       Multiple-Family Dwelling Unit. Any residential unit designed to house one family in a building containing more than two such units, including triplexes, quadplexes, and apartments. For the purpose of this Code, mobile homes located in a mobile home park shall be considered multiple-family dwellings.

 

(o)       Normal Work Days. Except as provided below, normal work days shall be defined as the normal 5-day work week of Monday through Friday less holidays. For User’s normal work days to exceed 5 days a week, the flow from the sixth and/or seventh day must approximate the average daily flow of the 5-day work week.

 

(p)       Residential Discharge Equivalency. A unit of discharge equal in volume and strength to the design discharge of a single-family dwelling unit, as determined in the most recent rate study.

 

(q)       Residential User. Any user introducing into the sewerage system domestic wastes from single-family, accessory or multiple-family dwellings.

 

(r)        Schools. Any public or private institutions of learning that introduce into the City’s sewerage system primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

 

(s)        Service User. An industrial user or a non-residential user whose wastewater discharge is monitored in order to determine flow, BOD, and/or SS.

 

(t)        Single-Family Dwelling. Any residential unit designed to house one family and not herein defined as multiple-family; duplexes and mobile homes not located in mobile home parks and condominiums shall be considered single-family.

 

(u)       SS (Suspended Solids). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are largely removable by laboratory filtration procedures.

 

(v)       User. A discharge of wastewater to the sanitary sewer system.

 

(w)      User Charge. A charge levied on a user of the sewage system which recovers operation and maintenance expenses and capital costs in proportion to the cost of service.

 

(x)       Volume. The wastewater flow occurring over a specified period of time.

 

(y)       Violation Follow-Up Monitoring. Wastewater discharge monitoring for an industrial user or a non-resident user whose wastewater discharge has exceeded wastewater discharge limitations.

 

§12.5.105: CLASSIFICATION OF USERS.
The user is the occupant or intended occupant or activity for which a connection is made to convey wastewater to the sanitary sewer system. The classifications of users shall be:

 

(a)       Classification A. Residential dwelling units; includes single-family dwelling units (detached units; duplexes, condominiums), accessory dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units (triplexes, quadplexes, apartments, mobile home parks).

 

(b)       Classification B. All general commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments from which only sewage is discharged.

 

(c)       Classification C. All non-residential establishments whose wastewater discharge contains all or partly non-sewage water, and who are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC) Manual, 1987, U.S. Office of Management and Budget as amended and supplemented.

 

§12.5.110: USER CHARGES.
Every user shall pay the following monthly sewer use charge, but in no case shall the total charge be less than the effective rate for a multiple-family dwelling unit.

 

(a)       For Classification A Users. The user charge shall be as listed in San Leandro Administrative Code §6.4.100. The charge shall be based upon a flat rate determined by the methods described in these Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations per single-family dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit or multiple-family dwelling unit.

 

(b)       For Classification B Users. The user charge shall be as listed in San Leandro Administrative Code §6.4.100. The charge shall be based upon the volume of water used as determined by the methods described in these Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations.

 

(c)       For Classification C Users. Industrial and other large users shall be assessed user charges based on measured discharges of wastewater flow, BOD, and SS. Such measurement shall be obtained from monitoring facilities installed on private property at the points of discharge to the sewer system, unless another location is approved by the Manager. Both installation and operating costs of the monitoring facilities shall be at the sole expense of the user. Frequency of monitoring shall be determined by the Manager. Sampling and testing shall be performed by City staff and shall be paid for by the user in accordance with San Leandro Administrative Code §6.4.100. In the event that City staff are unable to take samples and make tests during a billing period, an average of the test results for the prior twelve-month period shall be used to estimate BOD and SS discharges for the billing period. The Manager shall have the discretion of not using an unusually high measurement if it is judged to be unrepresentative of a user’s long-term use of the wastewater system and/or can be explained by a one-time event.

 

§12.5.115: CAPACITY FEES.
 

(a)       Any person (whether a new or existing user) who installs new or additional fixtures, equipment, processes or devices, including provisions for future installation, which will add (either in fact or potential) wastewater load to the sanitary sewer system shall pay to the City a “Capacity Fee” as determined by the conditions and formula hereinafter enumerated. No plumbing permit shall be issued nor shall any connection be made to the sanitary sewer system until the applicable capacity fee has been paid.

 

(b)       The capacity fee for residential dwelling units shall be the appropriate unit cost as listed in San Leandro Administrative Code §6.4.100.

 

The capacity fee for converting an existing apartment building to condominium units shall be as listed in San Leandro Administrative Code §6.4.100. Non-residential users shall be assessed capacity fees based on the estimated average day of their peak month discharge according to the unit cost schedule as listed in San Leandro Administrative Code §6.4.100, but in no case shall the fee for a new connection be less than the single-family Residential discharge equivalency.

 

(c)       A capacity fee adjustment may be made at the end of one year of service for all non-residential users to reflect the actual wastewater discharge based on monitored wastewater discharged or metered water usage adjusted for volume not discharged to the sanitary sewer system. If the estimated wastewater discharge is low, an additional capacity fee shall be assessed. If the estimated wastewater discharge is high, the City shall issue a refund to the user.

 

(d)       The City reserves the right to make an additional capacity fee assessment for an existing sewer connection if the peak month flow or strength of discharge is increased above that flow or strength upon which the original capacity fee was based.

 

(e)       Capacity fee receipts shall be deposited into a separate reserve account to be used for future treatment facility expansion projects, or if no future expansion is required, these funds may be used to finance other treatment facility improvement projects or to retire the State Revolving Fund Loan.

 

(f)        Each sewer permit issued as herein provided, and the right to a sewer connection pursuant to any such sewer permit so issued, shall run with the land, and shall not be transferred to, or used for, any other property other than the property for which the sewer permit was originally issued.

 

(g)       All sewer rates, charges, and fees as herein provided shall be non-refundable.

 

(h)       The Sanitary Sewer Capacity Fee shall be modified each July 1st or on the date set by City Council by an amount less than or equal to the percentage change in the ENR 20 City Index as published by Engineering News-Record from the preceding one-year period. City Council may also change the fee to other amounts as appropriate.

 

§12.5.120: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
 

(a)       Reference is made to the Title 3, Chapter 14, Uniform Wastewater Discharge Regulations, of the San Leandro Municipal Code. All references herein to “Regulations” shall be to the aforementioned regulations.

 

(b)       The Regulations require that Major Contributing Industries, as defined in Section 3-14-200 of the Regulations, connected to or discharging into the City sewer must obtain a Pretreatment Permit.

 

(c)       Section 3-14-520 of the Regulations lists standard permit conditions.

 

(d)       Applications for the Pretreatment Permit will be kept on file by the City. Major Contributing Users shall be issued a permit upon completion of the application.

 

(e)       Upon receipt of the completed application, City staff will schedule an inspection of each applicant’s facility. This will verify and complete the information provided on the application.

 

(f)        Upon issuance or renewal of the permit, a permit fee as set forth in San Leandro Administrative Code § 6.4.100 shall be charged.

 

(g)       A condition of any Pretreatment Permit shall be the requirement that the permittee pre-treat the wastewater to acceptable limits for conventional pollutants, as described in applicable Federal, State and/or City regulations.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 82-128, 06/21/1982 [§§12.5.100-12.5.115]; Resolution No. 82-262, 10/04/1982 [§§12.5.100-12.5.115]; Resolution No. 83-113, 06/20/1983 [§§12.5.100-12.5.115]; Resolution No. 85-115, 06/24/1985 [§§12.5.100-12.5.115]; Administrative Order, 09/17/1985 [§12.5.115]; Resolution No. 87-108, 06/15/1987 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 89-122, 06/19/1989 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 91-111, 06/17/1991 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 93-161, 07/16/1993 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 95-108, 06/12/1995 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 98-85, 08/17/1998 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 2000-78, 06/05/2000 [§12.5.100(e)]; Resolution No. 2001-48, 03/05/2001 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 2002-95, 07/01/2002 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 2003-114, 05/19/2003 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120]; Resolution No. 2005-156, 11/21/2005 [§12.5.120]; Resolution No. 2006-042, 05/01/2006 [§§12.5.110-12.5.115]; Resolution No. 2010-071, 06/21/2010 [§12.5.100; §12.5.110]; Resolution No. 2011-159, 09/06/2011 [§12-5-115(i)]; Resolution No. 2017-040, 03/20/2017 [§§12.5.100-12.5.120] ; Resolution No. 2019-125, 07/15/2019 [§ 12.5.115]

Chapter 6 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 6, Public Works: Fees and Charges for Services Provided by the Building Regulations Division of the Development Services Department, was repealed and moved to Title 6, Chapter 4, Finance: Fees, by Resolution No. 2000-79, 06/05/2000.

Chapter 7 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 7, Public Works: Abatement of Weeds and Grass, was editorially renumbered to be Title 11, Chapter 4, Police: Abatement of Weeds and Grass, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 8 Street Tree Policy and Procedure
§12.8.100: GENERAL.
A street tree is a plant of arborescent form planted by the City within the public right-of-way. Except as specifically provided in this Chapter, trees planted by the property owner that are located inside or outside the public right-of-way, and/or City trees that have been at some point maintained by the property owner are the sole and exclusive responsibility of the property owner.

 

§12.8.105: STREET TREE PLANTING.
Property owners desiring a new street tree must contact the City to request a tree. The City will plant the tree for a fee set forth in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code. The property owner will have limited discretion as to the type of tree based on the area available for planting.

 

If an existing street tree is being removed by the City under the circumstances in §12.8.110 and the property owner asks for a replacement tree to be planted, there will be no cost to the property owner for this service.

 

§12.8.110: STREET TREE REMOVAL.
(a)       The City will remove a street tree under the following circumstances:

 

(1)       Where the tree is dead or damaged beyond expected recuperation (by storm, vehicle accident, etc.).

 

(2)       Where hazardous conditions exist (e.g., a tree in danger of falling over).

 

(3)       Where the City determines a tree has caused concrete or sewer damage and further damage cannot be prevented by normal tree maintenance measures, such as root pruning.

 

(4)       Where the City is engaged in a scheduled and phased tree removal and replacement program.

 

(5)       Under unusual hardship circumstances upon approval by the Public Works Services Director.

 

(b)       A property owner may prune or remove a City street tree under the following conditions:

 

(1)       The property owner shall obtain an encroachment permit from the City Engineering and Transportation Department prior to pruning or removal of the City tree.

 

(2)       The tree removal shall include stump-grinding, with return of the planting area to either softscape or hardscape that does not create a tripping hazard to the public.

 

(3)       The cost of pruning or removal and stump-grinding of the City tree shall be the exclusive responsibility of the property owner.

(4)       If a replacement tree is not requested by the property owner as set forth in §12.8.105, the property owner shall be required to pay the City the fee set forth in §6.4.100 of the San Leandro Administrative Code for a tree to be planted in a location of the City’s choosing.

 

§12.8.115: STREET TREE TRIMMING.
The City trims young street trees as needed for proper growth. Mature trees are trimmed by area on a scheduled basis depending on the size and species of the trees.

 

Pacific Gas & Electric, as the local electricity utility purveyor, may trim or remove City trees at any time in order to maintain electrical line clearance, and will attempt to provide prior notification to the property owner. It is noted that Pacific Gas & Electric does not remove/grind the stumps of trees that they remove.

 

§12.8.120: {RESERVED}.
 

§12.8.125: OTHER MAINTENANCE.
The City will root prune street trees as needed. The City will remove and dispose of large limbs that have fallen from street trees. The property owner is responsible for the clean up of tree debris, such as small limbs, leaves, berries and nuts.

 

If large limbs from trees located on private property fall and obstruct the public sidewalk or street, the City will, upon notification by the property owner, remove the obstruction and place the limbs on the private property for disposal by the property owner.

 

§12.8.126: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
In order to provide for a sustainable urban forest within San Leandro neighborhoods, street trees within identified neighborhoods, which may have grown beyond the public right-of-way, may require maintenance by the City. The Public Works Services Director is hereby given administrative authority to adopt policies pertinent to the maintenance of street trees as deemed necessary.

 

§12.8.130: {RESERVED}.
 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 83-260, 11/21/83 [§§12.8.100-12.8.130]; Resolution No. 2001-154, 09/17/01 [§§12.8.100-12.8.130]; Resolution No. 2003-125, 06/02/2003 [§§12.8.105, 12.8.110, 12.8.120, 12.8.130]; Resolution No. 2008-134, 11/03/2008 [§§12.8.110, 12.8.126]; Resolution No. 2010-049, 05/03/2010 [§12.8.105]; Resolution No. 2019-150, 09/03/2019 [§§ 12.8.100—12.8.115]

Chapter 9 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 9, Public Works: Substitution of Subcontractors, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 2, Engineering and Transportation: Substitution of Subcontractors, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 10 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 10, Public Works: Traffic Warrants for Stop Signs, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 3, Engineering and Transportation: Traffic Warrants for Stop Signs, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 11 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was reserved for Encroachment Procedures.

Chapter 12 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 12, Public Works: Oversize Vehicles, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 4, Engineering and Transportation: Oversize Vehicles, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 13 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 13, Public Works: Substandard Residential Driveways, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 5, Engineering and Transportation: Substandard Residential Driveways, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 14 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 14, Public Works: Residential Parking Permit Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 6, Engineering and Transportation: Residential Parking Permit Program, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 15 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 12, Chapter 15, Public Works: Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 7, Engineering and Transportation: Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program, during the 2005-06 republication.

TITLE 13 RENT REVIEW BOARD
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§13.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
The Rent Review Board shall meet only when there is an eligible issue (e.g. rental increase that meets the program’s eligibility review criteria, proposed program amendments) for it to review. When meetings do occur, they will be held on the fourth Tuesday of the month, convening at the hour of 7:00 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Board.

 

§13.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Board shall call special meetings of the Board whenever the business of the Board shall so require, or at the express written request of any three (3) members of the Board. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Board, to the City Manager, the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§13.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Board, the interests of the City and Board could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§13.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Board; shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting; and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§13.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Board shall be the Chair who will be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Board; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Board; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

 

§13.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Board shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§13.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Board Members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§13.1.215:       LIMIT OF TERM. No member of the Board shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Board provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause and by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

§13.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Board shall be the Housing Manager. The Secretary shall keep all minutes; shall prepare and distribute the agenda; shall furnish all members of the Board with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Board need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Board.

 

§13.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§13.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§13.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Board:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Public Comments.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Correspondence.

5.         Hearings.

 

6.         Miscellaneous.

 

7.         Board Members Comments.

 

8.         Staff Comments.

 

9.         Adjournment.

 

§13.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Board, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§13.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Board with the consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 REQUEST FOR HEARING
§13.1.400: TIME FOR FILING.
No application for a hearing shall be placed on the agenda of a regular meeting of the Board unless such application is filed with the Community Development Department by 5:00 p.m. of the fourteenth (14th) day preceding such regular Board meeting. Applications received after this deadline will be placed on the following regular meeting agenda. This rule may be waived, for good cause, by the Secretary to the Board.

 

ARTICLE 5 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§13.1.500: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Board, shall generally govern the conduct of meetings of the Board.

 

§13.1.505: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Board, the Chair shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Board Member is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§13.1.510: ADDRESSING BOARD.
Each person addressing the Board shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, landlord, tenant, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Board and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Board, except through the Chair.

 

§13.1.515: HEARINGS.
The hearings shall generally follow the format described below:

 

1.         Chair opens hearing.

 

2.         Petitioner shall have up to five (5) minutes to present case.

 

3.         Board asks questions to clarify information or to obtain additional information from petitioner.

 

4.         Respondent shall have up to five (5) minutes to present case.

 

5.         Board asks questions to clarify information or to obtain additional information.

 

6.         Chair closes hearing.

 

7.         Board deliberates.

 

8.         By consensus, Board develops findings and recommendations.

 

9.         Board records vote on findings and recommendations.

 

The Board may at its discretion vary from this format in appropriate circumstances including but not limited to increasing or reducing the amount of time a petitioner or respondent has to present a case, and allowing for a spokesperson to speak on behalf of a group of petitioners.

 

At the close of the Hearing the Board shall deliberate and vote on the matter. The Board may approve, conditionally-approve, or deny an application with findings; refer a matter to the City Council without action; continue an item to a future meeting; or refer an item to staff. No evidence shall be taken after the close of the Hearing. The Hearing may be reopened for the taking of further evidence, at the discretion of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 VOTING
§13.1.600: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§13.1.605: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Board actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 7 COMMITTEES
§13.1.700: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Board, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Board, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Board. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Board.

 

§13.1.705: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of two (2) Board Members. The Chair of the Board may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§13.1.710: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§13.1.715: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Board. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Board; promise any action on the part of the Board; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Board or place the Board in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

ARTICLE 8 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§13.1.800: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Board shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Board shall give such authority to another member of the Board. Board Members shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Board.

 

§13.1.805: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER BOARD MEMBER.
Any Board Member may give a personal evaluation of a Board action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

 

ARTICLE 9 AMENDMENTS
§13.1.900: AMENDMENTS.
The Board may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 13, Livermore-San Leandro Home Financing Authority, was removed and former Title 22A, Chapter 1, Rent Review Board: Rules of Operation, was renumbered to be Title 13, Chapter 1, Rent Review Board: Rules of Procedure, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for Title 22A, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 2002-39, 03/18/2002 [§§22A.1.100-22A.1.700]; Resolution No. 2002-131, 09/06/2002 [§22A.1.115]; Resolution No. 2005-103, 07/05/2005 [§22A.1.100]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§13.1.100-13.1.900]

TITLE 14 BOARD OF APPEALS
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§14.1.100: MEETINGS.
Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held on an as-needed basis.

 

§14.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Board shall call special meetings of the Board whenever the business of the Board shall so require, or at the express written request of any three (3) members of the Board. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Board, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§14.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Board, the interests of the City and Board could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§14.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Board; distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less then twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§14.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Board shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first meeting following the appointment of a new Board. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Board; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Board; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

 

§14.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Board shall be elected at the first meeting following the appointment of a new Board. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§14.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Board Members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§14.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
A member of the Board may serve as Chair or Vice Chair of the Board until replaced by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

§14.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Board shall be the Chief Building Official and shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Board with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Board need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Board.

 

§14.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§14.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§14.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Board:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Correspondence.

 

5.         Hearings.

6.         Public Comments.

 

7.         Unfinished Business.

 

8.         New Business.

 

9.         Staff Comments/Reports.

 

10.       Board Members Comments/Reports.

 

11.       Adjournment.

 

§14.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Board, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§14.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Board with consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§14.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Board, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Board.

 

§14.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Board, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Board Member is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§14.1.410: ADDRESSING BOARD.
Each person addressing the Board shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Board and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Board, except through the Chair.

 

§14.1.415: HEARING.
At the close of the Hearing the Board shall deliberate and vote on the matter. The Board may approve, conditionally-approve, or deny an appeal with findings; or continue an item to a future meeting. No evidence shall be taken after the closing of the Hearing. The Hearing may be reopened for the taking of further evidence, at the discretion of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§14.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§14.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Board actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 6 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§14.1.600: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Board shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Board shall give such authority to another member of the Board. Board Members shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Board.

 

§14.1.605: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER BOARD MEMBER.
Any Board Member may give a personal evaluation of a Board action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 7 AMENDMENTS
§14.1.700: AMENDMENTS.
The Board may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 14, Board of Appeals, was removed prior to the 2005-06 republication and re-created during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§14.1.100-14.1.700]

TITLE 15 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§15.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall be held on the first Thursday of each month, convening at the hour of 7:00 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Board.

 

§15.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Board shall call special meetings of the Board whenever the business of the Board shall so require, or at the express written request of any four (4) members of the Board. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Board, to the City Manager, the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§15.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Board, the interests of the City and Board could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§15.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Board and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, each member of the City Council, the City Manager, and the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§15.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Board shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Board; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Board; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§15.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Board shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall, in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair, serve as presiding officer. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§15.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Board members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§15.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Board shall serve more than one (1) successive full term for one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Board provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

§15.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Board, appointed by the Community Development Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Board with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Board need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Board.

 

§15.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§15.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§15.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Board:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Public Comments.

 

3.         Minutes (approval of minutes of previous meetings).

 

4.         Correspondence.

5.         Oral Communication.

 

6.         Work Session.

 

7.         Public Hearings.

 

8.         Miscellaneous.

 

9.         Board Members’ Comments.

 

10.       Staff Updates/Project Status Report.

 

11.       Adjourn.

 

§15.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Board, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§15.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Board with the consent by a two-thirds vote of the Board members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§15.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Board, shall generally govern the conduct of meetings of the Board.

 

§15.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Board, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Board Member is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§15.1.410: ADDRESSING BOARD.
Each person addressing the Board shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes, subject to adjustment by the Chair. All remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Board and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Board, except through the Chair.

 

§15.1.415: PUBLIC HEARING.
At the close of the Public Hearing, the Board shall deliberate and vote on the matter. The Board may approve, conditionally-approve, or deny an application with findings, continue an item to a future meeting; or refer an item to staff. No evidence shall be taken after the closing of the Public Hearing. The Public Hearing may be reopened for the taking of future evidence, at the discretion of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§15.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§15.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Board actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§15.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Board, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Board, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Board. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Board.

 

§15.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than three (3) Board Members. The Chair of the Board may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§15.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§15.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Board. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Board; promise any action on the part of the Board; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Board or place the Board in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

 

ARTICLE 7 APPLICATIONS
§15.1.700: TIME FOR FILING.
No application for a variance, conditional use approval, or application, or petition concerning any other matter upon which the Board shall act, shall be placed on the agenda unless said application or petition is filed in the Community Development Office a minimum of one (1) month prior to the Board meeting. This rule may be waived, for good cause, by the Secretary.

 

§15.1.705: FAILURE OF APPLICANT TO APPEAR FOR HEARING.
If the applicant fails to appear at the time his application is regularly called by the Board, and the applicant has not theretofore requested a continuance, the matter may either be acted upon, be dropped from the calendar, to be restored thereto upon request by the applicant, or the matter may be continued by the Board.

 

ARTICLE 8 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§15.1.800: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Board shall be released only by the Secretary or Chair, unless by the majority vote the Board shall give such authority to another member of the Board. Board Members shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Board.

 

§15.1.805: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER BOARD MEMBER.
Any Board Member may give a personal evaluation of a Board action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 9 AMENDMENTS
§15.1.900: AMENDMENTS.
The Board may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 94-25, 02/17/1994 [§15.1.1000]; Resolution No. 95-217, 11/06/1995 [§15.1.1000]; Resolution No. 96-138, 08/19/1996 [§§15.1.200, 15.1.205]; Resolution No. 2003-195, 09/15/2003 [§15.1.100]; Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§15.1.100-15.1.900]; Resolution No. 2010-010, 02/01/2010 [§15.1.100]

TITLE 16 HANDICAPPED ACCESS APPEALS BOARD
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§16.1.100: MEETINGS.
Meetings of the Handicapped Access Appeals Board shall be held on as as-needed basis.

 

§16.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Board shall call special meetings of the Board whenever the business of the Board shall so require, or at the express written request of any three (3) members of the Board. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Board, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§16.1.110:       MEETING PLACE.

All meetings of the Board shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Board, the interests of the City and Board could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§16.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Board; distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less then twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§16.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Board shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first meeting following the appointment of a new Board. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Board; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Board; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

 

§16.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Board shall be elected at the first meeting following the appointment of a new Board. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§16.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Board Members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§16.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
A member of the Board may serve as Chair or Vice Chair of the Board until replaced by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

§16.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Board shall be the Chief Building Official and shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Board with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Board need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Board.

 

§16.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§16.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§16.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Board:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Correspondence.

 

5.         Hearings.

6.         Public Comments.

 

7.         Unfinished Business.

 

8.         New Business.

 

9.         Staff Comments/Reports.

 

10.       Board Members Comments/Reports.

 

11.       Adjournment.

 

§16.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Board, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§16.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Board with consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§16.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Board, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Board.

 

§16.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Board, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Board Member is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§16.1.410: ADDRESSING BOARD.
Each person addressing the Board shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Board and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Board, except through the Chair.

 

§16.1.415: HEARINGS.
The Board shall conduct hearings in accordance with the following rules of procedure:

 

(a)       At the time of fixed in the notice required by Section 1-3-635 of the San Leandro Municipal Code the Board shall proceed to hear evidence respecting the conditions of the subject property or other matters relating to the subject matter of the hearing.

 

(b)       The Board may grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown or upon its own motion.

 

(c)       The Board shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of all parties of their representatives.

 

(d)       Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules of evidence relating to witnesses and documentary exhibits.

 

(e)       All parties shall have the following rights among others:

 

(1)       To call and examine witnesses on any matters relevant to the issues of the hearing.

 

(2)       To introduce documentary and physical evidence.

 

(3)       To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing.

 

(4)       To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify.

 

(5)       To rebut the evidence.

 

(6)       To represent themselves or to be represented by one of choice.

 

With the consent of the Board, the Chair may establish the order for presentation of evidence. In absence of any such determination by the Chair, the appellant shall proceed first, followed by the respondent and thereafter followed by rebuttals from each with public comment, if any, following at the conclusion of the last rebuttal.

 

At the close of the Hearing the Board shall deliberate and vote on the matter. The Board may approve or deny an appeal with findings, or continue an item to a future meeting. No evidence shall be taken after the closing of the Hearing. The Hearing may be reopened for the taking of further evidence, at the discretion of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§16.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§16.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Board actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Board.

ARTICLE 6 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§16.1.600: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Board shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Board shall give such authority to another member of the Board. Board Members shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Board.

 

§16.1.605: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER BOARD MEMBER.
Any Board Member may give a personal evaluation of a Board action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 7 APPLICATIONS
§16.1.700: TIME FOR FILING.
The provisions of Section 1-3-630 of the San Leandro Municipal Code authorize the Board to establish time limits within which appeals from enforcement actions and/or determinations of exemption shall be perfected. In accordance with this grant of authority no party shall be permitted to appeal such a determination of the Building Services Division in the enforcement of the building access requirements of Part 5.5 of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, unless such party files a written notice of appeal in the Office of the Building Services Division within thirty (30) days from the enforcement action and/or determination of exemption which is the subject matter of such appeal, provided that:

 

(a)       Notice of such enforcement action and/or determination of exemption has been personally served upon the party undertaking the appeal, such service having been made in the same manner as provided in Section 1-3-640 of the San Leandro Municipal Code and,

 

(b)       Notice of such enforcement action and/or determination of exemption has been posted in a conspicuous location in the City Hall of the City of San Leandro for a period of thirty (30) days and publication of the same has been made in the manner provided by §6061 of the California Government Code.

 

§16.1.705: FAILURE OF APPLICANT TO APPEAR FOR HEARING.
If the applicant fails to appear at the time the application is regularly called by the Board, and the applicant has not theretofore requested a continuance, the matter may be acted upon, be dropped from the calendar, be restored thereto upon request by the applicant, or be continued by the Board.

 

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§16.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Board may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§16.1.100-16.1.800]

TITLE 17 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§17.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any eleven (11) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Commission, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§17.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§17.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission; shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not later than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§17.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in November of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the Commission; shall state each question, shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§17.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in November of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§17.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commissioners present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§17.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Recreation and Human Services Director, shall keep all minutes; shall prepare and distribute the agenda, shall furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but copies of same can be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§17.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§17.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§17.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Presentations/Correspondence.

 

5.         Report of Committees.

 

6.         Staff Reports.

7.         Unfinished Business.

 

8.         Public Comments.

 

9.         New Business.

 

10.       Adjournment.

 

§17.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§17.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§17.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§17.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§17.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§17.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§17.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§17.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§17.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than ten (10) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§17.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§17.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

ARTICLE 7 RELATIONS WITH THE PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§17.1.700: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§17.1.705: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§17.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 17, Historical Commission, was repealed by Administrative Order on 04/14/1983. Former Title 23A, Chapter 1, Youth Advisory Commission: Rules of Operation, was editorially renumbered to be Title 17, Chapter 1, Youth Advisory Commission: Rules of Procedure, during the 2005-06 republication. Legislative history for former Title 23A, Chapter 1: Resolution No. 92-5, 01/06/1992 [§§23A.1.100-23A.1.800]; Resolution No. 94-78, 05/16/1994 [§23A.1.100]

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§17.1.100-17.1.800]; Resolution No. 2013-106, 07/15/2013 [17.1.100].

TITLE 18 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§18.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Human Services Commission shall be held on the fourth Wednesday of each month, convening at the hour of 7:00 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Commission.

 

§18.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever, in his opinion, the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any five (5) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Commission, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§18.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§18.1.115: AGENDA.
Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not later than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§18.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Commission; shall state each question, shall announce the decision and shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions, shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§18.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§18.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commissioners present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§18.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Commission shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Commission provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

§18.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Recreation and Human Services Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§18.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§18.1.300 CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§18.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission.

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

3.         Approval of Minutes of Previous Meetings.

 

4.         Public Comments.

 

5.         Correspondence.

 

6.         Report of Secretary.

 

7.         Committee Reports.

 

8.         Unfinished Business.

 

9.         New Business.

 

10.       Report of Chair.

 

11.       Commissioners Comments.

 

12.       Adjournment.

 

§18.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§18.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda as prepared may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with the consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§18.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall generally govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§18.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§18.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§18.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§18.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§18.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§18.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than four (4) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§18.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§18.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

 

ARTICLE 7 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL, AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§18.1.700: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released by the Secretary or Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§18.1.705: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§18.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2001-190, 11/05/2001 [§18.1.100]; Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§18.1.100-18.1.800]

TITLE 19 LIBRARY-HISTORICAL COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§19.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
The regular meeting of the Library-Historical Commission shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month, convening at the hour of 7:00 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Commission.

 

§19.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any four (4) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Commission, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§19.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Library or the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§19.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less then twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§19.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Commission; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§19.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§19.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commission members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§19.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Commission shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Commission provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

§19.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Library Services Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§19.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§19.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§19.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Public Comments.

 

5.         Activity Reports.

 

6.         Correspondence.

 

7.         Report of Secretary.

 

8.         Committee Reports.

 

9.         Unfinished Business.

 

10.       Election of Officers (in July).

 

11.       New Business.

 

12.       Report of Chair.

 

13.       Commissioners Comments.

 

14.       Adjournment.

 

§19.1.310: ALTERATION OR ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§19.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§19.1.400: RULES.
The Current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall generally govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§19.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§19.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§19.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§19.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§19.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§19.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than three (3) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§19.1.610:       MEETINGS.

Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§19.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

ARTICLE 7 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§19.1.700: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§19.1.705: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§19.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1985.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§19.1.100-19.1.800]

TITLE 20 PERSONNEL RELATIONS BOARD
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§20.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Personnel Relations Board shall be held on the third Thursday of the first month of each calendar quarter, convening at the hour of 5:30 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Board.

 

§20.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Board shall call special meetings of the Board whenever the business of the Board shall so require, or at the express written request of any three (3) members of the Board. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Board, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§20.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Board, the interests of the City and Board could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§20.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Board and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less then twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§20.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Board shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Board; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Board; shall vote on all questions; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§20.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Board shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§20.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Board Members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Board.

 

§20.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Board shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Board provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

§20.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Board, appointed by the Human Resources Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Board with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Board need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Board.

 

§20.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§20.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§20.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Board:

 

1.         Call to Order.

 

2.         Roll Call.

 

3.         Public Comments.

4.         Approval of Minutes.

 

5.         Employment List Extensions.

 

6.         Adoption/Revision of Classification Specifications.

 

7.         Human Resources Director’s Report.

 

8.         Miscellaneous.

 

9.         Adjournment.

 

§20.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Board, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§20.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Board with the consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§20.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Board, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Board.

 

§20.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Board, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Board Member is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair must be notified before the meeting.

 

§20.1.410: ADDRESSING BOARD.
Each person addressing the Board shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Board and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Board, except through the Chair.

 

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§20.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§20.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Board actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Board.

 

ARTICLE 6 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND BOARDS
§20.1.600: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Board shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Board shall give such authority to another member of the Board. Board Members shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Board.

 

§20.1.605: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER BOARD MEMBER.
Any Board Member may give a personal evaluation of a Board action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 7 AMENDMENTS
§20.1.700: AMENDMENTS.
The Board may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1984.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§20.1.100-20.1.700]

TITLE 21 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§21.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on the first Thursday of each month, convening at the hour of 7:00 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Commission.

 

§21.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any four (4) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Board, to the City Manager, the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§21.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless, in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§21.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§21.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Commission; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§21.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§21.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commission members present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§21.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Commission shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Commission provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

§21.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Community Development Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda and furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§21.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§21.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§21.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Public Comments.

 

3.         Minutes (Approval of Minutes of Previous Meetings).

 

4.         Correspondence.

 

5.         Oral Communication.

 

6.         Work Session.

 

7.         Public Hearings.

 

8.         Miscellaneous.

 

9.         Commissioners Comments.

 

10.       Staff Updates/Project Status Report.

 

11.       Adjourn.

 

§21.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§21.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with the consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§21.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall generally govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§21.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§21.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

§21.1.415: PUBLIC HEARING.
At the close of the Public Hearing, the Commission shall deliberate and vote on the matter. The Commission may recommend approval or conditional-approve, or may deny an application with findings; refer a matter to the City Council without action; continue an item to a future meeting; or refer an item to staff. No evidence shall be taken after the closing of the Public Hearing. The Public Hearing may be reopened for the taking of further evidence, at the discretion of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§21.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§21.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§21.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§21.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than three (3) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§21.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§21.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

ARTICLE 7 APPLICATIONS
§21.1.700: TIME FOR FILING.
No application for a General Plan map or text amendment, amendment to the Zoning Code or amendment to the Zoning Map of the City of San Leandro, development application, or petition concerning any other matter upon which the Commission shall act, shall be placed on the agenda unless said application or petition, in complete form, is filed in the Community Development Office a minimum of one (1) month prior to the Commission meeting. This rule may be waived, for good cause, by the Secretary.

 

§21.1.705: FAILURE OF APPLICANT TO APPEAR FOR HEARING.
If the applicant fails to appear at the time his application is regularly called by the Commission, and the applicant has not theretofore requested a continuance, the matter may either be acted upon, be dropped from the calendar, to be restored thereto upon request by the applicant, or the matter may be continued by the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 8 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§21.1.800: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§21.1.805: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 9 AMENDMENTS
§21.1.900: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 96-137, 08/19/1996 [§§21.1.200, 21.1.205]; Resolution No. 2003-195, 09/15/2003 [§21.1.100]; Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§21.1.100-21.1.900]; Resolution No. 2010-010, 02/01/2010 [§21.1.100]; Resolution No. 2018-133, 10/15/2018 [§21.1.100]

TITLE 22 RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
Chapter 2 {Reserved}

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§22.1.100: REGULAR MEETING.
Regular meetings of the Recreation and Parks Commission shall be held on the first Wednesday of each month, convening at the hour of 7:00 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Commission.

 

§22.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any five (5) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Commission, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§22.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§22.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting, and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§22.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair, who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Commission; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§22.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§22.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and the Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commissioners present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§22.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Commission shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Commission provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

§22.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Recreation and Human Services Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda, and furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers related to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§22.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§22.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§22.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Public Comments.

 

5.         Correspondence.

 

6.         Report of Secretary.

 

7.         Committee Reports.

 

8.         Unfinished Business.

 

9.         New Business.

 

10.       Report of Chair.

 

11.       Commissioners Comments.

 

12.       Adjournment.

 

§22.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§22.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§22.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§22.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§22.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the records. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§22.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§22.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§22.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§22.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than four (4) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§22.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§22.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining of previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

ARTICLE 7 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§22.1.700: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§22.1.705: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§22.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2001-189, 11/05/2001 [§22.1.100]; Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§22.1.100-22.1.800]

Chapter 2 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 22, Chapter 2, Recreation and Parks: Rules and Regulations for the Use of Public Parks and Recreational Facilities, was editorially renumbered to be Title 7, Chapter 1, Recreation and Human Services: Rules and Regulations for the Use of Public Parks and Recreational Facilities, during the 2005-06 republication.

TITLE 23 SENIOR COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§23.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Senior Commission shall be held on the third Thursday of each month, convening at the hour of 10:00 a.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meetings shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Commission.

 

§23.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any five (5) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Commission, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§23.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Civic Center, City Hall of San Leandro, unless in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§23.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties; and shall post the agenda not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§23.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Commission; shall state each question, shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§23.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the item of business then pending before the Commission.

 

§23.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commissioners present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. Upon the arrival of the Chair or Vice Chair, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the item of business then pending before the Commission.

 

§23.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Commission shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Commission provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

§23.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Recreation and Human Services Director shall keep all minutes; shall prepare and distribute the agenda; shall furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers relating to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but copies of same can be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§23.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§23.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§23.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission:

 

1.         Roll Call.

 

2.         Approval of Agenda.

 

3.         Approval of Minutes.

 

4.         Correspondence.

 

5.         Report of Secretary.

 

6.         Committee Report.

 

7.         Unfinished Business.

 

8.         Public Comments.

 

9.         New Business.

 

10.       Report of Chair.

 

11.       Commission Comments.

 

12.       Adjournment.

 

§23.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§23.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda as prepared may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with the consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirements including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§23.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§23.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§23.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the record. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§23.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§23.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§23.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§23.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than four (4) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§23.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§23.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

 

ARTICLE 7 RELATIONS WITH THE PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL, AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§23.1.700: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released only by the Secretary or Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§23.1.705: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§23.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2001-188, 11/05/2001 [§§23.1.100-23.1.800]; Resolution No. 2006-034, 04/03/2006 [§§23.1.100-23.1.800]

TITLE 24 ARTS COMMISSION
Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure

Chapter 1 Rules of Procedure
ARTICLE 1 MEETINGS
§24.1.100: REGULAR MEETING.
Regular meetings of the Arts Commission shall be held on the fourth Wednesday of each month, convening at the hour of 6:30 p.m. When the day or the day following the day fixed for such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held at such time as agreed upon by the Commission.

 

§24.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Commission shall call special meetings of the Commission whenever the business of the Commission shall so require, or at the express written request of any five (5) members of the Commission. Written notice of the time and place and the business to be transacted at such special meeting shall be delivered by personal delivery, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting to each member of the Commission, to the City Manager, to the City Clerk and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. No other business shall be considered at such special meeting.

 

§24.1.110: MEETING PLACE.
All regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at the Civic Center, City of San Leandro, unless in the opinion of the Commission, the interests of the City and Commission could be best served by holding such meetings elsewhere.

 

§24.1.115: AGENDA.
The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all matters to be submitted to the Commission and shall distribute the agenda and related materials to all interested parties not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of a regular meeting, and not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of a special meeting.

 

Copies of the agenda, or the Notice of Cancellation if a meeting has been cancelled, shall be delivered to each member of the Commission, to each member of the City Council, to the City Manager, and to the City Clerk.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§24.1.200: CHAIR.
The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Chair, who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum at regular and special meetings of the Commission; shall state each question; shall announce decisions; shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to the Commission; shall vote on all questions; shall appoint all committees; and shall generally perform the duties of a presiding officer.

 

§24.1.205: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair of the Commission shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting in July of every year. The Vice Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair or upon the request of the Chair. In the event the Chair shall arrive late, the Vice Chair shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§24.1.210: CHAIR PRO TEM.
In the event of the absence of the Chair and the Vice Chair or their inability to act, the Commissioners present shall elect from their membership a Chair Pro Tem to serve during such temporary absence. In the event the Chair or Vice Chair shall arrive late, the Chair Pro Tem shall relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the business then pending before the Commission.

 

§24.1.215: LIMIT OF TERM.
No member of the Commission shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms of one (1) year as Chair or Vice Chair of the Commission provided that this limitation may be waived upon a finding of good cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.

 

§24.1.220: SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Commission, appointed by the Recreation and Human Services Director, shall keep all minutes, prepare the agenda, and furnish all members of the Commission with a copy of the agenda, plus copies of all correspondence and other papers related to items appearing on the agenda; and shall follow all legal noticing requirements. Items which are of general interest and not requiring action on the part of the Commission need not be included in the agenda, but may be mailed to all members of the Commission.

 

§24.1.225: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

ARTICLE 3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
§24.1.300: CALL TO ORDER.
Upon opening the meeting and after determining that a quorum is present, the Chair shall call the meeting to order. The call to order may be immediately followed by the Pledge of Allegiance or other opening ceremonies.

 

§24.1.305: AGENDA.
The following shall be the ordinary order of business for meetings of the Commission:

1.     Roll Call

2.     Approval of Agenda

3.     Approval of Minutes

4.     Public Comments

5.     Correspondence

6.     Report of Secretary

7.     Committee Reports

8.     Unfinished Business

9.     New Business

10.   Report of Chair

11.   Commissioners Comments

12.   Adjournment

 

§24.1.310: ALTERATION OF ORDER.
The Chair, with the approval of the Commission, may move items out of prepared agenda order.

 

§24.1.315: SPECIAL ITEMS.
Special items not appearing on the agenda may be presented by any member of the public or Commission with consent by a two-thirds vote of the members present or by unanimous vote if less than two-thirds of the body is present, and subject to any applicable legal requirement including the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code §54950 et seq.).

 

ARTICLE 4 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
§24.1.400: RULES.
The current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where inconsistent with the express provisions of law or these Rules of Procedure or other resolutions of the Commission, shall govern the conduct of meetings of the Commission.

 

§24.1.405: ROLL CALL.
Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the Secretary shall call the roll of the membership, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a Commissioner is unable to attend a meeting, either the Secretary or the Chair shall be notified before the meeting.

 

§24.1.410: ADDRESSING COMMISSION.
Each person addressing the Commission shall give one’s name in an audible tone of voice for the records. If the person is appearing in a representative or professional capacity such as an attorney, engineer, etc., the person shall state the name of the individual or organization being represented. Unless additional time is granted by the Chair, all remarks shall be limited to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not to any individual member thereof. No person, other than members of the Commission and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, except through the Chair.

 

ARTICLE 5 VOTING
§24.1.500: MANNER OF TAKING VOTE.
The vote shall be taken by show of hands, voice vote, roll call, or electronic voting.

 

§24.1.505: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Commission actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Commission.

ARTICLE 6 COMMITTEES
§24.1.600: REFERRAL.
Upon the introduction of any new matter for consideration by the Commission, the Chair may refer the same to a committee of the Commission, appointed by the Chair to study such item of business and recommend to the Commission. The application of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the Chair, and shall be used by the Chair to provide a more even flow of business appearing before the Commission.

 

§24.1.605: APPOINTMENT.
Committees shall consist of no less than two (2) and no more than four (4) Commissioners. The Chair of the Commission may serve in an ex-officio capacity on all committees.

 

§24.1.610: MEETINGS.
Committees shall be empowered to meet with organizations or individuals as necessary in order to properly prepare their reports.

 

§24.1.615: BUSINESS.
Committees shall, in meeting with other organizations or individuals, limit themselves to gathering pertinent facts and explaining previously adopted policies of the Commission. They shall not make any commitments on behalf of the Commission; promise any action on the part of the Commission; initiate or organize any group or urge specific action by an organized group or individual, unless specifically empowered to do so at the time of appointment; take any action which would in any way compromise the position of the Commission or place the Commission in an embarrassing position before the public.

 

ARTICLE 7 RELATIONS WITH PRESS, THE GENERAL PUBLIC, THE CITY COUNCIL AND OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§24.1.700: INFORMATION THROUGH CHAIR.
All information on action by the Commission shall be released only by the Secretary or the Chair, unless by majority vote the Commission shall give such authority to another member of the Commission. Commissioners shall refer all requests for information to either the Secretary or the Chair, and shall not endeavor to interpret any action of the Commission.

 

§24.1.705: INFORMATION THROUGH OTHER COMMISSIONER.
Any Commissioner may give a personal evaluation of a Commission action, as long as it is made as a private citizen and so quoted.

 

ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
§24.1.800: AMENDMENTS.
The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council for amendments to these Rules of Procedure.

 

Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 24, Chapter 1, Surplus Property: Disposal Procedure, was editorially renumbered to be Title 8, Chapter 9, Engineering and Transportation: Disposal Procedure for Surplus Real Property, during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2014-094, 09/02/2014 [§§24.1.100-24.1.800]; Resolution No. 2019-041, 02/04/2019 [§24.1.100]

TITLE 25 PUBLIC FINANCING AUTHORITY
Chapter 1 Bylaws

Chapter 1 Bylaws
ARTICLE 1—DEFINITIONS; OFFICES AND SEAL
§25.1.100: DEFINITIONS.
All capitalized terms used herein shall have the respective meanings given such terms in the Joint Exercise of Powers Agreement, dated May 24, 1993, by and between the City of San Leandro, California, and the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro (the “Agreement”).

 

§25.1.105: OFFICES.
The principal office of the Authority for the transaction of business shall be 835 East 14th Street, San Leandro, CA 94577. The Board may, however, fix and change from time to time the principal office from one location to another within the City of San Leandro by noting the change of address in the minutes of the meeting of the Board at which the address was fixed or changed. The fixing or changing of such address shall not be deemed an amendment to these Bylaws.

 

§25.1.110: SEAL.
The Authority shall have an official seal, consisting of two (2) concentric circles with the words “San Leandro Public Financing Authority” within the outer circle and the date of formation of the Authority within the inner circle. The Secretary shall obtain or cause to be obtained the Seal at the Authority’s expense and shall have custody of the Seal.

 

ARTICLE 2 BOARD
§25.1.200: POWERS.
Subject to the limitations of the Agreement, the terms of these Bylaws, and the laws of the State of California, the powers of this Authority shall be vested in and exercised by and its property controlled and its affairs conducted by the Board of the Authority.

 

§25.1.205: NUMBER.
The Board shall have seven (7) Directors, who shall be the members of the City Council of the City of San Leandro. Each Director shall hold office for a term which coincides with such Director’s term of office as member of the City Council.

 

§25.1.210: COMPENSATION.
Directors shall serve without compensation but each Director may be reimbursed his or her necessary and actual expenses, including travel incident to his services as Director, pursuant to resolution of the Board. Any Director may elect, however, to decline said reimbursement.

 

 

§25.1.215: REGULAR MEETINGS.
The regular meetings of the Board shall be held annually on the third Monday in June at the hour of 7:00 p.m. If any regular meeting falls on a holiday, such regular meeting shall be held on the next business day at the same hour.

 

§25.1.220: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings of the Board shall be held upon call of the Chair of the Board, or by a majority of the Members thereof, by delivering personally or by mailed written notice to each member, and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail and shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice. Such written notice may be dispensed with as to any Member who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the Secretary of the Authority a written waiver of notice. Such waiver may be given by telegram. Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any Member who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. Such call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such meeting.

 

§25.1.221: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the regular meeting place of the Authority, unless the Board shall adjourn to or fix another place of meeting in a notice to be given thereof, or unless prevented by flood, fire or other disaster. Said regular meeting place is fixed and established as the City Council Chambers, 835 East 14th Street, San Leandro, California.

 

§25.1.225: PUBLIC MEETINGS; NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
All proceedings of the Board shall be subject to the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, constituting Chapter 9 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the California Government Code, and notice of the meetings of the Authority shall be given in accordance with such Act.

 

§25.1.230: CONSENT TO MEETINGS.
The transactions of the Board at any meeting however called and noticed or wherever held, shall be as valid as though done at a meeting duly held after call and notice if a quorum is present and if either before or after the meeting each Director not present signs a written waiver of notice or a consent to the holding of such meeting or approval of the minutes thereof. All such waivers, consents or approvals shall be filed with the corporate records and made a part of the minutes of the meeting.

 

§25.1.235: QUORUM.
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Board unless a greater number is expressly required by statute, by the Agreement, or by these Bylaws. Every act or decision done or made by a majority of the Directors present at a meeting duly held at which a quorum is present, shall be the act of the Board.

 

§25.1.240: ORDER OF BUSINESS.
The order of business at the regular meeting of the Board and, so far as possible, at all other meetings of the Board, shall be essentially as follows, except as otherwise determined by the Directors at such meeting:

(a)       Report on the number of Directors present in person or by proxy in order to determine the existence of a quorum.

 

(b)       Reading of the notice of the meeting and proof the delivery or mailing thereof, or the waiver or waivers of notice of the meeting then filed, as the case may be.

 

(c)       Reading of unapproved minutes of previous meetings of the Board and the taking of action with respect to approval thereof.

 

(d)       Presentation and consideration of reports of officers and committees.

 

(e)       Unfinished business.

 

(f)        New business.

 

(g)       Adjournment.

 

§25.1.241: RULES OF PROCEEDINGS.
 

(a)       Public Meetings. All legislative sessions of the Board, whether regular or special, shall be open to the public.

 

(b)       Quorum. Four (4) of the Members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

(c)       Method of Action. The Board shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion, which, to become effective, shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the Members of the Board voting.

 

(d)       Recording Vote. Except where action shall be taken by unanimous vote of all Members present and voting, the Ayes and Noes shall be taken on all actions had.

 

(e)       Adjournment. The Board may adjourn any regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment. Less than a quorum may so adjourn from time to time. If all Members are absent from any regular or adjourned regular meeting the Secretary may declare the meeting adjourned to a stated time and place and shall cause a written notice of the adjournment to be given in the same manner as provided for special meetings, unless such notice is waived as provided for special meetings. A copy of the order or notice of adjournment shall be conspicuously posted on or near the door of the place where the regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting was held within twenty-four (24) hours after the time of the adjournment. When a regular meeting is a regular meeting for all purposes. When an order of adjournment of any meeting fails to state the hour at which the adjourned meeting is to be held, it shall be held at the hour specified for regular meetings.

 

(f)        Hearings—Continuance. Any hearing being held, or notice or ordered to be held, by the Board at any meeting may by order or notice of continuance be continued or re-continued to any subsequent meeting of the Board in the same manner and to the same extent set forth for the adjournment of meetings; provided, that if the hearing is continued to a time less than twenty-four (24) hours after the time specified in the order of notice of hearing, a copy of the order or notice of continuance of hearing shall be posted immediately following the meeting at which the order or declaration of continuance was adopted or made.

 

§25.1.245: NON-LIABILITY FOR DEBTS.
The private property of the Directors shall be exempt from execution or other liability for any debts, liabilities or obligations of the Authority and no Director shall be liable or responsible for any debts, liabilities of obligations of the Authority.

 

§25.1.250: INDEMNITY BY AUTHORITY FOR LITIGATION EXPENSES OF OFFICER, DIRECTOR OR EMPLOYEE.
Should any Director, officer or employee of the Authority be sued, either alone or with others, because he is or was a director, officer or employee of the Authority, in any proceeding arising out of his alleged misfeasance or nonfeasance in the performance of his duties or out of any alleged wrongful act against the Authority or by the Authority, indemnity for his reasonable expenses, including attorneys’ fees incurred in the defense of the proceedings, may be assessed against the Authority or its receiver by the court in the same or a separate proceeding if the person sued acted in good faith and in a manner such person reasonably believed to be in the best interests of the Authority and, in the case of a criminal proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe the conduct of such person was unlawful. The amount of such indemnity shall equal the amount of the expenses, including attorneys’ fees, incurred in the defense of the proceeding.

 

ARTICLE 3 OBJECTS AND PURPOSES
§25.1.300: NATURE OF OBJECTS AND PURPOSES.
The business of this Authority is to be operated and conducted in the promotion of its objects and purposes as set forth in the Agreement.

 

§25.1.305: DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS DURING CONTINUANCE OF AUTHORITY.
During the continuance of the Authority, it may distribute any of its assets to the Members of the Authority. If for any reason the Members are unable or unwilling to accept the assets of the Authority, said assets shall be distributed to the Federal Government, or to a state or local government for public purposes, or to a nonprofit fund, foundation or corporation which is organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes.

 

§25.1.310: DISSOLUTION.
The Authority may, with the approval of all of the Members, be dissolved by majority vote of the Directors if at the time of such dissolution the Authority has no outstanding indebtedness and is not a party to any outstanding material contracts. Upon the dissolution or termination of this Authority, and after payment or provision for payment, all debts and liabilities, the assets of this Authority shall be distributed to the Members of the Authority. If for any reason the Members are unable or unwilling to accept the assets of the Authority, said assets will be distributed to the Federal Government or to a state or local government for public purposes; or to a nonprofit fund, foundation or corporation which is organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes.

 

ARTICLE 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
§25.1.400: PAYMENT OF MONEY; SIGNATURES.
All checks, drafts or other orders for payment of money, notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued in the name of or payable to the Authority and any and all securities owned by or held by the Authority requiring signature for transfer shall be signed or endorsed by the Treasurer.

 

§25.1.405: EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.
The Board, except as in the Agreement or in the Bylaws otherwise provided, may authorize any officer or officers, agent or agents, to enter into any contract or execute any contract or execute any instrument in the name of and on behalf of the Authority and such authority may be general or confined to specific instances and unless so authorized by the Board, no officer, agent or employee shall have any power or authority to bind the Authority by any contract or engagement or to pledge its credit or to render it liable for any purpose or in any amount.

 

All contracts or agreements on behalf of the Authority shall be signed by the Executive Director or Chair, and countersigned by the Secretary, after having been authorized to do so by action of the Board, except that the Vice Chair shall sign in the absence of the Chair.

 

§25.1.410: FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year of the Authority shall commence on the 1st day of July of each year and shall end on the 30th day of June of the next succeeding year.

 

§25.1.415: AMENDMENT OF BYLAWS.
These Bylaws may be amended at any time and from time to time by majority vote of the Board.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

Former Title 25, Chapter 1, Conflict of Interest Code: Administrative Regulations, was editorially renumbered to be Title 4, Chapter 2, City Clerk: Conflict of Interest; and the existing bylaws of the Public Financing Authority adopted by Resolution No. 93-1 PFA were codified as Title 25, Chapter 1, Public Financing Authority: Bylaws, during the 2005-06 republication.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§25.1.100-25.1.415]; Resolution No. 2007-001 PFA, 01/02/2007 [§§25.1.100-25.1.415]

TITLE 26 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 1 Bylaws
Chapter 2 Rules and Regulations—1981 Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds
Chapter 3 Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
Chapter 4 Payment of Prevailing Wages
Chapter 5 Deeds

Chapter 1 Bylaws
ARTICLE 1 THE AGENCY
§26.1.100: NAME OF AGENCY.
The name of the Agency shall be the “Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro,” and shall hereinafter be referred to as the Agency.

 

§26.1.105: SEAL OF AGENCY.
The seal of the Agency shall be in the form of a circle and shall bear the name of the Agency and the year of its organization.

 

§26.1.110: OFFICE OF AGENCY.
The office of the Agency shall be at the City Hall, 835 East 14th Street, in the City of San Leandro, California.

 

ARTICLE 2 OFFICERS
§26.1.200: OFFICERS.
The officers shall be selected in accordance with law for their respective offices. The officers of the Agency shall be the Mayor who shall be known as the Chair, the Vice Mayor who shall be known as the Vice Chair and the City Manager who shall be known as the Executive Director.

 

§26.1.205: CHAIR.
Except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the Agency, the Chair shall sign all contracts, deeds, and other instruments made by the Agency. At each meeting the Chair shall submit recommendations and information considered proper concerning the business, affairs, and policies of the Agency, and perform such other duties as may devolve by the nature of this office.

 

§26.1.210: VICE CHAIR.
The Vice Chair shall perform the duties of the Chair in the absence or incapacity of the Chair; and in the case of the resignation or death of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall perform such duties as are imposed on the Chair until such time as a new Chair shall be selected.

 

§26.1.211: EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
The Executive Director or designee shall have general supervision over the administration of the Agency’s business and affairs.

 

§26.1.215: SECRETARY.
The Secretary shall keep the records of the Agency, shall record all votes, shall keep a record of the proceedings of the Agency in a journal of proceedings to be kept for such purpose, shall attest to official acts, and shall perform all duties prescribed in the Community Development Law and incident to this office.

 

§26.1.220: ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
The Officers of the Agency shall perform such other duties and functions as may from time to time be required by the Agency or the bylaws or rules and regulations of the Agency.

 

ARTICLE 3 MEETINGS
§26.1.300: REGULAR MEETING.
Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. In the event a day of regular meeting shall be a legal holiday, said meeting shall be held on the next business day.

 

§26.1.305: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Chair of the Agency may, when deemed expedient, and shall, upon the written request of two members of the Agency, call a special meeting of the Agency for the purpose of transacting any business designated in the call. The call for a special meeting must be delivered personally, by mail, or by facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the call to each member of the Agency, to the Executive Director, and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. Such written call may be dispensed with as to any member who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the secretary a written waiver of such call. At such special meeting no business shall be considered other than as designated in the call.

 

§26.1.306: MEETING PLACE.
All meetings of the Agency shall be held in the Civic Center or on public property within the City.

 

§26.1.310: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Agency shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

§26.1.315: RECORD OF BUSINESS.
All resolutions shall be in writing and shall be kept in an official book of resolutions.

 

§26.1.320: MANNER OF VOTING.
The voting on formal resolutions, matters to any federal, state, county, or city agency, and on such other matters as may be requested by a majority of the Agency members shall be conducted by taking the ayes and nays by an open vote, which shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting. The ayes and nays shall be taken and recorded on all motions. Abstentions shall also be recorded.

 

§26.1.321: MAJORITY VOTE.
All Agency actions shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the Agency.

 

§26.1.325: ROBERT’S RULES.
All rules of order not herein provided for shall be determined in accordance with the current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised.

 

§26.1.330: {RESERVED}.
 

ARTICLE 4 AMENDMENTS
§26.1.400: AMENDMENTS TO BYLAWS.
The bylaws of the Agency shall be amended by resolution.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 81-42 RDA, 08/03/1981 [§§26.1.100-26.1.400]; Resolution No. 96-27 RDA, 06/17/1996 [§26.1.300]; Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§26.1.100-26.1.400]; Resolution No. 2007-001 RDA, 01/02/2007 [§§26.1.100-26.1.400]

Chapter 2 Rules and Regulations—1981 Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds
PREFACE
These Rules and Regulations are made pursuant to Chapter 8 of Part 1 of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and relate to the Agency’s 1981 Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds residential mortgage financing program of providing long-term, below-market-interest-rate mortgage loans to eligible borrowers for newly constructed residences in the Agency’s redevelopment project area. All mortgage loans made by the Agency through this program shall be made in accordance with these Rules and Regulations.

 

ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS
§26.2.100: DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this section shall for all purposes of these Rules and Regulations have the meanings herein specified, to be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms of any of the terms herein defined. Unless otherwise defined, all terms used in these Rules and Regulations shall have the meanings assigned to such terms in the Act.

 

§26.2.105: ACT.
“Act” means Chapter 8 of Part 1 Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California as in effect on the date of adoption of these Rules and Regulations.

 

§26.2.110: AGENCY.
“Agency” means the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro, a public body, corporate and politic, established under the Community Redevelopment Law of the State of California (being Part 1 of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California).

 

§26.2.115: BOND.
“Bonds” means the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro 1981 Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds authorized by, and at any time outstanding pursuant to, the Resolution.

 

§26.2.120: CITY.
“City” means the City of San Leandro.

 

§26.2.125: DEVELOPER.
“Developer” means Citcon Corporation, a California corporation, or any successors of assigns.

 

§26.2.130: LOCAL CODES.
“Local Codes” means the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Mechanical Code, the Uniform Plumbing Code, the Uniform Electrical Code and the Uniform Housing Code, all as adopted by the City of San Leandro by Ordinance No. 81-020 on March 30, 1981, as may be amended from time to time by the City, and the Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by the City of San Leandro by Ordinance No. 75-29 on June 9, 1975, as such may be amended from time to time by the City, and any applicable state or federal standards for residential construction.

§26.2.135: MORTGAGE LOAN.
“Mortgage Loan” means a loan of moneys made pursuant to the Program to a Participating Party to finance the purchase of property, which loan is evidenced by a note, secured by a deed of trust and insured or guaranteed, in whole or in part, by any instrumentality of the United States or of the State of California, or by any person licensed to insure mortgage loans in this State.

 

§26.2.140: OWNER PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT.
“Owner Participation Agreement” means the agreement, dated as of February 23, 1981, by and between the Developer and the Agency, providing for the construction of 164 Properties.

 

§26.2.145: PARTICIPATING PARTY.
“Participating Party” means any Person receiving financing for Property pursuant to the Program. No elective officer of the state or any of its political subdivisions or employee of any redevelopment agency shall be eligible to be a Participating Party.

 

§26.2.150: PERSON.
“Person” means an individual, corporation, firm, association, partnership, trust or other legal entity or any agency or political subdivision thereof.

 

§26.2.155: PROGRAM.
“Program” means the Agency’s program of making Mortgage Loans pursuant to the Resolution, the Act, and these Rules and Regulations.

 

§26.2.160: PROPERTY.
“Property” means a residential condominium dwelling unit constructed in accordance with and pursuant to the Owner Participation Agreement.

 

§26.2.165: REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA.
“Redevelopment Project Area” means those project areas currently or hereafter designated by a redevelopment plan as plans adopted in accordance with the Community Redevelopment Law (commencing with Section 33750, of Part 1 of Division 24 of the California Health and Safety Code).

 

§26.2.170: RESIDENT HOMEBUYER.
“Resident Homebuyer” means any person who, on the date of purchase of Property, is a legal resident of the City of San Leandro or is employed in a permanent full-time position in the City of San Leandro and does not own and has never owned a principal residence for his or her own use in any location.

 

§26.2.175: RESOLUTION.
“Resolution” means the resolution providing for the issuance of the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro 1981 Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds, as originally adopted by the Agency or as it may from time to time be supplemented, modified or amended.

 

§26.2.180: RULES AND REGULATIONS.
“Rules and Regulations” means these rules and regulations implementing the Program as adopted by the Agency on April 2, 1981, pursuant to Resolution No. 81-17, as they may be amended from time to time.

 

§26.2.185: TRUSTEE.
“Trustee” means the Trustee appointed by the Agency pursuant to Section 8.01 of the Resolution, or its successor for the time being as Trustee under Section 8.01 of the Resolution.

 

ARTICLE 2 STANDARDS
§26.2.200: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
The construction of any property to be financed by a Mortgage Loan shall be undertaken and completed in compliance with these Rules and Regulations, the Redevelopment Plan, Local Codes and the Owner Participation Agreement.

 

§26.2.205: NONDISCRIMINATION IN SALE OR RENTAL.
Any Property financed by a Mortgage Loan shall be available for sale or open for rental to all, regardless of race, sex, marital status, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.

 

§26.2.210: NONDISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT.
All contractors and subcontractors engaged in the construction of Property to be financed by a Mortgage Loan shall provide equal opportunity for employment, without discrimination as to race, sex, marital status, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. All contracts and subcontracts for such construction shall be let without discrimination as to race, sex, marital status, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. It is the express policy of the Agency to encourage participation by minority contractors in such construction.

 

ARTICLE 3 MORTGAGE LOANS
§26.2.300: MORTGAGE LOANS.
No Mortgage Loan shall exceed ninety-five percent (95%) of the purchase price or ninety-five percent (95%) of the appraised value of the Property, whichever is less.

 

§26.2.305: RESERVATION OF PROPERTIES FOR RESIDENT HOMEOWNERS.
For a period of not to exceed six (6) months after the commencement of the sale of Property pursuant to the Program, there shall be reserved for purchase by Resident Homebuyers thirty-five (35) Properties to the following extent: One bedroom Properties and one bedroom with den Properties may be purchased by a Resident Homebuyer with a Mortgage Loan equal to ninety-five percent (95%) of the purchase price of the Property or ninety-five percent (95%) of the appraised value of the Property, whichever is less, and two bedroom Properties and two bedroom with den Properties may be purchased by a Resident Homebuyer with a Mortgage Loan of not less than ninety percent (90%) of the purchase price of the Property or ninety percent (90%) of the appraised value of the property, whichever is less.

 

§26.2.310: ASSESSMENT OF LOANS.
Any Mortgage Loan may be assumed upon the Participating Party’s sale, transfer or other disposition of the Property, if the purchaser of such Property demonstrates his or her creditworthiness to assume such Mortgage Loan.

 

§26.2.315: TAX EXEMPTION.
No person (or any “related person” as defined in Section 103(b)(6)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended) from whom the Agency may acquire or through whom the Agency may make Mortgage Loans shall, pursuant to an arrangement, formal or informal, purchase Bonds in an amount related to the amount of Mortgage Loans to be purchased from or made through such Person.

 

ARTICLE 4 MISCELLANEOUS
§26.2.400: WAIVER.
No failure on the part of the Agency to enforce any rule or regulation herein contained, or any waiver of any right hereunder, shall discharge or invalidate such rule or regulation or affect the right of such party to enforce the same in the event of any subsequent breach of default. Failure to demand strict performance of any of these rules and regulations shall not be deemed a waiver of such rule or regulation.

 

§26.2.405: GOVERNING LAW.
All questions with respect to the construction of these Rules and Regulations shall be governed by the laws of the State of California.

 

§26.2.410: SELECTION HEADINGS.
The headings of the several sections of these Rules and Regulations, and any table of contents appended hereto, shall be solely for convenience of reference and shall not affect the meaning, construction or effect hereof.

 

§26.2.415: SEVERABILITY.
If any one or more of the provisions contained in these Rules and Regulations shall for any reason be held to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect, then such provision or provisions shall be deemed severable from the remaining provisions hereof and such invalidity, illegality or enforceability shall not affect any other provision hereof, and these Rules and Regulations shall be construed as if such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision had never been contained herein.

 

§26.2.420: COOPERATION.
Whenever possible and appropriate, the Agency will cooperate with federal, state and other local agencies to utilize all existing and available resources to promote the production and increased availability of below-market-rate-interest loans to facilitate construction of residences in the Redevelopment Project Area.

 

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 81-17, 04/02/1981 [§§26.2.100-26.2.420]; Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§26.2.185]; Resolution No. 2007-001 RDA, 01/02/2007 [§§26.2.100-26.2.420]

Chapter 3 Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
§26.3.100: IMPLEMENTATION OF CEQA GUIDELINES.
In implementing CEQA and the Guidelines for Implementation of CEQA when assessing the potential environmental impacts of a proposed project, the Redevelopment Agency will utilize the most current amended version of the Act and Guidelines. For projects that are deemed to require some level of environmental documentation; i.e., Categorical Exemption, Mitigated Negative Declaration/Negative Declaration, or Environmental Impact Report, the Agency shall follow the procedures for preparation of said documents, including preparation of appropriate notices, as provided for in the Guidelines.

 

§26.3.105: FORMS.
The Agency shall use the forms attached as Appendices A and B in San Leandro Administrative Code, Title 5, Chapter 1, for Initial Study Checklist and Negative Declaration.

 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1982.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§26.3.100-26.3.105]; Resolution No. 2007-001 RDA, 01/02/2007 [§§26.3.100-26.3.105]

Chapter 4 Payment of Prevailing Wages
§26.4.100: APPLICATION.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply within all Redevelopment Project Areas to contracts for construction of physical improvements on all real properties except as provided herein.

 

§26.4.105: PAYMENT OF GENERAL PREVAILING RATE.
Not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for work of a similar character in the locality in which the contracts subject to the provisions of this Chapter are performed, and not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for holiday and overtime work fixed as provided in Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code (commencing at §1720 et seq.), shall be paid to all workers employed on such works. For purposes of this Chapter, workers employed by contractors or subcontractors in the execution of any contract subject to the provisions of this Chapter are deemed to be employed upon public work.

 

§26.4.110: PENALTIES.
For all contractors subject to the provisions of this Chapter the Contractor shall forfeit as penalty to the Agency, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per calendar day or portion thereof for each worker paid less than the prevailing rates for any work done under the contract by him, or by any subcontractor under him. In addition to said penalty, the difference between the prevailing wage rates and the amounts paid for each worker less than the prevailing wage rates shall be paid to each worker by the contractor.

 

§26.4.115: DETERMINATIONS OF DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS.
The determinations of the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to Labor Code §1720 shall constitute the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for purposes of this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit payment of more than the general rate of prevailing wages.

 

§26.4.120: POSTING AND NOTICE.
The Agency Secretary shall maintain for public inspection, the current wage determinations of the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations. All contractors subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall reference the obligations imposed hereby. Any contractor subject to the provisions hereof shall post a copy of the general prevailing rate of wages applicable to the work to be done at the job site.

 

§26.4.125: PAYROLL RECORDS.
The provisions of §1776 of the Labor Code pertaining to records retention and inspection thereof shall be applicable to all contracts subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

 

§26.4.130: APPRENTICES.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the employment of any number of properly registered apprentices, as defined in Chapter 4, Division 3 of the Labor Code. Every such apprentice shall be paid not less than the standard wage paid to apprentices under the regulations of the crafts or trade at which he is employed, and shall be employed only at the work of the craft or trade to which he is registered. The employment and training of each apprentice shall be in accordance with the provisions of the apprenticeship standards and apprentice agreements under which he is in training.

 

§26.4.135: INCORPORATION IN AGREEMENTS.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be incorporated and referenced in each agreement, such as owner participation agreement, disposition and development agreement, or amendment, thereto entered into by the Agency.

 

§26.4.140: LIMITATIONS.
The prevailing wage requirements imposed hereby shall not apply to any contract for the remodeling of an existing building or structure or site improvements with a contract value less than $50,000 or to any contract required by an owner participation agreement for installation of seismic bracing. This Chapter shall not apply to tenant improvements for which the initial building permit for such work is issued more than one year after the certificate of occupancy is approved on the core and shell. The $50,000 value shall be adjusted annually pursuant to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the San Francisco/Oakland SMSA.

 

§26.4.145: HARDSHIP.
The requirements of this Chapter may be waived by the Agency upon a determination of hardship, economic necessity or other basis when necessary to carry out the provisions of the Redevelopment Plan or the Community Redevelopment Law.

 

§26.4.150: {RESERVED}.
 

 

Editor’s Note:

This Chapter was first codified administratively in 1987.

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§26.4.135, 26.4.150]; Resolution No. 2007-001 RDA, 01/02/2007 [§§26.4.100-26.4.150]

Chapter 5 Deeds
§26.5.100: AUTHORIZATION TO ACCEPT AND RECORD DEEDS.
Pursuant to §27281 of the Government Code of the State of California, the Executive Director and the Agency Secretary of the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro are hereby authorized to accept deeds and easements conveying an interest in or easement upon real property to the Redevelopment Agency of the City of San Leandro, a political corporation, and to consent to the recordation thereof.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 2009-012 RDA, 05/18/2009 [§26.5.100]

TITLE 27 PARKING AUTHORITY
Chapter 1 Bylaws
Chapter 2 Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines

Chapter 1 Bylaws
§27.1.100: REGULAR MEETINGS.
Regular meetings shall be held on the third Monday of June at 7:00 p.m. in the Civic Center Complex or on public property within the City, should the City Council find and determine that the City Council Chambers is hazardous or unsuitable for the conduct of a regular Council meeting. In the event a day of the regular meeting shall be a legal holiday, said meeting shall be held on the next business day.

 

§27.1.105: SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings of this Authority may be called in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 54956 or 54956.1, or as the same may be amended or superseded.

 

§27.1.110: ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
All meetings of this Authority may be adjourned and adjourned meetings may be held in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 54955, or as the same may be amended or superseded.

 

§27.1.115: QUORUM.
A majority of the members of this Authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

 

§27.1.120: ACTIONS.
Actions of this Authority shall be taken by the affirmative vote of a majority of the membership.

 

§27.1.125: FISCAL YEAR.
The first fiscal year of this Authority shall end on June 30, 1973, and thereafter each fiscal year shall commence on July 1 and end on the following June 30.

 

§27.1.130: DEEDS OR GRANTS.
The Clerk of this Authority is authorized to accept and consent to the recordation of deeds and grants conveying any interest in or easement upon real property to this Authority.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 81-3 PA, 08/03/1981 [§§27.1.100-27.1.130]; Resolution No. 86-5 PA, 07/21/1986 [§§27.1.100-27.1.130]; Resolution No. 96-3 PA, 06/17/1996 [§27.1.100]; Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§27.1.100]; Resolution No. 2007-001 PA, 01/02/2007 [§§27.1.100-27.1.130]

Chapter 2 Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
§27.2.100: IMPLEMENTATION OF CEQA GUIDELINES.
In implementing CEQA and the Guidelines for Implementation of CEQA when assessing the potential environmental impacts of a proposed project, the Parking Authority will utilize the most current amended version of the Act and Guidelines. For projects that are deemed to require some level of environmental documentation; i.e., Categorical Exemption, Mitigated Negative Declaration/Negative Declaration, or Environmental Impact Report, the Authority shall follow the procedures for preparation of said documents, including preparation of appropriate notices, as provided for in the Guidelines.

 

§27.2.105: FORMS.
The Authority shall use the forms attached as Appendices A and B in San Leandro Administrative Code, Title 5, Chapter 1, for Initial Study Checklist and Negative Declaration.

 

 

Legislative History:

Resolution No. 82-11 PA, 08/16/1982 [§§27.2.100-27.2.200]; Resolution No. 2006-123, 11/20/2006 [§§27.2.100-27.2.200]; Resolution No. 2007-001 PA, 01/02/2007 [§§27.2.100-27.2.105]

TITLE 28 {RESERVED}
Chapter 1 {Reserved}

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 28, Chapter 1, California Environmental Quality Act: Implementation of State Guidelines, was editorially renumbered to be Title 5, Chapter 1, Community Development: Implementation of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines, during the 2005-06 republication.

TITLE 29 {RESERVED}
Chapter 1 {Reserved}

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 29, Industrial Development Authority, was repealed by Resolution No. 2001-52 on 03/19/2001.

TITLE 30 {RESERVED}
Chapter 1 {Reserved}

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 30, Chapter 1, Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities: Authorization, Prohibitions, and Signs, was editorially renumbered to be Title 2, Chapter 2, City Manager: Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities, during the 2005-06 republication. Former Title 30, Regulation of Smoking in City Facilities, Chapters 2 to 4 were repealed by Resolution No. 97-13, 02/03/1997.

TITLE 31 {RESERVED}
Chapter 1 {Reserved}

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 31, Chapter 1, Cable Television: Basic Cable Television Service Tier-Rate Regulations, was editorially renumbered to be Title 2, Chapter 3, City Manager: Basic Cable Television Service Tier-Rate Regulations, during the 2005-06 republication.

Chapter 1 {Reserved}
Note
Editor’s Note:

Former Title 32, Chapter 1, Regulation of Professional Filming and Videotaping Activities, Professional Filming, was editorially renumbered to be Title 2, Chapter 4, City Manager: Regulation of Professional Filming and Videotaping, during the 2005-06 republication.

ZONING CODE

Title 1—General Provisions
Title 2—Base District Regulations
Title 3—Overlay Zoning Districts
Title 4—Regulations Applying in All or Several Districts
Title 5—Administration
Title 6—Affordable Housing

Title 1—General Provisions
Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes
Chapter 1.08 Organization, Applicability, and Interpretation
Chapter 1.12 Definitions

Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes
1.04.100 Title
 

These regulations and standards shall be known and cited as the “Zoning Code of the City of San Leandro,” or “Zoning Code.” (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.04.104 Components
 

The Zoning Code shall have the following components:

 

A.    Regulations, known as the zoning regulations, establishing various classes of zoning districts governing the use of land and the placement of buildings and improvements within districts and providing for the administration and amendment of the Zoning Code.

 

B.    A map or set of maps, known as the zoning map, delineating the boundaries of zoning districts within the City of San Leandro.

 

A copy of the zoning regulations and the zoning map, together with a record of all amendments, shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy of the zoning regulations and zoning map currently in effect also shall be kept on file with the Zoning Enforcement Official. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.04.108 Purposes
 

The broad purposes of the Zoning Code are to protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to implement the policies of the City of San Leandro General Plan and any adopted Specific Plan, as provided in the California Government Code, Title 7, Chapters 3 and 4 and in the California Constitution, Chapter 11, Section 7. More specifically, the Zoning Code is intended to:

 

A.    Provide a precise guide for the physical development of the City in accord with the policies of the General Plan and any adopted Specific Plan in order to:

 

1.     Preserve the character and quality of residential neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas consistent with the character of the development districts of the City;

 

2.     Foster convenient, harmonious, and workable relationships among land uses; and

 

3.     Achieve progressively the land development described in the General Plan.

 

B.    Promote the economic stability of existing land uses that are consistent with the development policies of the General Plan and protect them from intrusions by inharmonious or harmful land uses.

 

C.    Prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of land or buildings.

 

D.    Ensure the provision of adequate open space for light, air, and fire safety.

 

E.    Reduce the risk of injury or exposure to hazard of people and property.

 

F.     Permit the development of office, commercial, industrial, and related land uses that are consistent with the General Plan in order to strengthen the City’s economic base.

 

G.    Require the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities, and promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system.

 

H.    Ensure that service demands of new development will not exceed the capacities of existing streets, utilities, or public services.

 

I.      Conserve and enhance the City’s architectural and cultural resources.

 

J.     Conserve and enhance key visual features of San Leandro’s setting, including the hillsides and bay front, consistent with the General Plan.

 

K.    Improve the design and aesthetic quality of new and existing development.

 

L.     Provide for the elimination, over time, of land uses and structures that are inconsistent with the policies of the General Plan and adversely affect other property or uses. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 1.08 Organization, Applicability, and Interpretation
1.08.100 Organization
 

A.    Structure of Regulations. The zoning regulations are divided into six parts:

 

Title 1: General Provisions

Title 2: Base District Regulations

Title 3: Overlay District Regulations

Title 4: Regulations Applying in All or Several Districts

Title 5: Administrative Regulations

Title 6: Affordable Housing Regulations

 

B.    Types of Regulations. Three types of zoning regulations control the use and development of property:

 

1.     Land Use Regulations specify land uses permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited in each zoning district, and include special requirements, if any, applicable to specific uses. Land use regulations for base zoning districts are in Title 2 of the zoning regulations; land use regulations for overlay districts are in Title 3. Certain regulations, applicable in all or several districts, are in Title 4.

 

2.     Development Regulations control the height, bulk, location, and appearance of structures and development sites. Development regulations for base zoning districts are in Title 2 of the zoning regulations; development regulations for overlay districts are in Title 3. Certain development regulations, applicable in more than one class of base or overlay districts, are in Title 4. These include regulations for site development, parking and loading, signs, and nonconforming uses and structures.

 

3.     Administrative Regulations contain detailed procedures for the administration of zoning regulations, including requirements for zoning permits; notice and public hearings on use permits and variances; site plan review; development agreements; amendments; appeals of zoning decisions; and enforcement. Administrative regulations are in Title 5. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

1.08.104 General Rules for Applicability of Zoning Code
 

A.    Applicability to Property. The Zoning Code shall apply to all land within the City of San Leandro and to state or federal agencies, to the extent applicable by law. Application of regulations to specific lots shall be governed by the zoning map.

 

B.    Applicability to Streets and Rights-of-Way. Public streets, utility, and other rights-of-way shall be in the same zoning district as contiguous property. Where contiguous properties are classified in different zoning districts, the centerline of the street or right-of-way shall be the district boundary, unless otherwise depicted on the zoning map.

 

C.    Compliance with Code. No land shall be used and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, demolished or moved in any zoning district, except in accord with the provisions of this Code.

 

D.    Public Nuisance. Neither the provisions of this Code nor the approval of any permit authorized by this Code shall authorize the maintenance of any public nuisance.

 

E.    Compliance with Public Notice Requirements. Compliance with public notice requirements prescribed by this Code shall be deemed sufficient notice to allow the City to proceed with a public hearing and take action on an application, regardless of actual receipt of mailed or delivered notice.

 

F.     Requests for Notice. Where this Code requires that notice be given by first class mail to “any person who has filed a written request for such notice,” the request shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Official and shall be subject to any applicable fees set to cover mailing costs.

 

G.    Conflict with Other Regulations. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this Code and any other City code, title, chapter, resolution, guideline, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall control unless otherwise specified in this Code.

 

H.    Relation to Previously Approved Planned Developments. All Planned Developments approved under a prior zoning ordinance shall be considered legal uses and legal structures, provided that they conform to all applicable conditions of approval.

 

I.      Relation to Private Agreements. This Code shall not interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement now in effect, provided that where this Code imposes greater restriction than imposed by an easement, covenant, or agreement, this Code shall control.

 

J.     Relation to Prior Code. The provisions of this Code supersede all prior zoning codes, as amended, of the City of San Leandro, except that no provision of this Code shall validate or legalize any land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of the prior zoning code, as amended, unless specifically authorized by this Code.

 

K.    Application During Local Emergency. The San Leandro City Council, under the provisions of Title 3, Chapter 3-4 Disaster Regulations of the Municipal Code, may authorize deviations from any provision of this Code during a local emergency. Any deviations so authorized shall be by resolution of the Council, without notice or public hearing, pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 3-4.

 

L.     Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this Code shall not be affected. It is expressly declared that this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, and phrase would have been adopted regardless of the fact that one or more other portions of this Code would be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.08.108 Applicability of Land Use and Development Regulations
 

A.    Zoning Designation System. Land use and development regulations applicable to specific sites shall be shown on the zoning map by zoning district designations consisting of classes of letter designators:

 

1.     A land use regulations designator, indicating the principal land uses permitted or conditionally permitted in each zoning district, shall be a component of all zoning designations.

 

2.     A density designator, indicating the density range, shall be shown for all multiple residential districts.

 

3.     Overlay district designators shall be included in a zoning designation if the provisions of one or more overlay districts are applicable to a site.

 

B.    Establishment of Base Zoning Districts. Base zoning districts into which the City is divided are established as follows:

 

Base District Designator

Base District Name

Chapter

RD

Residential Duplex (Two-Family)

2.04

RM

Residential Multi-Family

2.04

RO

Residential Outer

2.04

RS

Residential Single-Family

2.04

CC

Commercial Community

2.08

CN

Commercial Neighborhood

2.08

CR

Commercial Regional

2.08

C-RM

Commercial Regional Mall

2.08

CS

Commercial Services

2.08

DA-1

Downtown Area-1

2.08

DA-2

Downtown Area-2

2.08

DA-3

Downtown Area-3

2.08

DA-4

Downtown Area-4

2.08

DA-6

Downtown Area-6

2.08

NA-1

North Area-1

2.08

NA-2

North Area-2

2.08

P

Professional

2.08

SA-1

South Area-1

2.08

SA-2

South Area-2

2.08

SA-3

South Area-3

2.08

IG

Industrial General

2.12

IL

Industrial Limited

2.12

IP

Industrial Park

2.12

IT

Industrial Transition

2.12

OS

Open Space

2.16

PS

Public and Semipublic

2.20

 

C.    References to Classes of Base Districts. References to R districts refer to all residential districts; references to C districts refer to all commercial districts; and references to I districts refer to all industrial districts.

 

D.    Establishment of Overlay Zoning Districts. Overlay zoning districts, one or more of which may be combined with a base district, are established as follows:

 

 

Overlay District Designator

Overlay District Name

Chapter

PD

Planned Development

3.04

IS

Interim Study

3.08

CV

Conservation

3.12

S

Special Review

3.16

AU

Assembly Use

3.20

N

Nonconforming Use

3.24

L

Landmark

3.28

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2008-003 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.08.112 Rules for Interpretation: Record-keeping
 

A.    Zoning Regulations. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this Code or its application to a specific site, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall determine the intent of the provision.

 

B.    Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundary of a zoning district the following rules shall apply:

 

1.     District boundaries shown as approximately following the property line of a lot shall be construed to follow such property line.

 

2.     On un-subdivided land, or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of the district boundary shall be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map, unless the boundary location is indicated by dimensions printed on the map.

 

3.     District boundaries shown as approximately following right-of-way lines of freeways, streets, alleys, railroads, or other identifiable boundary lines shall be construed to follow such right-of-way or boundary lines.

 

4.     District boundaries shown as lying within right-of-way lines of freeways, streets, alleys, railroads, or other identifiable boundary lines shall be construed to follow the centerline of such right-of-way or boundary lines.

 

5.     Should any uncertainty remain as to the location of a district boundary or other feature shown on the zoning map, the location shall be determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

C.    Record of Interpretation. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall keep a record of interpretations made pursuant to this section, which shall be available to the public for review.

 

D.    Appeals. An interpretation of the zoning regulations or zoning map by the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to either the Board of Zoning Adjustments, or the Planning Commission, whichever is most appropriate, as provided in Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.08.116 Effect of this Code on Approved Projects and Projects in Process
 

A.    Approved Projects

 

1.     No provision of this Code shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Code or any subsequent amendment.

 

2.     Use permits, Planned Developments, and other discretionary approvals, any of which are valid on the effective date of this Code, shall remain valid until their expiration date. These projects can be built in accord with the conditions of approval in effect at the time of approval, provided that the approval is valid at the time building permits are issued and that such a permit is subject to any time limits imposed pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, adopted by the City. Unless otherwise expressly established in a use permit, variance, Planned Development or other discretionary zoning approval, the use permit, variance, Planned Development or other discretionary approval shall lapse one year after the effective date of this Code unless, by that date:

 

a.     A complete application for a building permit has been accepted; or

 

b.     A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or

 

c.     The use is established; or

 

d.     An extension of time has been duly approved by the City.

 

3.     Any reapplication for an expired permit must meet the standards in effect at the time of reapplication.

 

4.     Any modification of a valid permit issued prior to the effective date of this Code that results in a change in use that affects more than 10 percent of the floor area or an increase in square footage by more than 10 percent of the floor area shall be approved only as a conditional use under the provisions of Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions. In no case may an increase in excess of 2,500 square feet be allowed.

 

B.    Projects in Process. Projects for which no approval or permit has been granted prior to the effective date of this Code shall be subject to the land-use regulations, development standards, and other requirements of this Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4)

Chapter 1.12 Definitions
1.12.100 Purpose and Applicability
 

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure precision in interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout the zoning regulations, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.12.104 Rules for Construction of Language
 

In addition to the general provisions of the Municipal Code, the following rules of construction shall apply:

 

A.    The particular shall control the general.

 

B.    Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

 

1.     “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

 

2.     “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

 

3.     “Either... or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly, but not in combination.

 

C.    In case of conflict between the text and a diagram, the text shall control.

 

D.    All references to departments, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the City of San Leandro, unless otherwise indicated.

 

E.    All references to public officials are to those of the City of San Leandro, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

 

F.     All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day.

 

G.    Chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of any section hereof.

 

H.    Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary:

 

1.     The present tense includes the future, and the future the present.

 

2.     The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

 

3.     References in the masculine and feminine genders are interchangeable.

 

4.     The words “activities” and “facilities” include any part thereof. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.12.108 Definitions
 

Abate. To bring into conformity with the provisions of this Code, either by reconstruction or modification pursuant to a valid permit, or by removal or obliteration as directed by the Chief Building Official or Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

Abutting or Adjoining. Having district boundaries or lot lines in common.

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). An attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. An ADU shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An ADU also includes: (a) an efficiency unit, or (b) a manufactured home, as defined in Sections 18007 and 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. See also Section 2.04.388 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs).

 

A.    Accessory Dwelling Unit, Repurposed (Single-Family). An attached or detached ADU within an existing legally established: (a) single-family dwelling, or (b) existing accessory structure on a parcel with an existing or proposed single-family dwelling.

 

B.    Accessory Dwelling Unit, Repurposed (Two-Family or Multi-Family). An attached ADU within existing non-habitable space(s) including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or attached garages in an existing legally established two-family or multi-family structure.

 

C.    Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JADU). A unit that is contained within the habitable floor area of a single-family residence and includes a separate exterior entrance.  A JADU may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure. At minimum, a JADU shall include an efficiency kitchen, which shall include a food preparation counter, refrigerator, and storage cabinets.

 

Accessory Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that are subordinate, incidental, and related to the principal permitted or conditionally permitted use or structure on the same lot and are customarily found on the same site. This classification includes, for example, home occupations, and caretaker’s quarters as defined in this Code.

 

Acre, Gross. A measure of land area prior to division or dedication for streets, public improvements, or other purposes.

 

Acre, Net. A measure of developable land area, after excluding existing dedicated rights-of-way and flood control and drainage easements.

 

Activity. The performance of a function or operation.

 

Activity Type. A type of activity which is specially described as such by the use classifications in various sections of the Code on the basis of common functional characteristics and similar effects on other uses, and which is designated throughout the zoning regulations by a special name each word of which starts with a capital letter.

 

Administrative Review. An administrative use permit approval that is granted by the Zoning Enforcement Official, if it meets certain criteria and that does not require a public hearing.

 

Adult-Oriented Business. “Adult-Oriented Business” means any of the following:

 

A.    Adult Arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

 

B.    Adult Bookstore. An establishment that has a substantial portion of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. Items sold over the Internet are included for the purposes of determining a substantial portion.

 

C.    Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (3) shows films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

 

D.    Adult Hotel/Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

 

1.     Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;

 

2.     Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or

 

3.     Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.

 

E.    Adult Motion Picture Theater. A business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

 

F.     Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

 

G.    Modeling Studio. A business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available “specified sexual activities.”

 

Air Cargo Processing Centers. See “Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers” and “Truck Terminals.”

 

Airport Safety Zone. A planning boundary near the ends of airport runways, adopted by the Alameda County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) within which land uses are limited in density, building height and type due to accident potential.

 

Alley. A public way having a width of not more than 20 feet permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

 

Alter. To make a change in the exterior appearance or the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, that will prolong the life of the structure.

 

Ambulance Services, Emergency. Provision of emergency medical care or transportation for critically injured or ill patients, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles and residential quarters for employees.

 

Ambulance Services, Non-Emergency. Provisions of non-emergency ambulance services to transport residents home from the hospital or to meet routine medical needs, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles. Siren use is not practiced.

 

Amendment. A change in the wording, context or substance of this chapter, or a change in the district boundaries on the zoning map.

 

Animal, Domestic. Small animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, fish and the like, but not including roosters, ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs or the like.

 

Animal, Exotic. Any wild animal not customarily confined or cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes but kept as a pet or for display.

 

Animal, Large. An animal larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes horses, cows, and other mammals customarily kept in corrals or stables.

 

Animal, Small. An animal no larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes fish, birds, and mammals customarily kept in kennels or within a dwelling unit.

 

Animal Boarding. Provision of shelter and care for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes activities such as feeding, exercising, training, grooming, and incidental medical care.

 

Animal Grooming. Provision of bathing and trimming services for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes boarding of domestic animals for a maximum period of 48 hours.

 

Animal Hospitals. Establishments where small animals receive medical and surgical treatment. This classification includes only facilities that are entirely enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned. Grooming and temporary (30 days) boarding of animals is included if incidental to the hospital use.

 

Animal Sales. Retail sales and boarding of small animals, provided such activities take place entirely within an enclosed building. This classification includes grooming if incidental to the retail use, and boarding for a maximum period of 48 hours of animals not offered for sale.

 

Animal Shows. Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven days.

 

Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency waves including, but not limited to, wireless telecommunications facilities used for transmitting or receiving television, radio, citizen’s band or cellular phone communication. (See also “Wireless Telecommunications Facility.”)

 

Apartment Building. A multi-family rental housing complex in which individual residential units are rented or leased rather than owned separately.

 

Arcade. See “Game Centers.”

 

Area, Lot, Parcel, or Site. The horizontal area within the property lines excluding public-access corridors, public vehicular easements, and areas to be included in future street rights-of-way as established by easement, dedication, or ordinance.

 

Artists’ Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied art or craft, but not including residential use.

 

Assembly Uses (AU). Meeting, recreational, social facilities of a private or non-profit organization primarily for use by member or guests, or facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education (but not including schools as defined in this section). This classification includes union halls, social clubs, fraternal organizations, and youth centers.

 

Assembly Uses, Temporary. Meeting, recreational, social facilities of a private or non-profit organization primarily for use by member or guests, or facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education (but not including schools as defined in this section) on a site that is not permanently occupied by an assembly use, for a period of not more than 30 days.

 

Attached. For purposes of determining the requirement for minimum separation between structures, any two structures shall be considered attached and not required to maintain a minimum separation if they are connected by a continuous roofline which conforms to the architectural style of the structures.

 

Attached Structure. A structure joined by a common wall or floor/ceiling assembly to another structure with a door or stairs providing interior access from the one to the other.

 

Attic. For planning and zoning purposes, an attic is the space between the underside of the roof framing (rafters or beams that directly support the roof sheathing) and the upperside of the ceiling framing. Attics are not considered a story. All areas greater than or equal to seven feet in height shall count as area for FAR calculations.

 

Automatic Teller Machine. Automatic banking terminals directly accessible to the public outside of an enclosed building.

 

Automobile Parts Sales. The retail sale of new automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).

 

Automobile Rentals. See “Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rental.”

 

Automobile Washing, Attended. A place for washing trucks or automobiles that has an attendant on-site while open to the public.

 

Automobile Washing, Unattended. A place for washing trucks or automobiles that has machinery designed to do the washing without allowing access to the bay during the process.

 

Awning. A temporary shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of rigid material or non-rigid material with a supporting framework.

 

Balcony. A platform that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail balustrade or parapet.

 

Banks. See “Financial Institutions, Retail.”

 

Barbed Wire. See “Razor/Barbed Wire.”

 

Bars. Establishments that provide on-site alcoholic beverage sales for drinking on the premises and do not admit persons under the age of 21. This classification includes businesses with Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) licenses of 40, 42, 48, 49 or 61.

 

Basement. For zoning purposes, a basement is the space below the bottom of the floor framing (joists or girders that directly support the floor sheathing) and the basement floor. To qualify as a basement, no more than 50 percent of the perimeter exterior wall may exceed six feet above the exterior grade and no portion may exceed 12 feet above the exterior grade at any point. If any part of a basement is seven feet six inches or higher, then all areas greater than five feet zero inches in height shall count as area for FAR calculations. Basements are not considered as a story (also refer to definition of “Story, First”).

 

1.12

BASEMENT

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Bedroom. A room used for sleeping, living, or dining purposes, excluding enclosed places (e.g., closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces).

 

Bed and Breakfast Inns. Establishments with no more than six guest rooms, offering lodging on a short-term rental not to exceed 30 days, typically in a converted single-family or multi-family dwelling, with incidental eating and drinking service for lodgers only provided from a single kitchen and which have a resident manager or owner.

 

Beer and Wine Stores. A retail store principally involved in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, excluding sales of “hard liquor,” “fortified wine,” or distilled spirits for consumption off the premises where sold. Stores shall be managed by a certified wine expert (sommelier or oenologist) or a certified beer expert (cicerone). This classification includes beer- or wine-only shops or facilities that are covered by a State license for “beer and wine” (Class 20 ABC license). This classification includes beer or wine tasting as an accessory use only, but does not allow for the establishment of a bar. This classification allows for accessory food sales, but does not include retail sales of food and other items as defined as a convenience store in this Code.

 

Billiard Parlors. A business establishment where one or more billiard, pool, or snooker tables or combination thereof, are maintained for hire, including, but not limited to, a “family billiard parlor” as defined in the San Leandro Municipal Code Section 4-21-100.

 

Bingo Parlors. A business or non-profit establishment where bingo is played. Bingo means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card that conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random.

 

Blockface. The properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided land, watercourse, city boundary, or other similar substantial boundary. Please refer to the Blockface illustration below.

 

1-304

Boarding House. A building with not more than four guest rooms where lodging and meals are provided for not more than 10 persons, but shall not include rest homes or convalescent homes. Guest rooms numbering five or over shall be considered a hotel. This definition includes rooming houses and lodging houses.

 

Brewpub. A public-house (pub) or restaurant that includes an on-site tasting room producing a limited amount of beer for consumption on the premises. Additionally, the sale of beer for consumption off the premises is also allowed.

 

Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

 

Building Materials and Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, plumbing supply businesses, and building contractors’ yards, but excludes establishments devoted exclusively to retail sales of paint, hardware, wall coverings, furniture, decorations, electronics, appliances, and home improvement sales, and activities classified under Vehicle/Equipment Repair and Sales classifications, including vehicle towing services.

 

Business and Trade Schools. Schools providing specialized instructional services in the business and trade fields, including university and college extension programs.

 

Business Services. Establishments providing support services to professional offices and industry, typically limited to graphic arts, graphic reproduction and delivery services, and including such services as drafting, typesetting, printing, copying and duplicating, and mail receipt, but excluding parcel processing centers and professional services, such as accounting and personnel management.

 

Cafés. Retail uses that primarily provide beverages and/or desserts for either on- or off-site consumption, including, but not limited to, coffee and tea-houses, juice bars, donut shops and ice cream/frozen yogurt parlors.

 

Cannabis. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., also referred to as marijuana, whether growing or not, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11018, as amended from time to time. This includes “cannabis” as: the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seeds of the plant incapable of germination.

 

Cannabis Dispensary. A collective, or cooperative, or other non-profit or for profit entity qualified or permitted to do business in the State of California and the City of San Leandro that distributes, dispenses, stores, exchanges, processes, delivers, makes available, transmits and/or gives away cannabis (“marijuana”). Baked products (i.e., brownies, bars, cookies, cakes), tinctures and other non-refrigerated type items are acceptable for manufacture and sale at a dispensary.

 

Canopy. A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of some durable material, which may or may not project over a public right-of-way.

 

Card Room. A space, room or enclosure, furnished or equipped with one or more tables used for the playing of cards or similar games, the use of which is available to the public or any portion of the public.

 

Caretaker’s Quarters. A dwelling unit on the site of, and accessory to, a commercial, industrial, public, or semipublic use, occupied by a guard or caretaker.

 

Carport. A permanent roofed structure open on at least two sides, designed for providing covered parking for vehicles.

 

Catering Services. Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or consumption. (See also “Restaurants, Full-Service.”)

 

Cellar. See “Basement.”

 

Cemeteries. Establishments where the remains of the dead may be kept indefinitely, whether underground or aboveground. This classification includes mausoleums and columbaria.

 

Cessation of Use. The discontinuance or abandonment of a use, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

Check-Cashing Business. See “Financial Institutions, Check Cashing and Personal Loan Services.”

 

Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales. Outdoor retail sales of Christmas trees during the Holiday Season, and pumpkins during the month of October.

 

Circuses and Carnivals. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of 30 days. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility.

 

City. The City of San Leandro.

 

Coin-Operated Laundry and Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Businesses. Any dry cleaning or laundry establishment that provides self-service machines or is not attended.

 

Collection Facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public.

 

A.    Small Collection Facility. Occupies less than 500 square feet and may include:

 

1.     Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet;

 

2.     Kiosk-type units that may include permanent structures; or

 

3.     Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials.

 

B.    Large Collection Facility. Occupies more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures as well as mobile units, bulk reverse vending machines, kiosk-type units.

 

Commercial Filming. Commercial motion picture or video photography.

 

Commercial Parking Facility. Lots offering short-term or long-term parking to the public for a fee.

 

Commercial Recreation. Provision of participant or spectator recreation or entertainment. This classification includes amusement parks, bowling alleys and ice/roller skating rinks with spectator stands, golf courses, miniature golf courses, children’s indoor playgrounds, and scale-model courses.

 

Communications Facilities. Broadcasting, recording, and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but excluding Utilities (Major) and Telecommunications antennas and towers as defined in this Code, [Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities as per Ordinance No. 98-009]. This classification includes radio, television, or recording studios; telephone switching centers; and telegraph offices.

 

Community Apartment. A dwelling unit as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 or successor section.

 

Community Gardens. A site that occupies less than one acre for non-commercial raising for family or community use of vegetables, berries, trees, fruits, vines, flowers, ornamental trees or shrubs. Crops from community gardens are limited to personal or group consumption, or for donation, only. Community garden uses may include communally-managed gardens. Community gardens may be the principal or accessory use. Community gardens may not grow cannabis or any other federally-controlled substances. Such use may not keep bees or any other animals unless allowed by Chapter 4-11 of the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

Concertina Wire. See “Razor/Barbed Wire.”

 

Conditional Use Permit. A use that may locate in certain zoning districts provided it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not impair the integrity and character of the zoned district. The Board of Zoning Adjustments either approves subject to conditions or denies such uses. Each application is considered on its individual merits.

 

Conditionally Permitted. Permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit or temporary conditional use permit.

 

Condominium. A dwelling unit as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code of the State of California or successor section. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office, or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

 

Condominium Conversion. The creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial, or commercial buildings.

 

Conforming Building. A building that conforms to all property-development regulations and requirements prescribed for the district in which it is located, except as otherwise provided in this Code.

 

Consignment. A retail establishment that accepts merchandise and related items, such as clothing and accessories, or home furnishings and household goods on a consignment basis, paying the owners of the merchandise a percentage when and if the items are sold. Related items means a clothing store that also sells accessories, such as belts and shoes or a home furnishings store that also sells home décor, and does not include donated items, drop-off bins or outdoor storage or sales.

 

Convalescent Facilities. Establishments providing care on a 24-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, including the aged, ambulatory or nonambulatory persons, the mentally ill and the addicted, but excludes general hospitals and facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services. This classification includes skilled nursing facilities and nursing homes and means only those services and facilities licensed by the State of California.

 

Convenience Stores. Retail sales of food, beverage and small convenience items primarily for off-premises consumption and typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation and a building with a floor area less than 10,000 square feet. This classification excludes tobacco stores, liquor stores, delicatessens, confectioneries, and specialty food markets, or grocery stores having a sizeable assortment of fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh-cut meat, fish or poultry. Also see “Tobacconist/Cigarette Store,” “Liquor Store,” “Beer and Wine Store,” and “Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.”

 

Corner Lot. See “Lot, Corner.”

 

Corporation Yards. Facilities providing maintenance and repair services for vehicles and equipment, and materials storage areas. This classification includes equipment maintenance and service centers and similar facilities.

 

Cottage Food Operation. A home-based food enterprise that is operated by a resident, and that has not more than one full-time equivalent cottage food employee, not including an immediate family member or household member of the cottage food operator, within the registered or permitted area of a private home where the cottage food operator resides and where cottage food products are prepared or packaged for direct and/or indirect sale to consumers. The term “cottage food operation” shall have the same meaning as provided in the California Health and Safety Code, as that section may be amended. Cottage food operations are regulated under Section 2.04.228 Cottage Food Operations of the San Leandro Zoning Code.

 

Court. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.

 

Coverage, Lot or Site. In calculating the percentage of lot coverage for the purpose of applying the regulations of this Zoning Code, the features of a structure as hereafter set forth shall not be included as coverage:

 

A.    Cornices, canopies, eaves or other projections which do not increase the volume of space enclosed by the building provided that any portion of such projections extending more than two feet from the building shall be included as coverage;

 

B.    Fire escapes up to three and one-half (3 1/2) feet;

 

C.    An uncovered stair and landing which does not extend above a ground floor entrance except for the railing; or

 

D.    Bay windows, balconies or chimneys which project from the wall not more than two  feet; provided, that, such features do not in the aggregate occupy more than one-third of the length of a wall which faces an interior side lot line, or more than two-thirds of the length of a wall which faces a street or a rear lot line.

 

Covered Porch. A roofed structure that is open on at least two sides, including the covered, unenclosed portion over porches, entryways, balconies, decks, terraces and patios. A trellis or arbor does not count as a covered porch.

 

Credit Union. See “Financial Institutions, Retail.”

 

Cross-Dock. An industrial shipping facility with truck loading docks and/or doors located on opposing sides of an enclosed or unenclosed platform. Shallow depth cross-docks (such as those with less than 75 feet between the opposing docks and/or doors, and with minimal area for storage) are typically associated with the “Truck Terminals” use classification.

 

Cultural Institutions. Non-profit institutions displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This classification includes libraries, museums, and art galleries.

 

Dance Clubs. Any establishment where the primary use is dance and where persons pay admission to dance except where admission charges are to be used for charitable, educational, religious, or social groups which do not include the distribution of profits to the sponsors or members thereof.

 

Day Care, Child or Adult. A State-licensed facility that provides care for adult clients or minor children for periods of less than 24 hours per day for any client. These facilities include the following, all of which are classified and required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services. This does not include employer-run day care services that are provided as an accessory use to an established business. For San Leandro zoning purposes, the categories are defined as follows:

 

A.    Day Care, General. As defined by California Health and Safety Code, any child or adult day care facility other than a family day care, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age child care centers.

 

B.    Day Care, Family Home. A day care facility in a single residence where an occupant of the residence provides family day care for up to 14 clients, inclusive, including adult clients and children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home.

 

Daylight Plane. An inclined plane, beginning at grade or a stated height above grade at a side or rear property line, and extending into the site at a stated upward angle to the horizontal, which may limit the height or horizontal extent of structures at any specific point on the site where the daylight plane is more restrictive than the height limit applicable at such point on the site. Please refer to the Daylight Plane illustration below.

Art

DAYLIGHT PLANE

(This diagram is illustrative)

 

Deck. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building that is supported by pillars or posts (see also, “Balcony”).

 

Department Store. A retail sales use occupying at least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of gross leasable area, that is operated subject to the overall management of a single entity or appears as such to the general public, and that sells a range of goods and services including men’s and women’s clothing, clothing accessories, and house wares and home furnishings. Department stores may also sell or provide a range of other goods or services such as appliances, electronic items, toys, giftware, specialty foods, financial or insurance services, travel services, coffee shops, etc., typically included or frequently found in businesses identified in the United States, as “department stores.”

 

Depth. See “Lot Depth.”

 

Detention Facilities. Publicly owned and operated facilities providing housing, care, and supervision for persons confined by law.

 

Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis upon. The dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Corvina, 115 Cal.App.3d 151 (1981).

 

Distribution Line. An electric power line bringing power from a distribution substation to consumers.

 

District. A portion of the City within which the use of land and structures and the location, height, and bulk of structures are governed by this Code.

 

Domestic Violence Safe House. A single housekeeping unit that exclusively houses survivors of domestic abuse and, if applicable, their children. The adult house members are to be within a program that counteracts the impacts of domestic violence and may receive Federal, State or City funding. House members agree to a program that maintains strict confidentiality of the safe houses’ location, with unpublished phone and address numbers, a prohibition on mail deliveries, and limitations or prohibition of visits from friends or family.

 

Drive-Up Facility. Service of food, goods or services from a building to persons in vehicles.

 

Drugstore. Establishments which have the primary use devoted to the sale of miscellaneous household items, including hair products, various toiletries, food items, housekeeping supplies, stationery supplies, etc., and which include the sale of prescription and non-prescription drugs as an accessory use.

 

Dwelling, Duplex. See “Two-Family Residential.”

 

Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building containing three or more dwelling units.

 

Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing one dwelling unit.

 

Dwelling Unit. One room, or a series of rooms that provides not more than one kitchen and one or more bathrooms, and is intended for occupancy by a single housekeeping unit. An individual dwelling unit is characterized by a single main pedestrian entry, with all other points of entry being visually subordinate, and an interior stairway provided between all stories.

 

Electronic Cigarette-Related Products. Any electronic device that can provide an inhalable dose of nicotine by delivering a vaporized solution, as defined by California Revenue and Tax Code Section 30121(b), or any electronic device designed to vaporize a liquid solution that releases flavored vapor and the use or inhalation of such device simulates smoking. This definition shall include any substance containing nicotine or a flavored liquid solution for vaporization through an electronic cigarette, including any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

 

Emergency Health Care. Facilities providing emergency medical service with no provision for continuing care on an inpatient basis.

 

Emergency Shelters. Facility limited to 25 beds and subject to the following requirements: the facility has an adopted management plan that includes hours and staffing; the facility provides sufficient waiting room, parking and loading facilities; and that 24-hour male and female toilets, showers and private lockers are provided.

 

Entertainment Events. Regulations pertaining to entertainment events, defined as a use classification by this Code, apply to the following events where they occur on a scheduled basis more than six days during a calendar year on the site of any permitted or conditionally permitted use, excluding events for the non-profit, charitable or educational proposes of public or private institutional uses. Entertainment events are further defined as events advertised as a stand-alone event with a set start or end time, or where separate admission is charged.

 

A.    A musical, theatrical, wrestling, cabaret, or comedy act performed by one or more persons, regardless of whether performers are compensated;

 

B.    A fashion show, except when conducted within an enclosed building used primarily for the manufacture or sale of clothing;

 

C.    Televised events.

 

Equipment Sales. The sale of large products for commercial and industrial use, e.g. X-ray machines, photocopy machines, etc.

 

Establishment of an Adult-Oriented Business. As used herein, to establish an adult-oriented business shall mean and include any of the following:

 

A.    The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business;

 

B.    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein;

 

C.    The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business;

 

D.    The relocation of any such adult-oriented business; or

 

E.    The expansion of the floor area of an existing adult-oriented business by 25 percent, or more.

 

Family. A person or a group of persons living together and maintaining a common household.

 

Farmers’ Market. The outdoor sale of products, including, but not limited to, fresh fruits, nuts, vegetables, baked goods, meats and seasonal decorative items such as flowers and Christmas wreaths made from natural materials grown by the vendor, with sales taking place between the consumer and the farmer at tables, booths or similar temporary stands.

 

Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. Establishments that primarily offer quick, take-out food service, with a menu of items that are either already prepared and held for service, or can be assembled, prepared, fried, or griddled quickly. This classification differs from “Restaurants, Full-Service” in that, generally, orders are not taken at the customer’s table; food is served in disposable wrapping or containers with disposable utensils; and limited or no table service is provided. Seating, if provided, typically consists of fixed chairs or benches. This classification excludes coffee and tea-houses, ice cream/frozen yogurt parlors and other food/beverage retailers within the “Cafés” classification. This classification applies to establishments with 2,000 square feet or more in gross floor area, and greater than 1,000 square feet of public dining area. Also see “Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale.”

 

Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. Establishments conforming to the “Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale” classification, but with less than 2,000 square feet in gross floor area, or less than 1,000 square feet of public dining area.

 

Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, separate, or screen areas of land.

 

Financial Institutions, Check Cashing and Personal Loan Services. Businesses whose primary purpose is to provide limited financial services to individuals, such as check cashing, deferred deposit loans and loans on vehicle titles. This includes, but is not limited to, check cashers, payday advance businesses and other businesses regulated by the State of California’s Check Casher Permit Program, per the California Civil Code, Section 1789.37. A financial institution, check cashing, or personal loan services use in conjunction with another use will be considered accessory to the use if said use is not advertised outside the business premises or by signs visible from the outside of the building.

 

Financial Institutions, Retail. Financial institutions that provide retail banking services to individuals and businesses. These institutions include banks, savings and loans, credit unions, security brokers and real property lending institutions. It does not include check cashing or payday advance (see “Financial Institutions, Check Cashing, and Personal Loan Services”).

 

First Story. See “Story, First.”

 

Floor Area, Gross. The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, other than a single-family home in a RO or RS District, measured to the outside face of the structural members in exterior walls, and including halls, stairways, mezzanines, elevator shafts at each floor level, service and mechanical equipment rooms, and basement or attic areas having a height of more than seven feet. For measure of floor area in a single-family home, refer to Section 2.04.404 Residential Site Plan Review—Measure of Floor Area and General Requirements.

 

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The gross floor area of a building, excluding the area used exclusively for vehicle parking and loading divided by the total lot area of the parcel on which the building is situated. Please refer to the Floor Area Ratio illustration below.

Art

FLOOR AREA RATIO

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Floor Area, Residential. The measure of floor area in a single-family home in an RO or RS District. Refer to Section 2.04.404 Residential Site Plan Review—Measure of Floor Area and General Requirements.

 

Food Processing, General. Establishments engaged in the manufacturing or processing of food or beverages for consumption and wholesale distribution where the processing of food is primarily from raw materials or involves complex food packaging. This classification includes breweries and establishments where the food processing may involve noxious or unpleasant odors.

 

Food Processing, Limited. Establishments engaged in the manufacturing or processing of food or beverages for consumption and wholesale distribution where the processing of food is primarily from previously prepared foodstuffs or is limited in nature. This classification excludes establishments where the food processing involves noxious or unpleasant odors.

 

Footprint. The ground area covered by a building excluding projections beyond the exterior walls, such as eaves, balconies and bay windows, that do not extend to grade.

 

Fortune-Telling Establishment. Any business establishment where a person purports to predict or influence future events through any magic, mystical, supernatural, occult, psychic, extrasensory, or metaphysical techniques.

 

Freight Forwarding Services. See “Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers” and “Truck Terminals.”

 

Frontage. The linear length of a building or lot facing a public way that contains a public entrance.

 

Furniture, Electronic, and Appliance Sales. Establishments retailing the following goods as their primary business: furniture, electronic equipment, and appliances. This classification excludes retailers who sell furniture, electronics and appliances as a part of a department store or retail sales, big box classification.

 

Game Centers. A commercial establishment, which contains more than four pinball machines, computer games, electronic video games, or any other similar games or devices, for the use of which fees are paid directly into the machines or to an operator regardless of whether the devices constitute the primary use or accessory or incidental use of the premises. This does not include games of chance, Internet sweepstakes, or any gambling activities, which are not permitted in any zoning district in the City.

 

Garage, Private. A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building with a permanent roof, situated on the same lot as the principal building and designed for the storage of motor vehicles, with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature; see also the definition of “Carport.”

 

Garage, Storage. A structure or part thereof used for the storage, parking or servicing of motor vehicles, but not the repair thereof.

 

Garage and Yard Sales. Sales in an R district of personal property on an occasional basis, not exceeding two times per year and on the premises of the property owner or the premises of a residential property in the immediate vicinity.

 

General Plan. The City of San Leandro General Plan, as amended.

 

Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental parking, storage and maintenance of vehicles.

 

Grade, Existing. The surface of the exterior ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists (i.e., without alteration) prior to disturbance in preparation for a project regulated by this Code.

 

Grade, Finished Ground Level. The lowest point of elevation of finished ground level within the area between a building and the property line or where the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. In cases where walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the finished ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. Please refer to the grade standards illustration below.

 

Art

GRADE STANDARDS

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Grade, Street. The top of the curb, or the top of the edge of the pavement or traveled way where no curb exists.

 

Group Housing. Shared living quarters, with a congregate arrangement, where meals are provided in a common dining area, and either no or limited cooking facilities are provided within the individual rooms or units. This classification includes rooming or boarding houses, private residential clubs, congregate and/or assisted care facilities for the elderly or persons with disabilities, and housing for individuals requiring court ordered supervision, but excludes “Residential Hotels,” “Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities,” “Convalescent Facilities,” and “Residential Congregate Care Facilities” use classifications.

 

Gun or Weapon Shop. A business establishment principally engaged in the business of selling firearms, ammunition or other “deadly weapon” as defined in Part 4, Title 2 of California Penal Code (commencing with Section 12000).

 

Hazardous Substances. Includes all substances on the comprehensive master list of hazardous substances compiled and maintained by the California Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 25282 of the California Health and Safety Code or the California Occupational Safety and Health Agency’s Hazardous Substances List; CCR Title 8, Division 1, Chapter 3.2, Subchapter 1, Article 5, Section 339. See also Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage.

 

Health and Fitness Centers. Establishments with equipment for exercise and physical conditioning. This classification includes spas, gyms, tennis clubs, racquet ball clubs, pools, sports courts and fields, climbing walls, skating rinks, batting cages, diet centers, reducing salons, fitness studios, health studios, and massage therapy as an accessory use to another health and fitness center use.

 

Hedge. Any arrangement of plants or trees forming a barrier or erected to enclose or screen areas of land and obstructing the clear view.

 

Height. A vertical dimension measured from finished ground level of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building, unless otherwise specified, to the highest point. Please refer to the Building Height illustration below. (For a definition of “height” in relation to Telecommunications antennas and towers, see Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities {as per Ordinance No. 98-009}; and for definition of height restrictions in the RS-VP sub-district, refer to Section 2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions).

Art

BUILDING HEIGHT

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Home Improvement and Interior Decoration. Establishments retailing the following goods: paint, wallpaper, carpeting, tile, floor coverings, plumbing fixtures, lighting fixtures, cabinets, countertops and other kitchen fixtures, window coverings, windows, and doors.

 

Home Occupation. Occupations conducted in a dwelling unit, portions of the garage not required for parking, or accessory building in a residential district that are incidental to the principal residential use of a lot or site and which meet the conditions of Section 2.04.220 Home Occupation in R Districts. This definition does not include “cottage food operations” defined separately herein.

 

Horticulture, Limited. The raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees, and shrubs as a commercial enterprise, provided that no nursery equipment or materials shall be stored and no structures erected. Commercial horticulture accessory to a dwelling unit shall be regulated as a home occupation in the RO District, only, per Section 2.04.208 RO District—Use Regulations.

 

Hospitals. Facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis. This classification includes incidental facilities for outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.

 

Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities. Establishments offering lodging on a less than weekly basis. This classification includes eating, drinking, and banquet service as accessory uses if under the direct control of the primary use.

 

Industrial Transfer/Storage/Treatment Facilities for Hazardous Waste: Any hazardous waste management facility, which is not a small-scale transfer and storage facility or a residuals repository. This facility category includes, but is not limited to:

 

A.    Manifested waste transfer station;

 

B.    Recycling facility;

 

C.    Aqueous treatment facility;

 

D.    Stabilization and solidification facility;

 

E.    Bioremediation facility.

 

Industry, Cannabis Product Manufacturing. Cannabis manufacturing, processing, and packaging of products derived from or infused with cannabis, including edibles, concentrates and extracts for wholesale or retail to cannabis dispensaries or other cannabis product distributors and manufacturers as allowed by State law. This definition includes cannabis manufacturers requiring a Type 6 or 7 license from the State of California. This definition does not include the cloning, planting or cultivation of cannabis plants or the direct sales, distribution, delivery, or dispensing of manufactured cannabis products to the public.

 

Industry, Custom. Establishments primarily engaged in on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale equipment.

 

Industry, General. Manufacturing of products, primarily from extracted or raw materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Uses in this classification typically involve a high incidence of truck or rail traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, equipment, or bulk fuel. This classification includes chemical manufacture or processing, laundry and dry cleaning plants, and auto dismantling within an enclosed building. This classification excludes the processing of recycled materials as a facility regulated by Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

Industry, Hazardous Materials or Hazardous Waste. Any use which involves the storage, transfer, processing, recycling, or long term disposal (residuals repository) of substantial quantities of hazardous or toxic materials or wastes.

 

Industry, Limited. Manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials; and provision of industrial services; both within an enclosed building. This classification includes processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging, but excludes basic industrial processing from raw materials, vehicle/equipment repair services, and the processing of recycled materials as a facility regulated by Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

Industry, Research and Development. Establishments primarily engaged in the research, development, and controlled production of high-technology electronic, industrial or scientific products or commodities for sale, but excludes uses that may be objectionable as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official, by reason of production of offensive odor, dust, noise, vibration, or storage of or risk associated with hazardous materials. Uses include biotechnology firms, metallurgy, optical, pharmaceutical and X-ray research, data processing, and non-toxic computer component manufacturers.

 

In-Law Unit. See “Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU).”

 

Instruction and Improvement Services. Provision of instructional services or facilities, including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, martial arts studios, and driving schools.

 

Internet Sweepstakes Center. A commercial establishment which sells a service, such as the ability to browse the world wide web or Internet, create and print documents, shop online, play games, watch video and video-related media, fax documents, use telephone services, and also provides customers with promotional sweepstake entries to obtain a prize through predetermined odds via simulated casino-style games on a computer or other electronic device or via immediate disclosure on a computer or other electronic device or via immediate disclosure from an employee.

 

Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JADU). See “Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU).”

 

Junk Yard. An outdoor space where waste, discarded or salvaged materials in excess of the normal accumulation from the use of the premises are stored or handled.

 

Kitchen. An area designed, intended or used for the preparation of food or a combination of facilities and appliances designed, intended or used for the preparation of food. The kitchen of a dwelling unit is typically that area inside the unit that serves as its primary food preparation area, and is characterized by the provision of both a refrigerator and range requiring either a 220-volt electrical connection, or is fueled by gas (e.g., LP gas, natural gas, white gas).

 

Laboratories. Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory services; or establishments with less than 2,000 square feet providing photographic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are classified as “Industry, Research and Development” or “Laboratories, Cannabis Testing Facilities.”

 

Laboratories, Cannabis Testing Facilities. Laboratories conducting safety, quality control, and analytical testing services of cannabis and products derived from cannabis as a service to cannabis dispensaries, medical facilities, government agencies, cannabis product manufacturers, or other entities as allowed by State law. This definition includes cannabis testing and laboratory facilities requiring a Type 8 license from the State of California. This definition does not include the cloning, planting or cultivation of cannabis plants or the direct sales, distribution, delivery, or dispensing of cannabis and cannabis products to the public.

 

Landscaping. An area devoted to or developed and maintained with native or exotic plantings, lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials, decorative outdoor landscape elements, pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces of rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements. Plants on rooftops or porches or in boxes attached to buildings are not considered landscaping.

 

Landscaping, Interior. The shortest circumference of a landscaped area or areas defining the perimeter or exterior boundary of the parking or loading area, or similar paved area, excluding driveways or walkways providing access to the facility (as applied to parking and load facilities or to similar paved areas). Please refer to the Landscaping: Perimeter/Interior illustration.

 

Landscaping, Perimeter. A landscaped area adjoining and outside the shortest circumferential line defining the exterior boundary of a parking or loading area, or similar paved area, excluding driveways or walkways providing access to the facility (as applied to parking and loading facilities or to similar paved areas). Please refer to the Landscaping: Perimeter/Interior illustration.

 



 

LANDSCAPING: PERIMETER/INTERIOR

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Liquor Stores. A retail store principally involved in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, including “hard liquor,” for the consumption off the premises where sold. This classification includes stores or facilities that are covered by a State license for “general alcohol sales” (Class 21 ABC license).

 

Live-Work. A structure or complex of structures that integrates space for both residential and nonresidential uses within individual units. Nonresidential uses shall operate to allow the “quiet enjoyment” expectations of neighbors. Such uses should operate with limited noise, odor and other similar impacts, consistent with applicable city ordinances. Ratios between the residential and nonresidential uses may be established as part of staff review.

 

Lot. A site or parcel of land under one ownership that has been legally subdivided, re-subdivided, or combined.

 

Lot, Corner. A site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines that have an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees. For corner lots, the owner may select either street frontage line as the front lot line, subject to approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

Lot Coverage. See “Coverage, Lot or Site.”

 

Lot Depth. The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front-lot line to the midpoint of the rear-lot line, or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear-lot line. Please refer to the Lot Depth and Lot Width illustration.

 

Art

 

LOT DEPTH AND LOT WIDTH

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Lot, Double-Frontage. An interior lot having frontage on more than one street. Each frontage from which access is permitted shall be deemed a front lot line.

 

Lot or Property Line, Interior. A lot line not abutting a street.

 

Lot or Property Line, Rear. A lot line, not a front lot line, that is parallel or approximately parallel to the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of measuring rear yard depth.

 

Lot or Property Line, Side. Any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

 

Lot or Property Line, Street. A lot line abutting a street.

 

Lot Width. The mean of the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at points 20 feet from the front lot line and 20 feet from the rear lot line, or from the rearmost point of the lot depth in cases where there is no rear lot line. Please refer to the Lot Depth and Lot Width illustration.

 

Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments providing appliance repair, office machine repair, or building maintenance services. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles (see Vehicle/Equipment Repair); or boats or ships (see Marine Sales and Services).

 

Manufactured Home. A dwelling unit manufactured elsewhere and placed on a building site as regulated in Section 2.04.392 Manufactured Homes in R Districts and constructed in accord with State of California standards for manufactured homes and with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C., Section 5401 et seq.), as amended. This definition is intended to include mobile homes and modular homes, which meet Federal and State standards for manufactured homes.

 

Marinas. Water basins with docks, mooring facilities, supplies and equipment for boats.

 

Marine Sales and Services. Establishments providing supplies and equipment for pleasure boating. Typical uses include chandlery, yacht brokerage and sales, boat rentals, and boat yards.

 

Marquee. See “Canopy.”

 

Massage Therapy. Establishments providing massage service, which comply with all local and state regulations.

 

Medical Cannabis Dispensary. A collective, or cooperative, or other non-profit or for profit entity qualified or permitted to do business in the State of California and the City of San Leandro that distributes, dispenses, stores, exchanges, processes, delivers, makes available, transmits and/or gives away cannabis (“marijuana”) for medicinal purposes to four or more qualified patients and/ or primary caregivers pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. Baked medicinal products (i.e., brownies, bars, cookies, cakes), tinctures and other non-refrigerated type items are acceptable for manufacture and sale at a dispensary.

 

Medical Supply Stores. Establishments that sell medical supplies and equipment.

 

Mezzanine. An intermediate floor placed within a room.

 

Mini-Warehouse. See “Public Storage.”

 

Mixed-Use Residential. One or more dwelling units in a building with another principal use. This classification includes housing above retail establishments in a commercial area.

 

Mobile Food Vending. The sale of food from any motorized or trailer vehicle, designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground, from which only food and beverages are sold, served free or sampled, displayed or offered for sale, as regulated by the San Leandro Municipal Code.

 

Mobile Home. A structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 35790. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Civil Code Section 799.24, or a commercial coach, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18218.

 

Mobile Home Park. An area of land where two or more mobile home sites are rented or held out for rent to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. Mobile home park shall not include a mobile home subdivision or stock cooperative.

 

Mobile Home Park Conversion. A use of a mobile home park for a purpose other than the rental or the holding out for rent of two or more mobile home sites to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. Such a conversion may affect an entire mobile home park or any portion thereof. A conversion shall include, but is not limited to, a change of the mobile home park or any portion thereof to a condominium, stock cooperative, planned unit development, or any form of ownership wherein spaces within the mobile home park are to be sold.

 

Mortuaries. Establishments where dead bodies are kept until burial. This classification includes funeral homes, but excludes cremation.

 

Multi-Family Residential. Three or more dwelling units in a single building on a site.

 

Municipal Code. The Municipal Code of the City of San Leandro, as amended.

 

Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets. Neighborhood grocery stores, and stores specializing in particular or distinctive food items, including, but not limited to, retailers whose primary business maintains a wide inventory of gourmet, health, or ethnic food items not commonly found in area supermarkets or convenience stores. This classification also includes delicatessens, confectioneries, full service bakeries, butcher, fish and poultry shops, and produce markets, and may also include a sandwich shop as an accessory use. Also see “Convenience Stores.”

 

Nonconforming Structure. A structure, which was lawfully erected but that does not conform to the development standards for lot coverage, setbacks, height, number of stories, distance between structures, or floor area ratio prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this Code or by reason of annexation of territory to the City.

 

Nonconforming Use. A use of a structure or land, which was lawfully established and maintained, but that does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this Code or by reason of annexation of territory to the City. A use that does not conform to the parking or loading regulations applicable to the district in which it is located shall not be considered a nonconforming use solely because of one or more of these nonconformities.

 

Nonhabitable Accessory Structure. A detached subordinate structure without living space, the use of which is appropriate, subordinate and customarily incidental to that of the main structure or the main use of the land and which is located on the same site with the main structure or use.

 

Nurseries. Any business which sells, primarily at retail, plants which are displayed or otherwise merchandised outside an enclosed building. Merchandise other than plants is kept with an enclosed building or a fully screened enclosure. Fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only.

 

Offices, Business and Professional. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as architectural, engineering, real estate, insurance, investment, legal, dental laboratories, and medical/dental offices. This classification includes firms developing software or providing Internet-based services, and medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office use, but excludes financial institutions.

 

Off-Street Loading Facilities. A site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

 

Open Space, Common. Usable open space with a minimum dimension of 10 feet in any direction and a minimum area of 300 square feet. (Also, see Section 2.04.356 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Open Space.)

 

Open Space, Private. A usable open space adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests and which is any of the following (Also see Section 2.04.356 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Open Space.)

 

A.    A private balcony attached to a dwelling unit with a minimum area of 60 square feet and a minimum horizontal dimension of six feet.

 

B.    A private porch, deck, patio, or court with a minimum horizontal dimension of 10 feet and a minimum area of 120 square feet.

Art

 

OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Open Space, Total. The sum of private open space and common open space.

 

Open Space, Usable. Outdoor or unenclosed area on the ground, or on a balcony, deck, porch or terrace designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian access or landscaping, but excluding parking facilities, driveways, utility or service areas, or any required front or street side yard and excluding any land area with a slope in excess of 20 percent.

 

Opposite. Walls, windows, signs, districts, or property lines shall be deemed opposite if a line perpendicular to the widest horizontal dimension would intersect the facing feature or boundary.

 

Parcel Processing and Shipping Facilities. Establishments for the processing and/or re-distribution of parcels or products, including but not limited to air and ground cargo receiving and distribution centers. This classification includes “Parcel Processing and Shipping Facilities” that provide incidental warehousing, but excludes “Truck Terminals” and parcel processing that is accessory to industrial, manufacturing or warehousing uses.

 

Park and Recreation Facilities. Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open spaces.

 

Parking Lot. A site or portion of a site, that is accessible to the public, devoted to the off-street parking of employees’ and/or customers’ passenger vehicles and light trucks, including areas for parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas, and screening walls, fences, or hedges.

 

Parking Structure. An enclosed or semi-enclosed area containing a ceiling or roof, used primarily for the short-term or temporary parking of motor vehicles, constructed either above or below grade, freestanding, or as part of a commercial or residential building.

 

Pawn Shop. A business establishment engaged in the buying and selling of new or secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by merchandise.

 

Permitted. Allowed without a requirement for approval of a use permit, temporary use permit, or other discretionary use approval under this Code.

 

Pervious Surfaces. Pervious surfaces are those that allow stormwater to infiltrate the underlying soils. Pervious surfaces shall include, but not be limited to, vegetative planting beds, porous asphalt, porous concrete, single-sized aggregate, open-jointed blocks, stone, pavers or brick that are loose-set and without mortar. Pervious surfaces are required to be contained so neither sediment nor the pervious surface discharges off the site.

 

Pharmacies. Establishments that primarily sell prescription drugs.

 

Porch. A covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building.

 

Pre-Existing. In existence prior to the effective date of this Code.

 

Processing Facility. A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing.

 

A.    Light-Processing Facility. Occupies less than 45,000 square feet, all activities are conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and includes equipment for baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials, except ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers, and repairing of reusable materials. See Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities, Subsection B Permits Required.

 

B.    Heavy-Processing Facility. Any processing facility other than a light-processing facility.

 

Project. Any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure that is subject to the provisions of this Code.

 

Public Safety Facilities. Facilities for public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection.

 

Public Storage. Storage in small individual spaces exclusively and directly accessible to a specific tenant and offered on a monthly or other limited basis. This classification includes mini-warehouses.

 

Public Transit Seating Sign. A replaceable panel for non-accessory advertising copy installed upon a fixed or movable bench intended for use by patrons of public transit systems.

 

Razor/Barbed Wire. A flat metal strip or band with regularly spaced sharp points or barbs and placed in continuous coils or strips on fences, buildings or other structures.

 

Real Estate Offices, Temporary. An office for the marketing, sales, or rental of real property.

 

Recyclable Materials. Residential, commercial and industrial materials or by-products, which are set aside, handled, packaged or offered for collection separate from garbage for the purpose of being processed and then returned to the economic mainstream in the form of commodities or products. Reusable material, including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic, and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Also see Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

Recycling. The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Also see Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

Recycling Centers. A facility for the recycling of waste paper, bottles, cans, or other materials, including small collection facilities and reverse vending machines. Also see Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

A.    Certified. A center certified by the State of California for redemption of waste materials having uniform redemption value or for any other recycling program.

 

B.    Small-Scale Hazardous Waste. A center for the collection, short-term storage, transfer, or limited processing of hazardous waste from households, small businesses or other small-scale generators.

 

Recycling Facility. A center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials, and includes facilities for the drop-off, buyback, deposit, or return for redemption, of recyclable material. Recyclable material is reusable material including, but not limited to, aluminum, glass, plastic and paper which is intended for remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. A recycling facility consists of a reverse vending machine, collection facility, or processing facility. A recycling collection facility may also consist of a facility for the collection of reusable household goods or clothes by a charitable organization. Also see Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

Regional Mall. A regional mall is defined as a complex of retail uses and related activity having a total gross leasable floor area of at least 700,000 square feet, plus associated parking and enclosed common space accessible to the public; having a wide range of retail uses including at least two department stores; and selling or providing a wide range of related goods and services such as restaurants or food courts, banks or financial services, entertainment or recreation facilities, child care services, and the like.

 

Regularly Features. The term “regularly features” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

 

Residential Congregate Care Facilities. Use of a residence for the purpose of providing, for a fee, adult day care and/or 24-hour-a-day, non-medical residential living accommodations, day treatment, or foster agency services for seven or more individuals, and where the duration of stay is determined, in whole or in part, by the individual residents’ participation in group or individual activities, such as counseling, recovery planning, and medical or therapeutic assistance. This classification includes facilities licensed by the State of California.

 

Residential Congregate Care Facilities, Limited. Use of a residence for the purpose of providing, for a fee, adult day care and/or 24-hour-a-day, non-medical residential living accommodations, day treatment, or foster agency services for up to six individuals, and where the duration of stay is determined, in whole or in part, by the individual residents’ participation in group or individual activities, such as counseling, recovery planning, and medical or therapeutic assistance. This classification includes facilities licensed by the State of California.

 

Residential Hotels. Buildings with six or more guest rooms without kitchen facilities in individual rooms, or kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of guests, and which are also the primary residences of the hotel guests.

 

Residuals Repositories for Hazardous Waste: A hazardous waste disposal facility for collection of residual wastes, defined as the residues from hazardous waste treatment facilities after treatment, and other irreducible stabilized or detoxified hazardous wastes.

 

Restaurants, Full-Service. An establishment which serves food or beverages for consumption primarily on the premises. Food is cooked or prepared on the premises on a customer-demand basis. Generally, seating and tables for on-premises customer dining is provided, with table service (waiters or waitresses) and non-disposable tableware. This classification does not include Bars, Fast Food Establishments, or Cafés (see “Bars”, “Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale” and “Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale” and “Cafés”).

 

Retail Sales. The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes, but is not limited to, clothing stores, quality re-sale consignment stores, and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby supplies, handcrafted items, gift items, jewelry, books, cameras, photographic supplies, music media, videos, sporting goods (excluding uses where gun and ammunition sale are the primary use - see “Gun or Weapon Shop” definition), kitchen utensils, hardware, antiques and vintage clothing stores, art supplies and services, musical instruments, supplies, and services, office supplies, and bicycles.

 

Retail Sales, Big Box. Large-scale discount or wholesale stores that primarily serve a regional market.

 

Retail Sales, Outdoor. Retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business.

 

Retail Services. Provision of services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, tattoo studios, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning businesses (excluding large-scale plants), photocopying, and self-service laundries. Retail services excludes coin-operated self-service laundries and coin-operated dry cleaning businesses.

 

Reverse Vending Machine(s). An automated mechanical device that accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers such as aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. Also see Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.

 

A.    Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. Designed to accept individual containers one at a time.

 

B.    Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. Designed to accept more than one container at a time and to compute the refund or credit due on the basis of weight.

 

Roof Line. The top of the parapet or the midpoint between the eave line and the top of the roof.

 

Roof Top. The covered surface of the uppermost story of a building.

 

Room, Habitable. A room meeting the requirements of the Uniform Housing Code for sleeping, living, cooking, or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms, garages, and similar spaces.

 

Rooming House. See “Boarding House.”

 

Schools, Public or Private. Educational institutions having a curriculum comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California and meeting the requirements of the State compulsory education laws.

 

Secondhand Sales. The retail sale of used items, for example, used appliances and used clothing, by secondhand dealers. This classification excludes antique shops primarily engaged in the sale of used furniture and accessories other than appliances, as well as vintage clothing or consignment stores.

 

Semi-Nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

 

Service Stations. Establishments engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other motor fuels, lubricants, parts, and accessories for automobiles and light trucks. This classification includes incidental maintenance and repair of automobiles and light trucks, but excludes body and fender work or repair of heavy trucks or vehicles.

 

Setback Line. A line within a lot parallel to a corresponding lot line, which is the boundary of any specified front, side or rear yard, or the boundary of any public right-of-way (whether acquired in fee, easement, established as a future right-of-way line, or otherwise) or a line otherwise established to govern the location of buildings, structures, or uses.

 

Sign. A visual communications device used to convey a message to its viewers. A sign shall mean and include every advertising message, announcement, declaration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interests of any person, entity, product or service. This shall include any sign located inside the store that is reasonably visible from the street.

 

Sign, Abandoned. A sign on a site or a structure which becomes vacant for a period of three months or more; a sign erected for a previous occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business; a sign which pertains to a date, event or purpose, which no longer exists; structural supports to which no sign is attached.

 

Sign, Accessory. A sign which indicates the name of the property, the name or trademark of the person in possession and control of the property, or the business conducted, services rendered, goods produced, distributed or sold, entertainment offered or event to occur upon the property upon which the sign is installed.

 

Sign, Animated. Any sign which is designed to give a message through a sequence of progressive changes of parts or lights or degree of lighting, including, but not limited to reader board signs.

 

Sign Area. The area of each individual sign surface upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. The area of a sign surface composed of characters, illustrations, backgrounds, or words attached directly to a wall or vertical surface of a building or structure shall be the area of the smallest rectangle, or series of contiguous rectangles that enclose such characters, illustrations or words.

 

Art

SIGN AREA

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Sign, Banner. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame.

 

Sign, Changeable Copy. A sign of which copy is changed manually or electrically.

 

Sign, Construction. A temporary sign identifying the persons, firms, or businesses directly connected with a construction or development project.

 

Sign, Directional. An on-premises incidental sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

 

Sign, Directly Illuminated. A sign, which is illuminated by means of light that travels directly from its source to the viewer’s eye.

 

Sign, Flag. See “Sign, Freestanding.”

 

Sign, Flashing. An illuminated sign, which exhibits changing light or color effect by blinking or any other such means, so as to provide a non-constant illumination.

 

Sign, Freestanding. A sign erected with a freestanding frame or support, mast or pole and not attached to any building. This includes “ground signs,” “flag signs,” “pole signs,” and “monument signs.”

 

Sign, Ground. See “Sign, Freestanding.”

 

Sign, Incidental. A small sign intended primarily for the convenience of the public, pertaining to goods, products, services, or facilities, which are available on the premises where the sign occurs.

 

Sign, Indirectly Illuminated. A sign, which is illuminated by means only of light cast upon an opaque surface from a concealed source.

 

Sign, Interior-illuminated. A sign illuminated by a non-visible light source located within the sign.

 

Sign, Monument. A freestanding sign with a solid base with approximately the same length and width dimension on the sign.

 

Sign, Moving. Any sign or device that has any visible moving part, visible revolving part, or visible mechanical movement.

 

Sign, Nameplate. A sign designating: (1) the name of a building; (2) the address of property; (3) the name of an occupant; or (4) the profession of an occupant.

 

Sign, Nonconforming. A sign that does not conform to the provisions of this Code.

 

Sign, Off-Site Advertising. Any sign, which advertises goods, products, services, or facilities not necessarily sold on the premises on which the sign is located. These signs are also known as off-site signs, billboards, and poster panels.

 

Sign, Pedestrian Advertising Panel. A freestanding, fixed or movable structure incorporating two (2) or more replaceable panels for non-accessory advertising copy, located and designed primarily for viewing by pedestrians and not substantially legible from a public street.

 

Sign, Pole. See “Sign, Freestanding.”

 

Sign, Political. A sign designed for the purpose of soliciting support of, or opposition to, a candidate or proposition at a public election.

 

Sign, Portable. Any movable sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building, including, but not limited to, stick signs, A-frame signs, or pennant signs.

 

Sign, Projecting. A sign which is attached to and projects from the structure or building face and is not parallel to the structure to which it is attached.

 

Sign, Public Service Information. Any sign intended primarily to promote items of general interest to the community such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control, including warning signs.

 

Sign, Real Estate. Any temporary sign pertaining to the sale, exchange, lease, or rental of land or buildings.

 

Sign, Roof. Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or above the parapet of a building.

 

Sign, Rotating. Any sign or portion thereof, which physically revolves about an axis.

 

Sign, Special Events. A temporary sign advertising or pertaining to any civic, patriotic, or special event of general public interest taking place within the City.

 

Sign, Temporary. A sign, which is installed for a limited time.

 

Sign, Temporary Window. A sign painted or constructed of paper or other lightweight material and affixed to the interior or exterior side of a window or glass area on a building for a limited time.

 

Sign, Under-Canopy. A sign installed under a canopy, awning, or marquee.

 

Sign, Wall. Any sign posted or painted or suspended from or otherwise affixed to the wall of any building or structure in an essentially flat position, or with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall. Any sign suspended from and placed approximately parallel to the front of a canopy, porch or similar covering structure shall be deemed to be a wall sign.

 

Sign, Wind. Flags, banners, pennants, or other similar devices, which consist of any material made in any shape that are fastened together in such manner as to move by wind pressure.

 

Sign, Window. A sign painted or constructed of paper or other lightweight material and affixed to the interior or exterior side of a window or glass area on a building.

 

Single-Family Residential. Buildings containing one dwelling unit and up to one accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling unit located on a single lot. This classification includes mobile home and factory-built housing.

 

Single Housekeeping Unit. An individual or two or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, and in which responsibilities for expenses, housekeeping, cooking, and other household maintenance chores are shared among the non-transient occupants. The definition of a “Single Housekeeping Unit” includes a “Domestic Violence Safe House,” but excludes “Residential Congregate Care Facilities” and “Group Housing” use classifications (e.g., assisted living facilities). A single housekeeping unit is allowed to occupy any legal dwelling unit subject to the requirements of Section 2.04.236 Maximum Dwelling Unit Occupancy (i.e., occupancy by more than 10 adults requires a zoning permit).

 

Single Ownership. Holding record title, possession under a contract to purchase, or possession under a lease, by a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, individually, jointly, in common, or in any other manner where the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.

 

Site. A lot, or group of contiguous lots not divided by an alley, street, or other right-of-way that is proposed for development in accord with the provisions of this Code, and is in a single ownership or has multiple owners, all of which join in an application for development.

 

Site Coverage. See “Coverage, Lot or Site.”

 

Small-Scale Hazardous Waste Center. A center for the collection, short-term storage, transfer, or limited processing of hazardous waste from households, small businesses or other small-scale generators. Facilities with waste streams small enough to be exempt from manifest requirements as described in California Health and Safety Code Section 25160. Wastes from any given generator must not exceed a total volume of five gallons or a total weight of 50 pounds. This definition includes household hazardous waste collection facilities. See also “Recycling Centers.”

 

Social Services Facility. A use that is operated by an organization that provides a variety of free services or goods to the community on a drop-in basis. Uses usually consist of “walk-in” clientele that utilize the facilities on a limited basis during a 24-hour period.

 

Specific Plan. A plan for a defined area that is consistent with the General Plan and with the provisions of the California Government Code pertaining to Specific Plans (Section 65450 et seq.).

 

Specified Anatomical Areas. As used herein, specified anatomical areas shall mean and include the following:

 

A.    Less than completely and opaquely covered human: (1) genitals or pubic region; (2) buttocks; and (3) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

 

B.    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; and

 

C.    Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in Subsection A or B above.

 

Specified Sexual Activities. As used herein, “specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

 

A.    The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

 

B.    Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

 

C.    Masturbation, actual or simulated; and

 

D.    Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in Subsections A through C of this definition.

 

Stadia and Sports Arenas. Outdoor or enclosed areas devoted to commercial spectator sports or entertainment.

 

Stock Cooperative. A dwelling unit as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California or successor section.

 

Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above the uppermost floor, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused floor space is more than six feet above grade (for more than 50 percent of the perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point, such usable or unused under-floor space) shall be considered a story.

1

STORY

(This diagram is illustrative)

 

Story, First. The lowest story in a building. The lowest level of a building having two or more levels is considered the “first story” when the floor level above is more than six feet above grade for at least 50 percent of the total perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above the exterior grade at any point. [If the floor level above the lowest level in NOT more than six feet above grade for at least 50 percent of the total perimeter, or is NOT more than 12 feet above the exterior grade at any point, the lowest level is considered a “basement” rather than the “first story” - also refer to definition of “basement”.]

 

1

STORY, FIRST

(This diagram is illustrative)

 

Story, Second. The story above a first story, as defined above. An addition to the upper level(s) of a multilevel hillside building is NOT considered a second story addition when the proposed addition is not directly above a “first story” (e.g., an addition built above a basement, crawlspace or at grade).

 

Street. A right-of-way permanently dedicated to common and general use by the public, including any avenue, drive, boulevard, or similar way, but not including any freeway or highway without a general right of access for abutting properties.

 

Street or Neighborhood Fairs. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, or similar activities conducted by a sponsor no more than once per year.

 

Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires a location on the ground, including a building or a swimming pool, but not including signs, access drives, walks, a fence, or a wall used as a fence if the height does not exceed six feet.

 

Supermarkets. Stores selling a wide variety of food and household items with a community-wide market area.

 

Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 65582 of the California Government Code and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community (see also “Target Population” definition). Under California Government Code Section 65583(a)(5), “supportive housing shall be considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwelling units of the same type in the same zone.” See development regulations in Section 4.04.316 Supportive and Transitional Housing.

Swap Meets, Non-Recurring. Retail sale or exchange of handcrafted, or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of 48 hours, conducted by a sponsor no more than twice in any year.

 

Swap Meets, Recurring. Retail sale or exchange of handcrafted or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of 48 hours, conducted by a sponsor on a more than twice yearly basis.

 

Swim and Tennis Clubs. Establishments that have swimming and tennis facilities for members.

 

Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs. Water-filled enclosures having a depth of 18 inches or more used for swimming, recreation, or therapy.

 

Target Population. As defined in subdivision (g) of Section 65582 of the California Government Code, persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans and homeless people.

 

Tattoo Studios. A business establishment principally engaged in the business of creating indelible marks or figures fixed upon the body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars for pay.

 

Temporary Storage Containers. An enclosed container intended for the storage of goods for a short and specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.

 

Temporary Use. An intermittent (not more than four times per year) commercial activity, the period of operation of which does not exceed 90 days at any one time. A temporary use permit shall be obtained, per Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

Tenant or Existing Tenant. A person who rents, leases or subleases, through either a written or oral agreement, real property from another.

 

Theaters. An enclosed area for the presentation of motion pictures and entertainment activities.

 

Theaters, Small Scale. Theaters of less than 100 seats primarily used for community theater and motion pictures.

 

Theaters, Outdoor. An outdoor area for the presentation of motion pictures, performing arts, or lectures. This classification includes drive-in theaters and amphitheaters.

Tobacconist/Cigarette Stores. Businesses devoted primarily to the sale of tobacco-related and e-cigarettes, and e-cigarette-related products, as defined by: (1) devoting 20 percent or more of total floor area or display area to; or (2) deriving 75 percent or more of gross sale receipts from, the sale or exchange of tobacco-related products.

 

Tobacco-Related Products. Any substance containing tobacco including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco and dipping tobacco; cigarette papers; vaporizers; or any other instrument or paraphernalia for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco and products prepared from tobacco.

 

Townhouse. A dwelling unit characterized by a separate interest in a building and the land directly beneath it, which may be combined with either an undivided interest in the remainder or easements across common areas.

 

Trade Fairs. Display and sale of goods or equipment related to a specific trade or industry for a maximum period of seven days.

 

Transfer Station. A transfer or processing station or stations which includes those facilities utilized to receive solid waste, recyclable or reusable materials, to temporary store, separate, convert or otherwise process such materials, or to transfer such materials directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, and those facilities utilized for such transformation.

 

Transitional Housing. As defined in subdivision (h) of California Government Code Section 65582, buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less that six months. Under California Government Code Section 65583(a)(5), transitional housing “shall be considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwelling units of the same type in the same zone.” See development regulations in Section 4.04.316 Supportive and Transitional Housing.

 

Transmission Line. An electric power line bringing power to a receiving or distribution substation.

 

Travel Services. Establishments providing travel information and reservations to individuals and businesses. This classification excludes car rental agencies.

 

Tree, Mature. Any tree with a diameter of 18 inches or more, measured 24 inches above existing grade.

 

Truck Terminals. Establishments whose sole purpose is to provide for the consolidation, division and/or distribution of bulk goods through the use of large trucks and trailers. This classification includes cross-dock trucking uses, which have only minimal warehousing facilities, and establishments that provide services to truck operators, including but not limited to re-fueling and dispatching. Also, refer to definition of “Cross-Dock.” (This classification excludes trucking activities accessory to industrial, manufacturing or warehousing uses, or to the “Parcel Processing and Shipping Facilities” use classification.)

 

Two-Family Residential. A building containing two dwelling units on a single lot.

 

Use. The purpose for which land or a structure, or both, are designed, constructed, arranged or intended, or for which they are occupied or maintained, let or leased.

 

Use, Accessory. See “Accessory Uses and Structures.”

 

Use, Allowed. Any use which may take place in a particular zone district.

 

Used. This term includes the following meanings: arranged, designed, constructed, altered, rented, leased, sold, occupied, and intended to be occupied.

 

Utilities, Major. Generating plants, electrical substations, above-ground electrical transmission lines, switching buildings, data centers, flood control or drainage facilities, water or wastewater treatment plants, transportation or communications utilities, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities, but excluding wireless telecommunications facilities, see Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. A structure that may have a significant effect on surrounding uses shall be regulated under this classification.

 

Utilities, Minor. Utility facilities that are necessary to support legally established uses and involve only minor structures such as electrical distribution lines, underground water and sewer lines.

 

Utility Rights-of-Way. Property substantially controlled by, and primarily used by, a public or private utility for high voltage transmission lines, flood control, railroad or similar purposes.

 

Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General. Repair of large commercial trucks [over six wheels or over 10,000 pounds], mobile homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts.

 

Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited. Repair of automobiles, small trucks (e.g., pick-up trucks), or motorcycles, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes auto repair shops, body and fender shops, wheel and brake shops, stereo installation, and tire sales and installations, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvage and tire re-treading or recapping.

 

Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New. Sale or leasing of new automobiles, motor-cycles, boats, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance. This includes used car sales in connection with new car sales.

 

Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used. Sale or leasing of used automobiles of numerous model types, motorcycle, boats, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance.

 

Vehicle /Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used. Sale or leasing of used automobiles of numerous model types, motorcycles, boats, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance, where no more than two parking spaces are devoted for such use and where the purpose is to satisfy the requirements of the California Department of Motor Vehicles to provide an office location where customers can complete required paperwork and take possession of a vehicle purchased primarily via Internet activities or fleet sales. Display of vehicles “For Sale” is prohibited.

 

Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rental. Rental of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and heavy equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance, but excluding maintenance requiring pneumatic lifts.

 

Vehicle Storage. Storage of operative or inoperative vehicles. This classification includes storage of parking tow-aways, impound yards, storage lots for automobiles, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and boats, including re-occurring storage of trucks as an “off-site” annex facility, but does not include “parking lots” or vehicle dismantling.

 

Visible. Likely to be noticed by a person of average height walking on a street or sidewalk. When related to screening or vegetation, it shall refer to conditions two years after installation of any planting intended to screen a view.

 

War Games Establishment. Any business that collects money, for profit or non-profit purposes, to provide a simulated war experience.

 

Warehouse - Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. Distribution and warehousing facilities, such as order-processing fulfillment centers, logistics business, and other facilities that provide for the shipment of an on-site inventory of goods and products directly to retail/wholesale customers or retail stores. This classification includes facilities for the repackaging of consumer goods for shipment to retail stores. (This classification excludes warehousing activity accessory to an industrial and/or manufacturing use, and also excludes “Truck Terminals” and “Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers” with incidental warehousing.)

 

Warehouse - Storage Facilities. Warehousing facilities primarily used for the storage and/or consolidating of items such as raw materials, private goods, and the intermediary storage of bulk goods intended for further distribution. This classification includes moving and furniture storage companies. (This classification excludes warehousing activity accessory to an industrial and/or manufacturing use and, also, excludes “Truck Terminals” and “Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers” with incidental warehousing.)

 

Window, Required. An exterior opening in a habitable room meeting the area requirements of the Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 7-5, Article 3 of the Municipal Code).

 

Wireless Telecommunications Facility. An unstaffed communications facility containing communication towers and/or antennas and any related equipment for the purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio frequency waves, including antennas and all ancillary equipment. It does not include radio and television towers, antennas or related equipment for commercial broadcast or amateur use; citizens band and any other miscellaneous telemetric and control communications systems.

 

Yard. An open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this Code, including a front yard, side yard, or rear yard.

 

Yard, Front. A yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the front setback line. (See illustrative diagram below.)

 

Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and the rear setback line except that on a corner lot the rear yard shall extend only to the side yard abutting the street. (See illustrative diagram below.)

 

Yard, Side. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front property line of the site where no front yard is required, to the front line of the required rear yard, or the rear property line of the site where no rear yard is required, the width of which is the horizontal distance between the side property line and the side setback line except that the side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall extend to the rear lot line. (See illustrative diagram below.)

Art

YARD TYPES

(This diagram is illustrative)

Zoning Enforcement Official. That person designated by the City Manager as responsible for determining compliance with the Zoning Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-014 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2017-001 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-011 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2014-003 § 3; Ord. 2013-006 § 3; Ord. 2011-004 § 1; Ord. 2011-003 § 1; Ord. 2008-002 § 1; Ord. 2007-005 § 1; Ord. 2004-007 § 1; Ord. 2004-004 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

1.12.112 Responsibilities
 

Title 1 of the Municipal Code defines responsibilities of the Board of Zoning Adjustments, the Planning Commission, and the City Council for administration of the Zoning Code. Responsibilities of the Zoning Enforcement Official and the Site Development Sub-Commission shall be as follows:

 

A.    Zoning Enforcement Official. The Zoning Enforcement Official’s responsibilities shall include interpreting and enforcing all regulations and standards of this Code, and has the following duties, as specified below:

 

1.     Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

a.     Approval of Administrative Permits. Specifically, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall be responsible for approving administrative permits, including administrative reviews, administrative exceptions, certificates of compatibility, game center permits, home occupation permits, outdoor facility permits, satellite and microwave antenna permits, sign permits (including sign exceptions), site plan approvals, temporary use permits, and zoning permits, landscape plans, and, in consultation with the Traffic Engineer, parking requirements for certain uses, collective provision of parking, off-site parking, and specific parking area design.

 

b.     Approval of Minor Modifications. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall approve minor modifications to previously approved use permit, variance, parking exception and Planned Development approvals.

 

c.     Inventory and Enforcement. The Zoning Enforcement Official also shall be responsible for inventorying illegal or abandoned signs and nonconforming uses and structures and enforcement of the regulations and standards of this Code.

 

The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer matters involving major development issues to the Site Development Sub-Commission, Planning Commission, or the Board of Zoning Adjustments for action and may consult with the City Attorney on questions of interpretation.

 

B.    Site Development Sub-Commission. The Site Development Sub-Commission, created pursuant to Chapter 1-3, Article 12, of the Municipal Code, has the following organization and duties, as specified:

 

1.     Membership. The Site Development Sub-Commission shall consist of three  members. Notwithstanding the appointment procedure outlined in Section 1-3-105 of the Municipal Code, each of the three members shall be appointed so that: (a) one is either a member of the Planning Commission or the Board of Zoning Adjustment, and is to be appointed to the Sub-Commission by the mayor; (b) one is a member of the Planning Commission and is to be appointed to the Sub-Commission by the Chair of the Planning Commission; and (c) one is a member of the Board of Zoning Adjustments and is to be appointed to the Sub-Commission by the Chair of the Board of Zoning Adjustments.

 

2.     Duties of the Site Development Sub-Commission.

 

a.     Site Plan Approval. The Sub-Commission shall review requests for Site Plan, Residential Site Plan, and View Preservation/Site Plan approval that have been referred by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

b.     Signs. The Sub-Commission shall review requests for approval of signs as required by Chapter 4.12 Signs and others that have been referred by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

c.     Industrial Shipping and Loading Performance Standards. As referred by the Zoning Enforcement Official, the Sub-Commission shall review claims made of a business’ noncompliance with the performance standards of Section 2.12.328 Parcels Adjoining Residential Districts—Additional Performance Standards, and may propose a resolution between the business and the complaining party. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Title 2—Base District Regulations
Chapter 2.04 R Residential Districts
Chapter 2.08 Commercial and Professional Districts
Chapter 2.12 I Industrial Districts
Chapter 2.16 OS Open Space District
Chapter 2.20 PS Public and Semipublic District

Chapter 2.04 R Residential Districts
2.04.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes, the specific purposes of residential districts are to:

 

A.    Provide appropriately located areas for residential development that are consistent with the General Plan and with standards of public health and safety established by the Municipal Code.

 

B.    Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling, and protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, population density, traffic congestion, and other adverse environmental effects.

 

C.    Protect residential areas from fires, explosions, landslides, toxic fumes and substances, and other public safety hazards.

 

D.    Protect adjoining single-family residential districts from excessive loss of sun, light, quiet, and privacy resulting from proximity to new development.

 

E.    Achieve a high standard of site and building design and design compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.

 

F.     Promote development of housing affordable by low- and moderate-income households by providing a density bonus for projects in which a portion of the units are affordable for such households.

 

G.    Provide sites for public and semipublic land uses needed to complement residential development or requiring a residential environment.

 

H.    Ensure the provision of public services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities.

 

The additional purposes of each R Residential District are:

 

RD Residential Duplex District. To provide opportunities for two-family housing at appropriate locations.

 

RM Residential Multi-Family District. To provide opportunities for multiple residential uses, including town houses, condominiums, multi-dwelling structures, or cluster housing with landscaped open space for residents’ use, and apartments. Single-family and duplex dwellings are permitted uses in these districts. Four types of multi-family districts are established:

 

RM-3000 District, where the density is 14.5 dwellings per gross acre.

 

RM-2500 District, where the density is 17.5 dwellings per gross acre.

 

RM-2000 District, where the density is 22 dwellings per gross acre.

 

RM-1800 District, where the density is 24 dwellings per gross acre.

 

RO Residential Outer District. To provide opportunities for additional single- and two-family dwellings on larger lots, subject to appropriate standards and to permit horticulture, animal husbandry, and small-scale truck gardening within limitations consistent with the basic residential character of the district.

 

RS Residential Single-Family District. To provide opportunities for single-family residential land use in neighborhoods, subject to appropriate standards. There are two sub-districts of the RS District. One, indicated by a “-40” designation, is intended for areas where the minimum front yard setback is 40 feet. The other, indicated by a –VP, is intended for “view preservation,” where the maximum height limit is 18 feet and all new homes and additions are subject to discretionary review to prevent unreasonable blockage of views.

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 1. Use Regulations
2.04.200 RD District—Use Regulations
 

A.    RD District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RD District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Garage and Yard Sales. (Limited to two times per year on the premises of the property owner or a residential property in the immediate vicinity.)

3.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Public.

4.     Single-Family Residential.

5.     Two-Family Residential.

6.     Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    RD District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RD District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Private Noncommercial.

4.     Public Safety Facilities.

5.     Schools, Public or Private.

6.     Swim and Tennis Clubs.

7.     Utilities, Major.

 

C.    RD District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RD District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Community Gardens. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.380 Community Gardens)

2.     Day Care, General.

3.     Telecommunications Antennas, Architecturally-Integrated and/or Co-Locations & Modifications to Existing Tower Structures per Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

 

D.    RD District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the RD District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-005 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.204 RM District—Use Regulations
 

A.    RM District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RM District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Garage and Yard Sales. (Limited to two times per year on the premises of the property owner or a residential property in the immediate vicinity.)

3.     Multi-Family Residential.

4.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Public.

5.     Single-Family Residential.

6.     Two-Family Residential.

7.     Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    RM District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RM District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Bed and Breakfast Inns.

4.     Group Housing.

5.     Manufactured Home Parks.

6.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Private Noncommercial.

7.     Public Safety Facilities.

8.     Schools, Public or Private.

9.     Swim and Tennis Clubs.

10.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    RM District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RM District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Community Gardens. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.380 Community Gardens)

2.     Day Care, General.

3.     Telecommunications Antennas, Architecturally-Integrated and/or Co-Locations & Modifications to Existing Tower Structures per Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

 

D.    RM District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the RM District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-005 § 2; Ord. 2004-023 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.208 RO District—Use Regulations
 

A.    RO District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RO District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Husbandry. (Subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.240 RO District—Animal Husbandry.)

3.     Garage and Yard Sales. (Limited to two times per year on the premises of the property owner or a residential property in the immediate vicinity.)

4.     Horticulture, Limited.

5.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Public.

6.     Single-Family Residential.

7.     Additional Residential Dwelling Units, subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.384 RO District—Additional Dwelling Units.

8.     Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    RO District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RO District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classifications.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Private Noncommercial.

4.     Public Safety Facilities.

5.     Schools, Public or Private.

6.     Utilities, Major.

 

C.    RO District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RO District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Community Gardens. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.380 Community Gardens.)

2.     Day Care, General.

3.     Telecommunications Antennas, Architecturally-Integrated and/or Co-Locations & Modifications to Existing Tower Structures per Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

 

D.    RO District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the RO District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-005 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.212 RS District—Use Regulations
 

A.    RS District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RS District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Garage and Yard Sales. (Limited to two times per year on the premises of the property owner or a residential property in the immediate vicinity.)

3.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Public.

4.     Single-Family Residential.

5.     Two-Family Residential, Pre-Existing. (These pre-existing two-family residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming, but no new uses shall be established.)

6.     Utilities, Minor.

 

 

B.    RS District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RS District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Private Noncommercial.

4.     Public Safety Facilities.

5.     Schools, Public or Private.

6.     Swim and Tennis Clubs.

7.     Utilities, Major.

 

C.    RS District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the RS District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Community Gardens. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.380 Community Gardens.)

2.     Day Care, General.

3.     Telecommunications Antennas, Architecturally-Integrated and/or Co-Locations & Modifications to Existing Tower Structures per Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

 

D.    RS District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the RS District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-005 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.216 Additional Use Restrictions—Residential Districts
 

All uses not listed as permitted, conditionally permitted, subject to administrative review, or subject to site development review are prohibited, unless a determination is made by the Zoning Enforcement Official pursuant to Section 5.04.112 Uses Not Listed.

 

In addition to the uses listed above, the following regulations shall apply:

 

A.    Home Occupations are subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.220 Home Occupation in R Districts.

 

B.    Nonconforming Uses are subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

 

C.    Family Day Care Homes are subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.224 Family Day Care Homes.

 

D.    Cottage Food Operations are subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.228 Cottage Food Operations.

 

E.    Residential Congregate Care Facilities are subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.232 Residential Congregate Care Facilities. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.220 Home Occupation in R Districts
 

A.    Permit Required. A home occupation in a residential use shall require a home occupation permit, obtained by filing a completed application form with the Zoning Enforcement Official. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall issue the permit upon determining that the proposed home occupation complies with the requirements of this section.

 

B.    Contents of Application. An application for a home occupation permit shall contain:

 

1.     The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

 

2.     A complete description of the proposed home occupation, including, but not limited to, the number and occupation of persons employed or persons retained as independent contractors, or otherwise engaged or participating in the business, amount of floor space occupied, provisions for storage of materials, and number and type of vehicles or equipment used.

 

C.    Required Conditions. Home occupations shall comply with the following regulations:

 

1.     No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed on site or report to work at the site in the conduct of a home occupation. This prohibition also applies to independent contractors.

 

2.     There shall be no interior or exterior activity related to the home occupation inconsistent with or interfering with residential use of the property or detrimental to property in the vicinity.

 

3.     A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a building and shall occupy no more than the lesser of 500 square feet or 25 percent of the floor area. No outdoor storage of materials or supplies shall be permitted in conjunction with the home occupation.

 

4.     The existence of a home occupation shall not be apparent beyond the boundaries of the site, and no home occupation shall involve the use of a sign.

 

5.     A home occupation shall comply with the performance standards prescribed by Section 4.04.340 Performance Standards, provided that no noise shall be perceptible at or beyond the property line.

 

6.     A home occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic detrimental to property in the vicinity. All deliveries of materials related to a home occupation shall be by the U.S. Postal Service or similar carrier, or by means of vehicles customarily kept on the site by the permit holder or family members.

 

7.     A home occupation shall not result in a reduction or elimination of any required parking space.

 

8.     Any vehicle or vehicles used by the applicant in conjunction with the home occupation or with any related business activity shall be parked in a manner so as not to be visible from a public street. This limitation shall not apply to standard passenger vehicles or trucks and vans of three-quarter-ton or less in size, so long as no advertising of the home occupation or any related business activity (except that required by law) is displayed in or upon such vehicles.

 

9.     No advertising of the home occupation (including business cards) shall include the applicant’s address.

 

The permit for a home occupation that is not operated in compliance with these regulations shall be revoked by the Zoning Enforcement Official after 30 days’ written notice unless the home occupation is altered to comply.

 

D.    Business License and Renewal. A home occupation permit shall remain effective with the issuance and annual renewal of the required business license.

 

E.    Appeals. In accord with Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions, decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments by the applicant or by any interested party. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

2.04.224 Family Day Care Homes
 

A.    Family Day Care Homes as a Residential Use. Licensed family day care operations, as defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, shall be permitted in any dwelling in the City, including in apartments and multifamily dwelling units. Family day care homes are considered a residential use of property and may be permitted in all Residential Districts and all other Zoning Districts in which residential uses are either permitted, conditionally permitted, or subject to administrative review. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2012-001 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.228 Cottage Food Operations
 

Cottage food operations are subject to the following regulations:

 

A.    Permitted Location. Cottage food operations shall be permitted in any dwelling in the City.

 

B.    Required Permits. Any dwelling can be used for a cottage food operation when the Zoning Enforcement Official has granted a cottage food operation permit.

 

C.    Cottage Food Operation Permit—Compliance with Standards. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall grant a permit for the cottage food operation only if after review of the application for such permit, inspection of the premises and any other necessary information, the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that the application complies with the following standards:

 

1.     Spacing. No cottage food operation shall be located within 150 feet of any other cottage food operation, as measured from the exterior lot lines along the property frontages.

 

2.     On-Street Parking. No cottage food operation shall be located upon a lot having less than 32 feet of legally permitted parking along the frontage of the lot.

 

3.     Employee Parking and Customer Parking Circulation Plan. The driveway of a cottage food operation may be used to provide off-street parking required by Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations if such use will not obstruct a sidewalk or other public right-of-way.

 

The applicant shall provide the Zoning Enforcement Official with a written plan for the administration of parking and traffic operations related to the proposed cottage food operation. This plan shall include controls for vehicle circulation, drop-off and pick-up of cottage food related products and parking for the employee so that parking, loading, unloading and turning movements are compatible with the residential environment in which the cottage food operation will be located.

 

4.     Noise Control. The level of noise in connection with the operation of a cottage food operation shall not be persistently maintained at a level of 55 decibels or greater, as measured from any point along or beyond the property line of the subject premises.

 

5.     Traffic. A cottage food operation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic detrimental to property in the vicinity. All deliveries of materials related to a cottage food operation shall be by the U.S. Postal Service or similar carrier, or by means of vehicles customarily kept on the site by the permit holder or family members in trucks or vans of three-quarter-ton or less in size.

 

6.     Parking. A cottage food operation shall not result in a reduction or elimination of any required parking space. One off-street parking space shall be provided for employees, per Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required. Said employee parking may be uncovered and located in a driveway.

 

7.     Vehicles. Any vehicle or vehicles used by the applicant in conjunction with the cottage food operation or with any related business activity shall be parked in a manner so as not to be visible from a public street. This limitation shall not apply to standard passenger vehicles or trucks and vans of three-quarter-ton or less in size.

 

8.     Required State Permits or Licenses. No permit issued pursuant to this section shall become operative until copies of the Alameda County application/permitting form and City business license have been filed with the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

9.     Nontransferable. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable and shall not run with the land.

 

D.    Notwithstanding the above, Standards C.1: Spacing and C.2: On-Street Parking will not apply to a cottage food operation where the permit applicant declares on the application form that the cottage food operation will not be making any customer sales directly from the dwelling or property.

 

Notwithstanding the above, Standards C.1: Spacing and C.2: On-Street Parking will not apply to a cottage food operation that operates in a location where there are two or more on-site, off-street, dedicated parking spaces for guests.

 

E.    Administrative Exception Provision. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception, per Section 2.04.400 Administrative Exceptions, if an applicant cannot meet the provisions of Subsections C.1 through C.7.

 

F.     Appeals. In accord with Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions, decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments by the applicant or by any interested party. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2013-006 § 3)

 

2.04.232 Residential Congregate Care Facilities
 

A.    Purpose and Intent. The City Council finds that elderly persons, persons suffering from chronic illnesses, and persons with mental or physical disabilities, including persons recovering from drug and/or alcohol addiction, often benefit from living in a non-institutional residential environment, which is frequently cost-effective and more humane and therapeutic. The Council also finds that, under the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq., the City has an obligation to provide reasonable accommodation for the disabled, including changing, waiving, and making exceptions to zoning rules that would otherwise have the effect of limiting the ability of such individuals to live in the residence of their choice in the community. The Council further finds that the preservation and protection of the character of residential neighborhoods is in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, and that over-concentration of residential facilities for the individuals listed above can impair the character of residential neighborhoods, thereby defeating the very reason for providing residential accommodations for such individuals. Thus, the Council concludes that a set of land use laws that flexibly limits the concentration of residential facilities for the individuals listed above can balance the City’s complementary interests in reasonably accommodating disabled individuals seeking a residential living environment and in preserving the character of residential neighborhoods. The purpose of this section is to enact such a law. In enacting this law, the Council has attempted to achieve the goals described above by removing any special requirements for facilities for the disabled that would limit such individuals’ choice of places to live; to the extent that such residences are subject to requirements different from those applicable to similar uses of land, the Council has concluded that no less discriminatory alternatives exist that would as effectively promote its interests in reasonable accommodation and the preservation of residential neighborhoods.

 

B.    Residential Congregate Care Facilities as a Residential Use. Residential Congregate Care Facilities, as defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, are considered a residential use of property, and may be permitted in all Residential Districts, and all other Zoning Districts in which residential uses are either permitted, conditionally permitted, or subject to administrative review, and subject to the limitations prescribed in this section.

 

C.    Applicability of Regulations. Residential Congregate Care Facilities shall be subject to the zoning requirements of this section, and any subdivision, housing, and building regulations and codes expressly applicable to such Facilities, including building and fire safety requirements. Nothing in those regulations and codes shall be construed to prohibit such Facilities from locating where a residential use would otherwise be permitted or conditionally permitted. No privately created covenant, equitable servitude, or other contract or agreement shall be used as the basis of denial of permission to operate a Residential Congregate Care Facilities that has met all other applicable requirements.

 

D.    Over-Concentration and Minimum Spacing. To prevent an over-concentration of Residential Congregate Care Facilities in the City, all new Facilities for which the contemplated number of residents is more than six (not including live-in staff), and existing Facilities that wish to increase the number of residents to more than six, must be a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from another such Facility. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent more than one Facility from locating in an individual apartment/condominium complex, providing the spacing requirements of this subsection are met. An adjustment to the required minimum spacing may be granted pursuant to Subsection G: Adjustments to Required Minimum Spacing Requirement below.

 

E.    Small Facilities Exempt from Required Minimum Spacing. Residential Congregate Care Facilities with six or less residents (not including live-in staff) are exempt from the spacing requirements of Subsection D: Over-Concentration and Minimum Spacing above. Such Facilities, defined as “Residential Congregate Care Facilities, Limited” in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, are permitted in all Residential Districts, and shall be permitted in all other Zoning Districts pursuant to the same regulations as would apply to any other residential use in such Districts.

 

F.     Facilities with Total Occupancy of More 10 Adults. Residential Congregate Care Facilities with more than 10 residents (including staff) who are 18 years of age, or older, are subject to the requirements of Section 2.04.236 Maximum Dwelling Unit Occupancy.

 

G.    Adjustments to Required Minimum Spacing Requirement. Approval to locate a Residential Congregate Care Facilities with more than six residents (not including live-in staff) closer than 1,000 feet from another such Facility is subject to approval of an Adjustment to the Minimum Spacing Requirement, as outlined below:

 

1.     Application and Noticing. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall hold a public hearing on all applications for an Adjustment to the Minimum Spacing Requirement pursuant to this section. Public notices shall provide notice as set forth in Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing.

 

2.     Findings Requiring Denial of Request. All applications for Adjustment to the Minimum Spacing Requirement pursuant to this section shall be granted unless the Board of Zoning Adjustments finds all of the following:

 

a.     That the proposed Residential Congregate Care Facility, at the location being requested, would impose an undue administrative or financial burden on the City;

 

b.     That the proposed Residential Congregate Care Facility, at the location being requested, would effect a fundamental change in the nature of the neighborhood in which it proposes to locate; and

 

c.     That the proposed Residential Congregate Care Facility, at the location being requested, would significantly compromise the City’s interest in maintaining either the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood or reasonable accommodation to disabled persons seeking a residential living environment.

 

3.     Adjustment Review Process Does Not Limit Number of Facilities. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall neither interpret nor enforce this subsection in a manner, which creates a ceiling quota on the number of Residential Congregate Care Facilities that may locate in the City, or impose limitations, beyond those prescribed by Code, as to the number of persons who may live in such Facilities.

 

4.     Ability to Impose Conditions. The Board of Zoning Adjustments may impose conditions on an Adjustment to Spacing Limitations, in the same manner and subject to the same limitations as provided for the approval of a Use Permit or Variance, as prescribed in Section 5.08.128 Conditions of Approval.

 

5.     Appeals. A Decision by Board of Zoning Adjustments may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.236 Maximum Dwelling Unit Occupancy
 

To ensure consistency with the density policies of the General Plan and with the rights of individuals living as a household, occupancy by persons living as a single household (whether or not related by blood or marriage) in a dwelling unit shall comply with the California Uniform Housing Code.

 

A.    A zoning permit shall be required for occupancy of a dwelling unit by more than 10 persons 18 years or older. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.240 RO District—Animal Husbandry
 

The maintenance of horses, cows, goats, cats, dogs, rabbits, chinchillas, guinea pigs, poultry, pigeons, and other similar animals is permitted on a lot with one dwelling unit, subject to the following regulations:

 

A.    The slaughter of small animals, such as poultry and rabbits is permitted only where intended for consumption by the resident family.

 

B.    The keeping, feeding, and maintenance of horses, cows or goats is permitted for non-profit purposes only. The keeping, feeding and maintenance of dogs, cats, rabbits, chinchillas, guinea pigs, poultry, pigeons, and other similar animals is permitted for the purpose of profit only where the sale of animals or animal products on the site is clearly subordinate and incidental to the residential use of the property.

 

C.    No animal other than household pets shall be kept within a dwelling, or within 20 feet of a dwelling or of a required front yard, or within 60 feet of the front lot line.

 

D.    The maximum space devoted to the keeping of such animals shall be 5,000 square feet or 20 percent of the lot, whichever is less.

 

E.    Housing or caging of animals shall be adequate and sanitary. All animal food except hay and straw shall be stored in rodent-proof containers.

 

F.     The number of animals other than household pets shall be limited by the following requirements of open space:

 

1.     For each horse or cow - 4,000 square feet

 

2.     For each sheep or goat - 2,000 square feet

 

3.     For each dog not a household pet - 1,000 square feet

 

4.     For each cat not a household pet - 500 square feet

 

5.     For each large animal, other than above - 2,000 square feet

 

6.     For each small animal, such as rabbit or fowl - 250 square feet

 

Calculation of the total open space requirement shall be cumulative, except that one-half of the total requirement for large animals may be put toward the required space for small animals. Un-weaned young of animals and young of small animals and fowl under the age of six months can be excluded when determining the open space requirements, if the number of such animals is not twice the number of permitted animals at any one time.

 

G.    If any part of an RO District is recorded to be in a district in which animal husbandry is not a permitted accessory use, such use shall cease within six months from the effective date of the zoning. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

Article 2. Development Regulations
2.04.300 Property Development Regulations—Residential Districts
 

The following sections set forth the property development regulations of the RD, RM, RO and RS Districts. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.304 Maximum Density
 

Zoning District

Maximum Density

RD

2 dwelling units per parcel

RM-3000

14.5 dwelling units per acre

RM-2500

17.5 dwelling units per acre

RM-2000

22 dwelling units per acre

RM-1800

24 dwelling units per acre

RO

Varies based on parcel size.
See Section 2.04.384 RO District—Additional Dwelling Units

RS

1 dwelling unit per parcel

RS-40

1 dwelling unit per parcel

RS-VP

1 dwelling unit per parcel

 

A.    Where a corner lot has a property line radius of 20 feet or less, the area bounded by the extended property lines and the corner radius shall be considered part of the lot area.

 

B.    Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units do not count toward the maximum density. See Section 2.04.388 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.308 Minimum Lot Area
 

Zoning District

Minimum Lot Area (square feet)

Minimum Lot Area for Corner Lot (square feet)

RD

5,000

6,000

RM-3000

6,000

7,000

RM-2500

7,500

8,500

RM-2000

10,000

12,000

RM-1800

10,000

12,000

RO

8,000

8,000

RS

5,000

6,000

RS-40

5,000

6,000

RS-VP

5,000

6,000

 

A.    The Minimum Lot Area shall be subject to the regulations of Sections 4.04.304 Development on Lots Not Meeting Minimum Area or Width, and 4.04.308 Development on Lots Divided by District Boundaries. Where a corner lot has a property line radius of 20 feet or less, the area bounded by the extended property lines and the corner radius line shall be considered part of the lot area. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.312 Minimum Lot Width
 

Zoning District

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Minimum Lot Width for

Corner Lot (feet)

RD

50

60

RM-3000

60

70

RM-2500

75

85

RM-2000

100

120

RM-1800

100

120

RO

60

60

RS

50

60

RS-40

50

60

RS-VP

50

60

 

A.    The Minimum Lot Width shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.304 Development on Lots Not Meeting Minimum Area or Width. Where a corner lot has a property line radius of 20 feet or less, the area bounded by the extended property lines and the corner radius line shall be considered part of the lot area. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.316 Minimum Yards
 

A.    Minimum Building Setback. The minimum yard setback for building placement is as prescribed below. Additional building setback requirements may also apply as specified in Subsections B and C.

 

Zoning District

Front (feet)

Side (feet)

Corner Side (feet)

Rear (feet)

RD

20

5

10

15

RM-3000

20

Min.6; Avg.10

20

15

RM-2500

15

Min.6; Avg.10

15

15

RM-2000

15

Min.6; Avg.10

15

15

RM-1800

15

Min.6; Avg.10

15

15

RO

20

6-12

10

10-25

RS

20

5

10

15

RS-40

40

5

10

15

RS-VP

20

5

10

15

 

B.    Minimum required yard setbacks shall be subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.340 R Districts—Adjustments to Minimum Yard Requirements; and in the RO District, the regulations of Section 2.04.376 RO District—Additional Setback and Lot Coverage Requirements.

 

C.    Determination of Front and Corner Side Yards. For corner lots, the owner may select either street frontage line as the front lot line, subject to approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.320 Maximum Height of Structures
 

Zoning District

Height (feet)

RD

30(B)

RM-3000

40(B)

RM-2500

45(B)

RM-2000

50(B)

RM-1800

50(B)

RO

30(C)(D)

RS

30(C)

RS-40

30(C)

RS-VP

18(E)

 

A.    General Exceptions to Height Limits. The maximum height of a structure, other than in the RS-VP District, shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.320 Exceptions to Height Limits.

 

B.    Upper Story in RD or RM Districts. Residential construction projects that create or enlarge an upper story are subject to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval.

 

C.    Two-Story or Three-Story in RO, RS, and RS-40 Districts. Residential construction projects that create or enlarge a second or third story are subject to Section 2.04.408 RO, RS and RS-40 Districts—Residential Site Plan Review.

 

D.    Additional Height Restriction in RO District. Any portion of a dwelling located within 20 feet of the rear lot line shall not exceed 15 feet in height.

 

E.    Additional Height Restrictions in RS-VP Sub-District.

 

1.     Alternate Definition to Measure Maximum Height of Structure in RS-VP Sub-District. Notwithstanding the definition of “Height” in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, the height of a structure in the RS-VP sub-district shall not exceed a height of 18 feet, as defined below:

 

a.     Establishing Maximum Building Height. The 18-foot height limit is established by an assumed plane 18 feet above existing grade, as measured perpendicularly from the existing grade. Except for chimneys, vents, and non-commercial reception antennas, no portion of the structure, including any part of the roof, may exceed this 18 feet height limit. (See illustration “Examples of 18 Foot Height Limit.”)

 



 

EXAMPLES OF 18 FOOT HEIGHT LIMIT IN RS-VP SUB-DISTRICT

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

b.     Documenting Compliance with Maximum Building Height. As part of any application for View Preservation/Site Plan Review (which is required for any development in the RS-VP sub-district, as per Section 2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions), applicants shall illustrate the proposal’s height by providing no less than two sectional views, drawn through the proposed structure and perpendicular to existing contours, one of which shall illustrate the tallest point of the structure (i.e., where the structure would be at its maximum height above “existing grade”), and the other being drawn at approximately the center of the structure.

 

2.     Definition of “Existing Grade.” See Section 1.12.108 Definitions “Existing Grade” and illustration “Examples of 18 Foot Height Limit” above.

 

3.     Maximum of One Story. A maximum of one story is permitted in the RS-VP sub-district, except that the improvement of a basement or space below an existing habitable story (i.e., construction of a new habitable story within the building envelope of a pre-existing structure) is exempt from this one-story limitation.

 

4.     Exceptions. Exceptions may be granted to the 18 feet and/or one-story height limit pursuant to Section 2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions.

 

5.     Pre-Existing Structures. Notwithstanding the restrictions specified in Subsection B.3 of Section 4.20.108 Alterations and Expansions on allowed improvements to nonconforming structures, single-family residences in the RS-VP sub-district permitted prior to August 15, 2001, and are nonconforming only because they exceed the height limitation of this subsection, may be improved by enlargements or alterations of any value. If damaged or destroyed, such structures may be reconstructed as specified by Subsection B.1 of Section 4.20.116 Restoration of a Damaged Structure and Its Nonconforming Use (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.324 Daylight Planes in R Districts
 

Daylight Planes are intended to provide for light and air, and to limit the impacts of bulk and mass on adjacent properties. “Daylight Plane” means a height limitation that, when combined with the maximum height limit, defines the building envelope within which all new structures or additions must be contained. The daylight plane may further limit the height or horizontal extent of the building at any specific point where the daylight plane is more restrictive than the height limit applicable at such point on the site. The daylight plane shall be measured separately for each building on a lot, and separately for each side of each building.

 

A.    Applicability. Daylight planes are established for lots zoned RD, RO, RS, RS-40, and RS-VP.

 

B.    Daylight Plane. A daylight plane shall begin at a horizontal line 19 feet, six inches above the grade of each side setback line of each lot and shall slope inwards at a 45-degree angle. (Please refer to Residential Daylight Plane illustration.)

 

No portion of the structure shall intrude beyond the daylight plane except as provided for in Section 4.04.312 Building Projections into Yards and Courts.

 

C.    Exceptions. Exceptions may be granted with administrative approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official (per Section 5.04.108 Authority of Zoning Enforcement Official, as amended).

 

Residential-Daylight-Plane

 

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-001 § 1)

 

2.04.328 Maximum Lot Coverage
 

District

Coverage (percent)

RO

33-1/3

RS

50

RS-40

50

RS-VP

50

RD

50

RM-3000

50

RM-2500

60

RM-2000

60

RM-1800

70

 

A.    Exceptions. In calculating the percentage of lot coverage for the purpose of applying the regulations of this Zoning Code, the features of a structure as hereafter set forth shall not be included as coverage:

 

1.     Cornices, canopies, eaves or other projections which do not increase the volume of space enclosed by the building provided that any portion of such projections extending more than two feet from the building shall be included as coverage;

 

2.     Fire escapes up to 3 1/2 feet;

 

3.     An uncovered stair and landing which does not extend above a ground floor entrance except for the railing; or

 

4.     Bay windows, balconies or chimneys which project from the wall not more than two feet; provided, that, such features do not in the aggregate occupy more than one-third of the length of a wall which faces an interior side lot line, or more than two-thirds of the length of a wall which faces a street or a rear lot line.

 

B.    Covered Porch. In determining coverage, one-half of the roofed area of a Covered Porch shall be excluded. Covered Porch is defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.332 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 

 

RD, RS, RS-40, RS-VP

RO

Lots Less than 5,000 sf

50% + 450 sf if a garage exists;

Maximum livable area = 2,500 sf

50% + 500 sf if a garage exists;

Maximum livable area = 4,000 sf

Lots 5,001 – 8,000 sf

50% + 500 sf if a garage exists;

Maximum livable area = 4,000 sf

Lots more than 8,000 sf

50% for first 5,000 sf, then 30% for area > 5,000—10,000 sf, then 10% for area >10,000 sf;

+ 500 sf if 2-car garage exists or 750 sf if 3 or more car garage exists;

 

Livable area >4,000 sf for any single structure would require Major Site Plan Review approval by the Board of Zoning Adjustments

50% for first 5,000 sf, then 30% for area > 5,000—10,000 sf, then 10% for area >10,000 sf;

+ 500 sf/unit if a garage exists;

 

Livable area >6,000 sf cumulatively for the entire site would require Major Site Plan Review approval by the Board of Zoning Adjustments

 

A.    Floor Area shall be measured as defined per Section 2.04.404 Residential Site Plan Review—Measure of Floor Area and General Requirements.

 

B.    Exceptions to the Maximum FAR may apply for Major Site Plan Review (Section 2.04.408 RO, RS and RS-40 Districts—Residential Site Plan Review). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-001 § 1)

 

2.04.336 Additional Property Development Regulations: Residential Districts
 

In addition to the development regulations listed above, the following regulations shall apply:

 

A.    Courts shall be subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.352 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Courts Opposite Windows.

 

B.    Outdoor Living Area shall be subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.356 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Open Space.

 

C.    Minimum Site Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.360 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Planting Areas.

 

D.    Fences and Walls shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.364 Fences, Walls, and Hedges.

 

E.    Off-Street Parking and Loading shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

 

F.     Signs shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.12 Signs.

 

G.    Outdoor Facilities shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.324 Outdoor Facilities and Storage/Loading Facilities.

 

H.    Screening of Mechanical Equipment shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.328 Screening of Mechanical Equipment.

 

I.      Refuse Storage Areas shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.332 Refuse Storage Areas.

 

J.     Underground Utilities shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.336 Underground Utilities.

 

K.    Performance Standards shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.340 Performance Standards.

 

L.     Nonconforming Structures shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

 

M.    Multi-Family Storage shall be subject to the regulations of Section 2.04.364 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Storage Space. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.340 R Districts—Adjustments to Minimum Yard Requirements
 

A.    RS Districts - Abutting Nonconforming Front Yard Setbacks. Where two or more lots on the same side of a street between intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and cul-de-sac, have front yards less than what is required for the district, the following shall apply: The front yard for a dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall not be required to be greater than the average of the two abutting lots sharing a common side lot line. When an abutting lot is vacant, the required front yard setback shall be used in calculating the average. Where only one other lot has a common side lot line with the building site, the front yard may be reduced to match this adjoining lot. However, in no case shall a front yard setback be reduced to less than 10 feet.

 

B.    R Districts - Religious Assembly Yard Requirements. Yards, height and bulk, and buffering requirements shall be as specified by a use permit, provided that, where adjacent to a building site in an R district, the minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet and the minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet. Yards adjoining street property lines shall not be less than required for a permitted use.

 

C.    R Districts—Additional Setback Requirement Adjacent to Building Wall Exceeding 25 Feet. Except as provided below, the width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining a building wall exceeding 25 feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, shall be increased five feet over the basic requirement.

 

1.     Exceptions. If the lot width is less than 60 feet, no increase in the side yard is required.

 

D.    R Districts - Alley Setback. The width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining an alley may be reduced to five feet.

 

E.    RS Districts - Rear Yard Requirement Exception. The required depth of the rear yard is 15 feet. However, if there is an open space on the site, exclusive of the required front yard, containing 400 square feet and a minimum dimension of 15 feet, the depth of the rear yard may be reduced to 10 feet. At the discretion of the Zoning Enforcement Official, such reductions may also require an exception to the Daylight Plane requirements as outlined in Sections 2.04.324 Daylight Planes in R Districts and 2.04.400 Administrative Exceptions.

 

F.     RM District - Single-Family and Two-Family Development. The side and rear yard of a single-family home in a RM District shall be the same as those setbacks required in the RS District. The side and rear yard of a two-family home in a RM District shall be the same as those setbacks required in the RD District.

 

G.    RM District - Variable Yards in. The average yard should be 10 feet and the minimum width, six feet, unless a zero-side yard development is approved.

 

H.    Zero-Side Yard Development.

 

1.     Existing. Structures constructed in conformance with the standards for zero-side yard development in effect immediately prior to the time this Code was adopted shall not be considered nonconforming structures, subject to Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures, provided that any addition or enlargement shall require a use permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Official, and no addition or enlargement shall increase the existing floor area by more than 10 percent nor increase the lot coverage to more than 50 percent).

 

2.     New. In the RD and RM-3000 districts, the Site Development Sub-Commission may recommend and the Board of Zoning Adjustment may approve a use permit for projects with attached single-family housing subject to the following standards:

 

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) - 4,000

Minimum Lot Width (feet) - 50 feet

Minimum Front Yard - 20 feet

Minimum Side Yard - One yard shall be 12 feet and no opposite yard is required

Minimum Corner Side Yard - 10 feet

Minimum Rear Yard - 15 feet

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.344 Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Related Equipment
 

An unenclosed swimming pool, hot tub and related equipment may occupy a required rear yard or side yard but shall not be within five feet of an interior property line or within 10 feet of a street property line. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.348 Accessory Structures in RD, RM and RS Districts
 

A.    Timing. Accessory structures shall not be established or constructed prior to the start of construction of a principal structure on a site, except that construction trailers may be placed on a site at the time site clearance and grading begins and may remain on the site only for the duration of construction.

 

B.    Location. Except as provided in this subsection, accessory structures shall not occupy a required front or corner side yard or court or project beyond the front building line of the principal structure on a site. No accessory uses shall be permitted off-site. Accessory structures must maintain a six foot separation from other structures on the lot.

 

C.    Maximum Area and Coverage.

 

1.     The coverage of accessory structures on the lot shall be part of the 50 percent total lot coverage allowed in the RS, RD, and RM-3000 Districts. Accessory structures in the RM-2500 and RM-2000 Districts shall meet the total lot coverage requirement of 60 percent and accessory structures in the RM-1800 District shall meet the total lot coverage requirement of 70 percent.

 

2.     No single structure, excluding accessory dwelling units as regulated by Section 2.04.388 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs), shall occupy more than 500 square feet.

 

3.     Structures that are not required to obtain a building permit under the San Leandro Building Code and which are not over eight feet in height and under 120 square feet shall be exempt from the lot coverage requirement.

 

4.     In determining coverage, one-half of the roofed area of a building open on at least two sides shall be excluded.

 

5.     The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception, per Section 2.04.400 Administrative Exceptions, to allow exception to these provisions, or refer the matter to the Board of Zoning Adjustments for a Conditional Use Permit.

 

D.    Maximum Height and Minimum Setbacks.

 

1.     Accessory Structures shall have the following maximum height and minimum setbacks. Maximum height is defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions of this Zoning Code.

 

Maximum Height

Minimum Setback

8 feet and 120 square feet or less and not required to obtain a building permit under the City of San Leandro Building Code

0 feet

Greater than 8 feet up to 12 feet

3 feet

Greater than 12 feet up to 15 feet

5 feet

 

2.     The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception, per Section 2.04.400 Administrative Exceptions, to allow exception to these provisions, or refer the matter to the Board of Zoning Adjustments for a Conditional Use Permit.

 

E.    Residential Garage Doors in Accessory Structures. The following standards apply only to garage doors for single-family homes, duplexes, and small apartment and condominium complexes giving access to not more than three parking spaces either side-by-side or in tandem:

 

1.     The vehicle access opening shall not have a height in excess of seven and one-half feet;

 

2.     The entire opening shall be covered by a solid or sectional overhead door constructed of wood, metal, or fiberglass;

 

3.     The door shall be painted, stained, or treated to match the exterior of the residential structure.

 

Any door that does not comply with the above standards shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official prior to installation. In reviewing the proposed door, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall find that the door has an appearance that is consistent with the home on which it is installed and with other homes in the vicinity and does not detract from the residential appearance of the neighborhood. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2012-001 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.352 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Courts Opposite Windows
 

A.    Courts Opposite Walls on the Same Site. The minimum depth shall be one-half the height of the opposite wall but not less than 18 feet opposite a living room and 12 feet opposite a required window for any habitable room.

 

B.    Courts Opposite Interior Property Line. The minimum depth of a court for a required window of a habitable room shall be 10 feet measured from the property line.

 

C.    Court Dimensions. Courts shall be 20 feet wide—10 feet on either side of the centerline of the required window and shall be open to the sky, provided that eaves may project two feet into a court.

Art

REQUIRED COURTS OPPOSITE WINDOWS

(The diagram is illustrative)

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.356 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Open Space
 

A.    Basic Requirement. Total open space on a site having three or more dwelling units shall be at least 200 square feet per dwelling unit.

 

B.    Private Open Space. Private open space meeting a portion of the requirement shall be on patios or balconies within which a horizontal rectangle has no dimension less than six feet and a minimum area of 60 square feet for balconies above the first story and 120 square feet for patio or decks at grade level.

 

C.    Common Open Space. Common open space, provided by non-street side yards, courts, patios, terraces, and rooftops shall be designed so that a horizontal rectangle inscribed within it has no dimension less than 10 feet and a minimum area of 300 square feet, shall be open to the sky, and shall not include driveways, pedestrian access to units, or parking areas, or area required for front or street side yards. Common open space provided on roof tops shall be surrounded by a parapet, wall, or other enclosure that is at least four feet high, and shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official. The Board of Zoning Adjustments may allow a percentage, not to exceed 30 percent, of the total roof top open space provided to be used to satisfy the open space requirement of Section 2.08.336 Open Space for Multi-Family Residential and Mixed-Use Residential Development of this Code. To approve roof top open space, the Board of Zoning Adjustments must make the following findings:

 

1.     The roof top open space is readily accessible to all residents of the complex;

 

2.     The roof top open space includes areas for active recreation or has significant aesthetic value, or a combination thereof; and

 

3.     The roof top open space is an amenity of the development which adds value to the project overall. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.360 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Planting Areas
 

A.    Yards Adjoining Streets. All visible portions of a required yard adjoining a street shall be driveways, walks or parking areas, or planting area or landscape that may include areas covered by ornamental gravel, crushed rock or similar materials.

 

B.    Interior Yards. At least 50 percent of each required interior side yard and rear yard shall be planting area having a minimum width of five feet adjoining a side or rear property line, provided that the width of a required planting area may be reduced to three feet in one side or rear yard adjoining a driveway or patio, and a nonresidential accessory structure may occupy a portion of the planting area in a rear yard.

 

Art

PLANTING AREAS

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

C.    A continuous planting area having a minimum width of five feet shall adjoin an RS district. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.364 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Storage Space
 

Storage Space shall be required for multi-family dwellings in RM districts. For each dwelling unit there shall be a separate enclosed, lockable storage space area reserved for the occupants of each dwelling unit. Such storage space may be located in the garage space allocated to such unit or elsewhere within the development, but shall not be directly accessible from the dwelling unit. Such storage space shall be at least 250 cubic feet in size and shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by eight feet. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.368 RM District—Multi-Family Dwellings, Requirements for Exterior Materials
 

In all RM districts, exterior materials are subject to review and approval of the Site Plan Approval decision-maker, as per the requirement of Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

2.04.372 RO District—Applicability of Prior Zoning Code
 

In matters where a difference between this Zoning Code and the latest version of the 1961 Zoning Code occurs in interpreting property development issues in the RO District, the latest version of the 1961 Zoning Code shall apply. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.376 RO District—Additional Setback and Lot Coverage Requirements
 

For lots exceeding 60 feet in width, the following additional setback and lot coverage requirements apply:

 

A.    Side yards shall be 10 percent of lot width up to a maximum of 12 feet.

 

B.    Rear yards shall be 10 feet or 10 percent of lot depth, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of 25 feet.

 

C.    On the rear one-quarter of a lot where the rear yard abuts the front yard of another, the side yard shall be not less than 20 feet wide.

 

D.    The total lot coverage, calculated as explained in the definition of lot coverage, shall not exceed one-third (of the area of the lot). Where animals are housed in tiers, three-fourths of the area of each tier above the first shall be counted as additional lot coverage. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.380 RO District—Accessory Structures
 

Accessory buildings may be placed on any part of the lot except within 60 feet of the front lot line, but shall not be located within 15 feet of a dwelling or within 10 feet of another accessory building. In the case of a corner lot, where the rear yard abuts the front yard of another lot, no accessory building shall project beyond the front setback required on such other lot. Accessory buildings may not exceed 15 feet in height. Accessory structures shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the required rear or side yard area in the aggregate, and no single structure may occupy more than 30 percent of the required yard areas. In determining coverage, one-half of the roofed area of a building open on at least two sides shall be excluded. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.384 RO District—Additional Dwelling Units
 

A.    Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Area for Each Unit.

 

1.     One additional single-family dwelling may occupy a lot having an area of 12,000 square feet or greater; or

 

2.     One additional two-family dwelling may occupy a lot having an area of 14,000 square feet or greater; and

 

3.     On lots larger than 14,000 square feet, the number of additional dwellings permitted shall be based upon a requirement of 7,000 square feet for the first single dwelling, 5,000 square feet additional for each additional single-family dwelling, and 7,000 square feet additional for each additional two-family dwelling.

 

B.    Minimum Setback and Separation Requirements.

 

1.     No additional dwelling shall be less than 20 feet from any other dwelling, nor from a side lot line toward which it faces, nor less than 10 feet from any other side lot line.

 

2.     No additional dwelling shall be less than 60 feet from the front lot line nor less than 25 feet from the rear lot line. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.388 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)
 

This section is intended to implement Government Code Sections 65852.1, 65852.2, and 65852.22 et seq., by allowing the creation of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and/or junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) through ministerial review subject to meeting the criteria defined below.

 

A.    Location and Number Permitted. Subject to meeting the regulations of this section, ADUs and/or JADUs shall be allowed on a parcel in the following locations and quantities:

Type

Total Number of Units

A Parcel with an Existing or Proposed Single-Family Use

(both of the following are permitted)

Repurposed ADU,

Detached ADU, or

Attached ADU

Maximum of 1 ADU is permitted.

JADU

Maximum of 1 JADU is permitted.

A Parcel with an Existing Two-Family or Multi-Family Use

(both of the following are permitted)

Repurposed ADU

·                     Minimum of 1 ADU is permitted.

·         Maximum number of units not to exceed 25 percent of the number of legally established dwelling units on a parcel.

·         Limited to non-habitable portions of the existing dwelling structure(s).

·         A fraction of 0.5 or more is rounded up and a fraction that is less than 0.5 is disregarded.

Detached ADU

·                     Maximum of 2 detached ADUs are permitted.

·         The two ADUs are permitted to be attached to one another, but shall be detached from all existing structure(s).

 

1.     ADUs and JADUs do not count toward the maximum density established by the zoning district in which the property is located.

 

B.    Unit Size. ADUs and JADUs shall not exceed the maximum floor area established below.

 

Type

Maximum Floor Area

A Parcel with an Existing or Proposed Single-Family Use

Repurposed ADU,

Detached ADU, Attached ADU

The greater of:

·         800 square feet; or

·         850 square feet, or 1,000 square feet if two or more bedrooms, subject to Subsection B.1 below; or

·         50% of the total floor area of the primary dwelling, not to exceed 1,200 square feet, subject to Subsection B.1 below.

JADU

500 square feet, excluding any shared sanitation facility with the primary dwelling.

A Parcel with an Existing Two-Family or Multi-Family Use

Repurposed ADU

1,200 square feet

Detached ADU

The greater of:

·                     800 square feet; or

·         850 square feet, or 1,000 square feet if two or more bedrooms, subject to Subsection B.1 below.

 

1.     An ADU greater than 800 square feet is required to comply with the maximum lot coverage, floor area ratio (FAR), and minimum open space requirements established by the zoning district in which the property is located, with the exception of repurposed ADUs on a two-family or multi-family parcel.

 

2.     On a parcel with an existing single-family dwelling, the existing structure may be expanded by up to 150 square feet to accommodate ingress and egress for a repurposed ADU, subject to Subsection B.1 above.

 

3.     An ADU or JADU shall be a minimum of 150 square feet or the size necessary to accommodate an efficiency unit as defined in Sections 18007 and 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code, whichever is greater.

 

C.    Setbacks and Separation.

 

1.     Minimum four-foot side and rear yard setbacks are required for all attached and detached ADUs.

 

2.     Detached ADUs shall maintain a minimum five-foot separation from other structures on the parcel.

 

3.     ADUs shall not occupy a required front yard and shall be subject to the driveway visibility requirements of Section 4.08.148 Driveways—Visibility.

 

4.     No setbacks are required for the repurposed portions of an ADU. Any expanded portions of a repurposed ADU shall comply with Subsections C.1 and C.2 above.

 

D.    Height. ADUs and JADUs shall not exceed the heights established below.

 

Type

Maximum Height

A Parcel with an Existing or Proposed Single-Family Use

Repurposed ADU

Same as existing structure

Detached ADU

16 feet

Attached ADU

Maximum height as established by zoning district. The ADU may project one foot laterally into the required daylight plane.

JADU

Same as existing single-family dwelling

A Parcel with an Existing Two-Family or Multi-Family Use

Repurposed ADU

Same as existing structure

Detached ADU

16 feet

 

E.    Parking. No parking spaces shall be required for an ADU or JADU. No replacement parking spaces shall be required when a garage, carport, or parking structure is repurposed as an ADU.

 

F.     Entrance. An ADU or a JADU shall include its own entrance, separate from the main entrance to the primary dwelling structure(s). An exterior stairway proposed to serve an ADU and/or JADU on a second story or higher shall not be visible from the front public right-of-way.

 

G.    Design Standards. Attached and/or repurposed ADUs shall incorporate the same roof and exterior wall material, building color(s), door and window trim, and predominate roof form and pitch as the primary dwelling structure. Repurposed garages shall replace garage doors with the same exterior wall material, building color, and door and window trim as the primary dwelling structure.

 

H.    No Balconies/Decks. ADUs shall not contain balconies, upper-story decks, or rooftop terraces.

 

I.      No Short-Term Rental. ADUs and JADUs shall not be rented for terms of 30 days or less.

 

J.     Occupancy. Owner-occupancy shall not be required.

 

K.    Sale. Neither the ADU nor the JADU shall be sold separately from the primary structure.

 

L.     Review and Approval Authority. Application for an ADU and/or JADU shall be subject to ministerial building permit review and approval within 60 days of submission of a complete application. However, if an application to create an ADU or JADU is submitted with an application that requires discretionary review, a building permit shall not be issued for the ADU or JADU until the discretionary approval(s) have first been granted and any appeal period(s) has/have passed. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2012-013 § 3; Ord. 2003-010 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.392 Manufactured Homes in R Districts
 

A.    Purpose. It is the intent of the City to provide opportunities for the placement of manufactured homes in R districts, consistent with state law, and to ensure that such manufactured homes are designed and located so as to be harmonious within the context of the surrounding houses and neighborhood.

 

B.    General Requirements. Manufactured homes may be used for residential purposes if such manufactured homes have been granted a Certificate of Compatibility and are located in an R district.

 

C.    Requirements for Certificates of Compatibility. Manufactured homes may be located in any R district where a single-family detached dwelling is permitted, subject to the same restrictions on density and to the same property development regulations, provided that such manufactured home receives a Certificate of Compatibility. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall issue a certificate of compatibility if the manufactured home complies with all development regulations of the zoning district and if the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that the manufactured home is compatible with surrounding development. In considering compatibility, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall consider only roof overhang, roofing material, siding material and roof design.

 

D.    Cancellation of State Registration. Whenever a manufactured home is installed on a permanent foundation, any registration of said manufactured home with the State of California shall be canceled, pursuant to state laws and regulations. Before any occupancy certificate may be issued for use of such a manufactured home, the owner shall provide to the Building Official satisfactory evidence showing: that the state registration of the manufactured home has been or will, with certainty, be canceled; if the manufactured home is new and has never been registered with the state, the owner shall provide the Building Official with a statement to that effect from the dealer selling the home. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

2.04.396 Manufactured Home Parks
 

The following supplemental development regulations shall apply to Manufactured Home Parks.

 

A.    Occupancy—Minimum Lot Size (excluding interior access drives).

 

1.     A manufactured home not more than 12 feet in width containing one unit: 2,400 square feet.

 

2.     A manufactured home more than 12 feet in width containing one unit: 3,000 square feet.

 

3.     A manufactured home containing more than one dwelling unit: 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit.

 

B.    Maximum Density. Twelve manufactured homes per acre.

 

C.    Minimum Perimeter Setbacks. Fifteen feet from perimeter property line of manufactured home park.

 

D.    Minimum Interior Setbacks for Homes.

 

1.     From an interior street: Five feet.

 

2.     From any required screening wall or earth berm: Five feet.

 

3.     From a common utilities area or recreational area: Six feet.

 

4.     Between homes: Ten feet.

 

E.    Maximum Height. Fifteen feet, except for recreation facilities, which may be 20 feet high.

 

F.     Screening.

 

1.     Abutting Public Street. A six foot high solid wall or fence shall be installed and maintained along the entire front setback area except for the areas required for vehicular access in which case the wall must be sufficiently lowered for a long enough distance to assure adequate sight distance for the expected speed of traffic.

 

2.     Interior Property Lines. A six-foot high solid wall or fence shall be installed and maintained on interior property lines.

 

G.    Landscaping. At least 35 percent of the site area shall be landscaped, and a landscape plan shall be prepared consistent with Section 4.16.108 Landscaping Plans Required.

 

H.    Recreation Area Required. At least 100 square feet of recreation area shall be provided for each home. Such recreation area shall include:

 

1.     Outdoor Recreation Space. Areas for games and activities such as shuffleboard, horseshoes, putting greens and swimming pools.

 

2.     Clubhouse Space. Areas for indoor activities such as reading and games, rest rooms, show facilities, and cooking facilities.

 

No recreation area shall be permitted within 100 feet of the perimeter property line.

 

I.      Outdoor Facilities. Central trash collection and storage areas shall be provided.

 

J.     Storage Area. Common storage areas shall be provided, within an area enclosed by a wall or screen fence, for the residents of the manufactured home park for the storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, travel trailers, and other licensed or unlicensed vehicles. This area shall total not less than 50 square feet for each manufactured home lot.

 

K.    Internal Circulation. Internal street widths shall be:

 

Twenty-five feet if no parking is permitted;

Thirty-three feet if parallel parking on one side is permitted;

Forty feet if parallel parking on two sides is permitted.

 

Each park shall have a main access point with a minimum traveled way width of 40 feet, and at least one secondary or emergency access approved by the Police Chief and Fire Chief if only one main access is provided. The main access shall be located on a collector or higher rated roadway as identified in the Master Plan of City Streets and shall conform to City standards for allowable access parking.

 

L.     Modification of Standards. Modification to the standards of this section may be granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustments following a public hearing when the applicant can clearly show that the proposed manufactured home park will provide for, and be permanently maintained for, low- and moderate-income housing.

 

M.    Application to Existing Manufactured Home Parks. Manufactured home parks existing on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 3. Administrative Regulations
2.04.400 Administrative Exceptions
 

A.    Standards for Which an Administrative Exception May be Approved. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception for the following:

 

1.     Exceptions to the provisions for Maximum Area and Coverage for Accessory Structures, per Subsection C of Section 2.04.348 Accessory Structures in RD, RM and RS Districts.

 

2.     Exceptions to the provisions for Maximum Height and Minimum Setbacks for Accessory Structures, up to a height not to exceed maximum height allowed in the applicable R District, per Subsection D of Section 2.04.348 Accessory Structures in RD, RM and RS Districts.

 

3.    An extension of the existing building line of a single-family residence, which legally projects into a required yard area of the applicable R District.

 

4.     Exceptions to the Daylight Plane, per Section 2.04.324 Daylight Planes in R Districts.

 

5.     Exceptions to the provisions for cottage food operations, per Subsections C.1 through C.7 of Section 2.04.228 Cottage Food Operations.

 

B.    Application Requirements. Application for such approval shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Official on a form prescribed by Planning staff, and shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing location and height of all structures on the premises subject to the application and on all abutting premises, and showing location, height and area of the proposal. Reduced copies of these plans shall also be provided. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require further information as is deemed appropriate to the application.

 

C.    Neighborhood Notification. The City shall notify abutting property owners in writing of the proposal. A copy of the reduced plan shall be included.

 

D.    Administrative Review.

 

1.     Findings Necessary for Approval. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception upon a determination that the proposal would not be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare and would not cause undue damage, hardship, nuisance or other detriment to persons or property in the vicinity. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall deny, approve or conditionally approve the application.

 

2.     Notice of Decision. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall notify by mail the applicant and all abutting property owners. Said notice shall contain a statement that the action taken will become final within 15 days from the date thereof unless appealed in writing to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The action of the Zoning Enforcement Official shall be final unless an appeal is so filed.

 

E.    Appeals. Any person aggrieved with the action of the Zoning Enforcement Official may appeal such action to the Board of Zoning Adjustments, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2013-006 § 3; Ord. 2012-001 § 3; Ord. 2007-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.404 Residential Site Plan Review—Measure of Floor Area and General Requirements
 

A.    Intent. This section defines the measure of “floor area” for single-family homes in the RO, RS, RS-40, and RS-VP Districts, and imposes a requirement for Residential Site Plan Approval on certain new, and newly enlarged, single-family homes in the RO, RS, and RS-VP Districts, in order to prevent such homes from appearing out-of-scale relative to homes and structures in the vicinity.

 

B.    Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to a proposal for an individual new and/or enlarged single-family home, on an existing parcel. Requirements for Residential Site Plan Review in the RO, RS, and RS-40 District are as prescribed in Subsection B of Section 2.04.408 RO, RS and RS-40 Districts—Residential Site Plan Review, and requirements for View Preservation/Site Plan Review in the RS-VP District are as prescribed in Subsection D.1 of Section 2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions.

 

C.    Exemption for Planned Developments Approved After July 15, 2001. A new home may be permitted without Residential Site Plan Approval, if plans and/or design standards for such homes are approved by the City Council as an integral component of a residential Planned Development Overlay District.

 

D.    Calculation of Floor Area. The floor area of a single-family dwelling shall be calculated as follows:

 

1.     The floor area shall include the total horizontal area of each floor within the exterior walls of the building(s) that comprise the primary residence, include any enclosed space with a seven foot or greater ceiling height, and as measured at the exterior face of the enclosing walls. The calculated floor area shall be doubled for that portion of interior space with an interior ceiling height of 15 feet or greater.

 

2.     The floor area shall exclude:

 

a.     Garages, carports and accessory buildings, excluding accessory dwelling units;

 

b.     Portions of attics and lofts which have less than a seven-foot ceiling height, see definition of “Attic” in Section 1.12.108 Definitions;

 

c.     Basements, unless any part of the basement is seven feet six inches or higher, then all areas greater than five feet in height shall count as area for FAR calculations, see definition of “Basement” in Section 1.12.108 Definitions; and

 

d.     A balcony, porch, deck or other structure where at least one of the longest dimensions is completely unenclosed.

 

E.    Deed Restriction for Use of Large Homes. The City may require that the owners of a home with a residential floor area of 4,000 square feet, or larger, record a deed restriction limiting the structure to a single-family residential use. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.408 RO, RS and RS-40 Districts—Residential Site Plan Review
 

A.    Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a process of Residential Site Plan Review, assuring that certain new homes and major additions are evaluated through a publicly noticed discretionary procedure, so that potential adverse impacts to neighbors are minimized and such single-family residences are visually compatible with their surroundings.

 

B.    Applicability: Certain Single-Family Construction Projects. The requirements of this section apply to single-family construction projects in RO, RS, and RS-40 Districts. Single-family construction in the RS-VP District is regulated by Subsection D of Section 2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions, View Preservation/Site Plan Review. Single-family construction in the RD, RM, C, and I Districts is regulated by Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval.

 

1.     MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review. MAJOR Residential Site Plan Approval is required for either a new and/or enlarged single-family home, on an existing parcel, which would either:

 

a.     Large Home: Result in a home with floor area greater than 4,000 square feet (also applicable to multiple units on a single parcel in the RO district, with a cumulative floor area greater than 6,000 square feet); or

 

b.     Major Addition: Result in an addition that exceeds 100 percent of the existing home’s floor area (i.e., more than doubles the floor area of the existing home), and/or exceeds the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) established for the parcel; or

 

c.     Third Story: Result in a three-story home, or enlarge a third story.

 

Floor area for single-family homes shall be calculated as per the requirements of Subsection D of Section 2.04.404 Residential Site Plan Review—Measure of Floor Area and General Requirements.

 

2.     MINOR Residential Site Plan Review. For single-family construction projects NOT subject to MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review as required in Subsection 1 above, MINOR Residential Site Plan Approval is required prior to issuance of a building permit for the construction of:

 

a.     A new two-story home; or

 

b.     An addition that creates a new second story; or

 

c.     An addition to any existing second story.

 

C.    Applicability: Certain Two-Family Construction Projects. Additions to existing two-family dwellings as listed in Subsection B of Section 5.12.104 Applicability, if within the RS and RS-40 Districts, require MAJOR Residential Plan Review pursuant to this section.

 

D.    Exemptions. Non-structural alterations that do not require building permits are exempt from this chapter.

 

E.    Review and Approval Authority.

 

1.     MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review—Large Home. For projects that meet the requirements for Major Residential Site Plan Review as specified in Subsections B.1.a and B.1.c above, the Board of Zoning Adjustments (BZA) shall review and either approve, conditionally approve or deny a Residential Site Plan.

 

2.     MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review—Major Addition or Third Story. For projects that meet the requirements for Major Residential Site Plan Review as specified in Subsection B.1.b or B.1.c above, a public hearing is required and the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) shall be the decision-maker, unless the ZEO defers action to the Site Development Sub-Commission (SDSC). The ZEO or SDSC shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Residential Site Plan.

 

3.     MINOR Residential Site Plan Review. For projects that meet the requirements for Minor Residential Site Plan Review as specified in Subsection B.2 above, no public hearing is required and the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) shall be the decision-maker, unless the ZEO defers action to the Site Development Sub-Commission (SDSC). The ZEO or SDSC shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Residential Site Plan.

 

F.     Noticing, Review and Hearing Requirements. Prior to a decision-maker’s action on an application as outlined in Subsection E above, public notice shall be given as specified below:

 

1.     MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review—Large Home. For single-family construction projects that require Major Residential Site Plan Review pursuant to Subsection E.1 above, written notification of the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the Board of Zoning Adjustments (BZA) shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner, and property owners adjoining and across the street from the subject site, not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing.

 

2.     MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review—Major Addition or Third Story. For single-family construction projects that require Major Residential Site Plan Review pursuant to Subsection E.2 above, written notification of the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner, and property owners adjoining and across the street from the subject site, not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing.

 

3.     MINOR Residential Site Review. Notice of an application for single-family construction projects that require MINOR Residential Site Plan Review pursuant to Subsection E.3 shall be mailed to property owners adjoining and across the street from the subject site, not less than 10 days prior to action on the application by the Zoning Enforcement Official. Upon review of the application and any correspondence received from those sent notice of the application, the Zoning Enforcement Official may take action on the application without holding a public hearing. The applicant, and those who submitted written comments regarding the application, shall be given written notification of the Zoning Enforcement Official’s action so that an appeal (per Subsection G, below) can be filed within 15 days from when such notification is sent.

 

G.    Appeals.

 

1.     A decision by the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

2.     A decision by the Site Development Sub-Commission may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

3.     A decision by the Board of Zoning Adjustments may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

H.    Residential Site Plan Review Standards. To approve or conditionally approve a Residential Site Plan, the decision-maker or the decision making body shall find that the proposed project is in substantial compliance with all of the following standards:

 

1.     The Residence’s Architecture is Appropriate and Consistently Applied. The structure has adequate articulation, with appropriate window placement, architectural detailing, roof forms and/or changes in wall planes to provide visual interest. Additions shall not have a “tacked on” appearance, and either the addition should be consistent with the existing residence in terms of design and use of materials, or the existing residence should be remodeled concurrently with construction of the proposed addition in order to achieve the desired consistency.

 

2.     The Visual Mass of the Home is De-Emphasized. The home appears in scale with the surrounding homes. The building’s surfaces should be articulated in a manner that reduces the appearance of blocky or massive features, and architectural features, detailing and/or landscaping should subdue, rather than accentuate the prominence of larger homes.

 

3.     The Neighborhood’s Existing Visual Character is Valued. The proposal “fits in” to the neighborhood’s existing architectural and landscape context, utilizing a compatible architectural vocabulary and retaining existing trees to the degree feasible and where conducive to achieving the purposes of this chapter. The landscaping to be retained and/or provided around the new and/or remodeled residence should include an appropriate balance of trees, shrubs and living ground covers, and should be designed to blend the project into its larger setting.

 

4.     The Physical Impacts to Neighbors Are Minimized. The proposed home or addition does not substantially impair the privacy and access to light and air of adjacent residences, while balancing the applicant’s ability to improve the subject property in accordance with all applicable restrictions.

 

I.      Conditions of Approval. In approving a MAJOR or MINOR Residential Site Plan, reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to achieve consistency with the intent of the applicable R District’s development standards and the standards of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, a requirement that the size of the proposed home and/or addition be reduced.

 

J.     Conditions Effective Date; Lapse and Renewal; Alterations.

 

1.     Effective Date. Site Plan approval shall become effective on the 15th day after the date the decision-maker or the decision making body approves the site plan, unless appealed, as provided in Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

2.     Lapse of Approvals, and Renewals. Site Plan approval shall lapse after one year or at an alternate time specified as a condition of approval after its date of approval unless:

 

a.     A grading permit or building permit has been issued, coupled with diligent progress evidencing good faith intention to commence the intended use; or

 

b.     An occupancy permit has been issued; or

 

c.     The approval is renewed, as provided for in Subsection E of Section 5.08.136 Lapse of Approval; Transferability; Discontinuance; Revocation.

 

3.     Changed Plans. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve changes to approved plans or in conditions of approval without a public hearing upon determining that the changes in conditions are minor and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. Revisions involving substantial changes in project design or conditions of approval shall be treated as new applications, to be reviewed as a new project by the decision making body as required by Subsection E. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions
 

A.    Intent of RS-VP (View Preservation) Sub-District. The regulations and review requirements of the RS-VP Sub-District are intended to restrict new construction that would impair residents’ enjoyment of distant views of scenic features. New single-family construction projects are regulated so that neighbors’ views are not unreasonably blocked by the new construction. Pursuant to Section 2.04.320 Maximum Height of Structures, the maximum height of structures in the RS-VP Sub-District is not to exceed 18 feet or one story. In addition, all new homes and additions are evaluated through a publicly noticed discretionary procedure to prevent unreasonable blockage of views, minimize potential adverse impacts to neighbors and to assure single-family residences are visually compatible with their surroundings (“View Preservation/Site Plan Review”).

 

B.    Height Restrictions in the RS-VP Sub-District.

 

1.     Maximum Height of Structure Shall Not Exceed 18 Feet. Notwithstanding the definition of “height” in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, the maximum height of a structure in the RS-VP Sub-District shall not exceed 18 feet, pursuant to Subsection D of Section 2.04.320 Maximum Height of Structures.

 

2.     Maximum of One Story. A maximum of one story is permitted in the RS-VP Sub-District, except that the improvement of a basement or space below an existing habitable story (i.e., construction of a new habitable story within the building envelope of a pre-existing structure) is exempt from this one story limitation.

 

C.    Exceptions to Height Restrictions of the RS-VP Sub-District.

 

1.     Exceptions Authorized. The Board of Zoning Adjustments is authorized to grant Exceptions to the height limits of the RS-VP Sub-District, up to a height not to exceed the 30 feet height limit of the base RS District. Construction in excess of the base RS District’s limit of 30 feet is subject to approval of both an Exception, as authorized by this section, and a Variance pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions.

 

2.     Required Finding for Granting of an Exception. To approve an Exception to the height limit of the RS-VP Sub-District, the decision-making body shall make the following finding:

 

a.     Mandatory Finding—The Views Currently Enjoyed by Neighbors Are Retained. The proposed construction that is in excess of the height limit of the RS-VP Sub-District does not unreasonably block or diminish neighbors’ views of distant and scenic features, such as the San Francisco Bay and surrounding open spaces and skylines, to any greater degree than would a proposal for construction that conformed to the height limits of the RS-VP Sub-District.

 

b.     Mandatory Denial. Failure to make the required finding under (a) shall require denial of the application for an Exception made under this section.

 

3.     Notice, Review and Appeal Process. Requests for granting of an Exception shall be made concurrently with, and have the same noticing requirements as, an application for MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review as specified in Subsection D, below.

 

D.    View Preservation/Site Plan Review.

 

1.     Applicability. Single-family construction projects in the RS-VP Sub-District:

 

a.     MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review. MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan approval is required for either:

 

i.      New Home: A new single-family home; or

 

ii.     Single-Story Addition: Any addition, including accessory structures or garages, containing 250 square feet, or more; or

 

iii.    Large Home: Any addition that results in a home with floor area greater than 4,000 square feet; or

 

iv.    Height Exception: Any addition for which a Variance or an Exception (per Subsection C, above) is requested.

 

b.     MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review. For single-family construction projects NOT subject to MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review as required in Subsection D.1.a above, MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Approval is required for either:

 

i.      Construction for any addition requiring a building permit, including accessory structures and garages;

 

ii.     For outdoor features such as gazebos, trellises, and other architectural/landscape elements that are more than 120 square feet in size, and/or 10 feet or more in height.

 

Floor area for the primary residential structure shall be calculated as specified in Subsection D of Section 2.04.404 Residential Site Plan Review—Measure of Floor Area and General Requirements.

 

2.     Exemptions. Non-structural alterations that do not require building permits are exempt from this section.

 

3.     Review and Approval Authority.

 

a.     MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review—Height Exception and/or Large Home. For projects that meet the requirements for Major View Preservation/Site Plan Review as specified in Subsection D.1.a.iii or D.1.a.iv above, the Board of Zoning Adjustments (BZA) shall review and either approve, conditionally approve or deny a Residential Site Plan.

 

b.     MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review—Single-Story Addition or New Home. For projects that meet the requirements for Major View Preservation/Site Plan Review as specified in Subsection D.1.a.i or D.1.a.ii above, a public hearing is required and the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) shall be the decision-maker, unless the ZEO defers action to the Site Development Sub-Commission (SDSC). The ZEO or SDSC shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Major View Preservation/Site Plan Review.

 

c.     MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review. For projects that meet the requirements for Minor View Preservation/Site Plan Review as specified in Subsection D.1.b above, no public hearing is required and the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) shall be the decision-maker, unless the ZEO defers action to the Site Development Sub-Commission (SDSC). The ZEO or SDSC shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Major View Preservation/Site Plan Review.

 

4.     Noticing, Review and Hearing Requirements. Prior to a decision-makers’ action on an application as outlined in Subsection 3, above, public notice shall be given as specified below:

 

a.     MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review—Height Exception and/or Large Home. For projects that require Major View Preservation/Site Plan Review pursuant to Subsection D.3.a above, written notification of the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the Board of Zoning Adjustments (BZA) shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner, and property owners within a 500-foot radius from the subject site not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing.

 

b.     MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review—Single-Story Addition and/or New Home. For projects that require Major View Preservation/Site Plan Review pursuant to Subsection D.3.b above, written notification of the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) or Site Development Sub-Commission (SDSC) shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner, and property owners within a 500-foot radius from the subject site not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing.

 

c.     MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review. For projects that require MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review pursuant to Subsection D.3.c above, written notice shall be mailed to property owners adjoining and across the street from the subject site, not less than 10 days prior to action on the application by the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO). Upon review of the application and any correspondence received from those sent notice of the application, the ZEO may take action on the application without holding a public hearing. The applicant, and those who submitted written comments regarding the application, shall be given written notification of the ZEO’s action so that an appeal (per Subsection 5, below) can be filed within 15 days from when such notification is sent.

 

d.     Simulation of Proposed Construction Required.

 

i.      Methods of Simulation to Be Used. The Applicant for MAJOR or MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review shall erect “story poles” to simulate height and mass of the proposed construction project. Poles shall be placed at all exterior corners of the proposed structure, and to illustrate the height of the tallest proposed roof ridge. Additional visual aids, including, but not limited to, photo montages or computer simulations, may be required by the Zoning Enforcement Official or Board of Zoning Adjustments if it is found that such additional documentation is necessary to determine the impacts the proposed construction will have on neighbors’ existing views. The Zoning Enforcement Official may also waive the requirement for a simulation if he or she determines that the project has a low probability of impacting existing views.

 

ii.     Simulations Must be Installed Prior to Action on Applications. Applicants must install the required story poles not less than 10 days before a scheduled public hearing for MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review, or 10 days before an action by the Zoning Enforcement Official to approve or deny an application for MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review.

 

iii.    Simulations to be Retained During Appeals. Applicants shall not remove the story poles until the 15 day appeal period has passed. If an appeal is filed, the poles are not to be removed until action is taken on the appeal, and any subsequent administrative appeal period has passed.

 

5.     Appeals.

 

a.     A decision by the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

b.     A decision by the Site Development Sub-Commission may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

c.     A decision by the Board of Zoning Adjustments may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

6.     View Preservation/Site Plan Review Standards. To approve or conditionally approve a View Preservation Site Plan, the decision-maker or the decision-making body shall find that the proposed project is in substantial compliance with all of the following standards:

 

a.     The Views Currently Enjoyed by Neighbors Are Respected. The proposed construction does not unreasonably block or diminish neighbors’ views of distant and scenic features, such as the San Francisco Bay and surrounding open spaces and skylines, while balancing the applicant’s ability to improve the subject property in accordance with the applicable restrictions.

 

b.     The Residence’s Architecture is Appropriate and Consistently Applied. The structure has adequate articulation, with appropriate window placement, architectural detailing, roof forms and/or changes in wall planes to provide visual interest. Additions shall not have a “tacked on” appearance, and either the addition should be consistent with the existing residence in terms of design and use of materials, or the existing residence should be remodeled concurrently with construction of the proposed addition in order to achieve the desired consistency.

 

c.     The Visual Mass of the Home is De-Emphasized. The home appears in scale with the surrounding homes. The building’s surfaces should be articulated in a manner that reduces the appearance of blocky or massive features, and architectural features, detailing and/or landscaping should subdue, rather than accentuate, the prominence of larger homes.

 

d.     The Neighborhood’s Existing Visual Character is Valued. The proposal “fits in” to the neighborhood’s existing architectural and landscape context, utilizing a compatible architectural vocabulary and retaining existing trees to the degree feasible and where conducive to achieving the purposes of this chapter. The landscaping to be retained and/or provided around the new and/or remodeled residence should include an appropriate balance of trees, shrubs and living ground covers, and should be designed to blend the project into its larger setting.

 

e.     The Physical Impacts to Neighbors Are Minimized. The proposed home or addition does not substantially impair the privacy and access to light and air of adjacent residences, while balancing the applicant’s ability to improve the subject property in accordance with all applicable restrictions.

 

7.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a View Preservation/Site Plan, reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to achieve consistency with the intent of the RS-VP Sub-District’s development standards and the standards of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, a requirement that the size of the proposed home and/or addition be reduced.

 

8.     Conditions Effective Date; Lapse and Renewal; Alterations.

 

a.     Effective Date. View Preservation/Site Plan approval shall become effective on the 15th day after the date the decision-maker or the decision-making body approves the site plan, unless appealed, as provided in Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

b.     Lapse of Approvals, and Renewals. View Preservation/Site Plan approval shall lapse after one year or at an alternate time specified as a condition of approval after its date of approval unless:

 

i.      A grading permit or building permit has been issued, coupled with diligent progress evidencing good faith intention to commence the intended use; or

 

ii.     An occupancy permit has been issued; or

 

iii.    The approval is renewed, as provided for in Subsection E of Section 5.08.136 Lapse of Approval; Transferability; Discontinuance; Rev-ocation.

 

c.     Changed Plans. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve changes to approved plans or in conditions of approval without a public hearing upon determining that the changes in conditions are minor and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. Revisions involving substantial changes in project design or conditions of approval shall be treated as new applications, to be reviewed as a new project by the decision making body as required by Subsection 4. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.04.416 RO and RS Districts—Overview of Residential Site Plan Review Requirements
 

TYPE OF SINGLE-FAMILY CONSTRUCTION

DISTRICT & TYPE OF REVIEW REQUIRED

RO, RS, & RS-40

Refer to Section 2.04.408 RO, RS and RS-40 Districts—Residential Site Plan Review

RS-VP

Refer to Sections 2.04.320 Maximum Height of Structures,  2.04.412 RS-VP Sub-District—Residential Site Plan Review and Exceptions to Height Restrictions

I. SINGLE -STORY CONSTRUCTION

MINOR ADDITIONS

Additions less than 250 square feet, including additions of accessory buildings or garages, and gazebos, trellises and other architectural and landscape features that are more than 120 square feet and/or 10 feet in height or taller.

None required

MINOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review

– Notice to adjacent properties

– No hearing required, action by ZEO

ADDITIONS or NEW HOMES

Additions of 250 square feet or larger, and new homes, but not “major additions and new large homes” as outlined below.

None required

MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review

– Notice to properties within 500 foot radius

– Action by ZEO or SDSC at public hearing

MAJOR ADDITIONS

An addition that exceeds 100% of the existing residence’s floor area and/or exceeds the maximum established FAR.

MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review

– Notice to adjacent properties

– Action by ZEO or SDSC at public hearing

NEW LARGE HOMES

New homes or additions to existing homes that would result in a residence exceeding 4,000 square feet of livable area. (For multiple units in the RO on a single parcel, applies if cumulative square footage for all units exceeds 6,000 square feet of livable area.)

MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review

– Notice to adjacent properties

– Action by BZA at public hearing

MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review

– Notice to properties within 500 foot radius

– Action by BZA at public hearing

II. TWO-STORY CONSTRUCTION

MINOR ADDITIONS,

ADDITIONS, or NEW HOMES

All additions and new homes, other than “major additions” and “new large homes” as outlined below.

MINOR Residential Site Plan Review

– Notice to adjacent properties

– No hearing required, action by ZEO

MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review & Exception (TO EXCEED SINGLE STORY/18-FOOT HEIGHT LIMIT)

– Notice to properties within 500 foot radius

– Action by BZA at public hearing

MAJOR ADDITIONS

An addition that exceeds 100% of the existing residence’s floor area and/or exceeds the maximum established FAR.

MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review

– Notice to adjacent properties

– Action by ZEO or SDSC at public hearing

NEW LARGE HOMES

New homes or additions to existing homes that would result in a residence exceeding 4,000 square feet of livable area. (For multiple units in the RO on a single parcel, applies if cumulative square footage for all units exceeds 6,000 square feet of livable area.)

MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review

– Notice to adjacent properties

– Action by BZA at public hearing

MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review

– Notice to properties within 500 foot radius

– Action by BZA at public hearing

III. THREE-STORY CONSTRUCTION

(All Additions and New Homes)

MAJOR Residential Site Plan Review

Same as Above

MAJOR View Preservation/Site Plan Review & Exception

Same as Above

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 2.08 Commercial and Professional Districts
2.08.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes, the specific purposes of commercial district regulations are to:

 

A.    Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the General Plan for a full range of office, retail commercial, and service commercial uses needed by residents, businesses, and visitors in the City and region.

 

B.    Strengthen the City’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the City and surrounding communities.

 

C.    Create suitable environments for various types of commercial uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of inharmonious uses.

 

D.    Minimize the impact of commercial development on adjacent residential districts.

 

E.    Ensure that the appearance and effects of commercial buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area or with planned changes in the character of the area in which they are located and that the quality of site and building design enhances the community.

 

F.     Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.

 

G.    Provide sites for public and semipublic uses needed to complement commercial development or compatible with a commercial environment.

 

The additional purposes of each C, DA, NA, P, and SA districts are as follows:

 

CC Commercial Community District. To provide sites for commercial centers containing a wide variety of commercial establishments, including banking and financial establishments and businesses selling home furnishings, apparel, durable goods, and specialty items and generally having a citywide market area. Facilities, such as entertainment, eating-and-drinking establishments, hotels and motels are permitted, subject to certain limitations to avoid adverse effects on adjacent uses.

 

CN Commercial Neighborhood District. To provide sites for businesses serving the daily needs of nearby residential areas, subject to development standards that prevent significant adverse effects on adjoining neighborhoods. In addition to uses serving nearby residential areas, business and professional offices and residential uses are permitted above the ground floor.

 

CR Commercial Recreation District. To provide sites for recreation-oriented uses and commercial activities, such as hotels, and restaurants that are compatible with water-front recreation and open space uses, conveniently located near the marina.

 

C-RM Commercial-Regional Mall District. To provide for development and operation of large regional shopping malls to encourage the economic stability and viability of regional malls, to recognize the unique characteristics of regional malls with regard to such factors as mix of uses, scale and design, parking, traffic and transit, signage, and other factors, and to promote the economic and fiscal prosperity of the City in accordance with the General Plan.

 

CS Commercial Services District. To provide sites for commercial services, including automobile sales and services, building materials, contractors’ yards, warehousing, storage and similar uses; offices not accessory to a permitted use are excluded.

 

DA-1 (Downtown Area 1). To implement specific provisions of the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy for the Downtown retail core area centered on East 14th Street between Davis Street and Castro Street. Ground floor retail is required on parcels fronting on East 14th Street and Washington Avenue north of Parrott Street and encouraged on all other parcels in this District. Residential mixed use development is allowed.

 

DA-2 (Downtown Area 2). To implement specific provisions of the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy by providing for designated areas on the periphery of the Downtown core where new development shall be sensitive to and of a scale consistent with adjacent Residential Districts and where mixed use developments are allowed and encouraged but not required.

 

DA-3 (Downtown Area 3). To implement specific provisions of the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy in areas adjacent to the Downtown retail core. Infill development shall respect the scale and fabric of the neighborhood while increased building height and higher residential densities are allowed.

 

DA-4 (Downtown Area 4). To implement specific provisions of the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy on land located near transit facilities or where sensitivity to increased height and density is not significant. Residential use is required and limited ground-floor retail and office uses are permitted.

 

DA-6 (Downtown Area 6). To implement specific provisions of the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy by clustering office uses in the vicinity of Davis Street and San Leandro Boulevard that will benefit from visibility from these streets and the nearby BART station. Off-site and shared parking is encouraged.

 

NA-1 North Area-1. To provide opportunities for small scale, pedestrian-oriented retail and service uses which serve the neighborhood, encourage mixed use development, especially multi-story mixed developments, minimize auto traffic, and promote new development consistent with existing neighborhood quality. The NA-1 Zoning District will serve to implement the North Area Specific Plan.

 

NA-2 North Area-2. To provide opportunities for and encourage mixed use development, especially multi-story residential, commercial retail and service-oriented uses, and promote new development consistent with existing neighborhood quality. The NA-2 Zoning District will also serve to implement the North Area Specific Plan.

 

P Professional Office District. To provide opportunities for offices, mixed-use and multi-family residential uses at appropriate locations, subject to development standards and landscaping requirements that prevent significant adverse effects on adjacent uses. Retail activity is appropriate, subject to limitations to ensure development is consistent with the existing neighborhood quality.

 

SA-1 (South Area-1). To promote quality mixed-use developments, especially multi-story developments, with neighborhood-oriented commercial uses. A primary intent is to ensure that new development will be quality in-fill projects. Provisions for reduced parking are included. The SA-1 Zoning District will serve to implement the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy, particularly, policies and design guidelines for the Palma District and International and Cultural District.

 

SA-2 (South Area-2). To promote in-fill residential uses that would be sensitive to the adjoining neighborhoods. Residential, commercial and community-oriented uses would also be encouraged in mixed use multi-story buildings. Provisions for reduced parking are included. The SA-2 Zoning District will serve to implement the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy, particularly, policies and design guidelines for the McKinley Residential District.

 

SA-3 (South Area-3). To provide opportunities for larger commercial and office developments, and to promote additional commercial opportunities that would exhibit quality design. Provisions for reduced parking are included. The SA-3 Zoning District will serve to implement the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy, particularly, policies and design guidelines in the Gateway District. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 1. Use Regulations
2.08.200 CC District—Use Regulations
 

A.    CC District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CC District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Ambulance Service, Emergency. (A conditional use permit is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

3.     Ambulance Service, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

4.     Animal Grooming.

5.     Animal Sales.

6.     Artists’ Studios.

7.     Automobile Washing, Attended. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing.)

8.     Brewpubs.

9.     Business Services.

10.   Business and Trade Schools.

11.   Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

12.   Catering Services.

13.   Communication Facilities.

14.   Drugstores.

15.   Fast Food Establishment, Small Scale. (Subject to the regulations of Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts, and Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

16.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

17.   Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

18.   Health and Fitness Centers.

19.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

20.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

21.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

22.   Medical Supply Stores.

23.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

24.   Nurseries.

25.   Offices, Business and Professional.

26.   Pharmacies.

27.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

28.   Retail Sales.

29.   Retail Services.

30.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

31.   Theaters, Small Scale.

32.   Travel Services.

33.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    CC District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CC District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Animal Boarding.

3.     Animal Hospitals.

4.     Automobile Washing, Unattended. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing.)

5.     Bars.

6.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

7.     Beer and Wine Stores. (Beer and wine stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Beer and wine stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing beer and wine store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

8.     Billiard Parlors.

9.     Bingo Parlors.

10.   Building Materials and Services.

11.   Cannabis Dispensary. (Subject to performance standards in the San Leandro Municipal Code Section 4-33-500 Cannabis Dispensary Permits.)

12.  Coin-Operated Laundry Businesses.

13.   Commercial Parking Facility.

14.   Commercial Recreation.

15.   Convenience Stores. (Convenience markets shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Convenience markets may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing convenience store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

16.   Cultural Institutions.

17.   Dance Clubs.

18    Department Stores.

19.   Drive-Up Facilities.

20.   Emergency Health Care.

21.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

22.   Farmers’ Market.

23.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

24.   Financial Institutions, Personal Loan Services. (Financial institutions, personal loan services uses shall not be located within 1,500 feet from other financial institutions, personal loan services uses. Financial institutions, personal loan services uses may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses.)

25.   Fortune-Telling Establishments.

26.   Game Centers.

27.   Government Offices.

28.   Gun or Weapon Shop.

29.   Hospitals.

30.   Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities.

31.   Laboratories, Cannabis Testing Facilities.

32.   Liquor Stores. (Liquor stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Liquor stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing liquor store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

33.   Massage Therapy.

34.   Mixed-Use Residential.

35.   Multi-Family Residential.

36.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

37.   Pawn Shop.

38.   Public Safety Facilities.

39.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

40.   Secondhand Sales.

41.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

42.   Supermarkets.

43.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

44.   Theaters.

45.   Tobacconist/Cigarette Stores. (Tobacconist/cigarette stores shall not be located within 1,500 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, or of other tobacconist/cigarette stores, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Tobacconist/cigarette stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses.)

46.   Two-Family Residential.

47.   Utilities, Major.

48.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

49.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

50.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

51.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

52.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

 

C.    CC District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CC District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Automobile Parts Sales.

3.     Community Gardens.

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by the Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

6.     Parking Lot.

7.     Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

8.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

9.     Recycling Facilities, Small Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

10.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

11.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    CC District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the CC District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

7.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

8.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-014 § 4; Ord. 2017-001 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2014-003 § 3; Ord. 2008-002 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2003-006 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.204 CN District—Use Regulations
 

A.    CN District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CN District, and a conditional use permit is not required, provided that the use does not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming.

3.     Animal Sales.

4.     Brewpubs.

5.     Business Services.

6.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

7.     Catering Services.

8.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

9.     Maintenance and Repair Services.

10.   Medical Supply Stores.

11.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

12.   Nurseries.

13.   Offices, Business and Professional.

14.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

15.   Pharmacies.

16.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

17.   Retail Sales.

18.   Retail Services.

19.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    CN District—Conditionally Permitted Hours of Operation.

 

The operation of a permitted use in the CN District, as identified in Subsection A, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., is subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.

 

C.    CN District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CN District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Animal Hospitals.

3.     Artists’ Studios.

4.     Bed and Breakfast Inns.

5.     Cultural Institutions.

6.     Drugstores.

7.     Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

8.     Farmers’ Market.

9.     Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

10.   Government Offices.

11.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

12.   Massage Therapy.

13.   Mixed-Use Residential.

14.   Multi-Family Residential.

15.   Public Safety Facilities.

16.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

17.   Supermarkets.

18.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

19.   Theaters.

20.   Theaters, Small Scale.

21.   Two-Family Residential.

22.   Utilities, Major.

 

D.    CN District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CN District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of  Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Community Gardens.

3.     Day Care, General.

4.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

5.     Health and Fitness Centers.

6.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

7.     Parking Lot.

8.     Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

9.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

10.   Recycling Facilities, Small Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

11.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

E.    CN District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the CN District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

4.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

5.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

6.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.208 CR District—Use Regulations
 

A.    CR District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CR District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Brewpubs.

3.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

4.     Commercial Recreation. (Arcades and game centers prohibited.)

5.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

6.     Health and Fitness Centers.

7.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

8.     Marine Sales and Service.

9.     Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

10.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

11.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

12.   Retail Sales.

13.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

14.   Theaters, Small Scale.

15.   Travel Services.

16.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    CR District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CR District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Artists’ Studios.

3.     Bars.

4.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

5.     Coin-Operated Laundry Businesses.

6.     Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

7.     Farmers’ Market.

8.     Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

9.     Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities.

10.   Marinas.

11.   Massage Therapy.

12.   Public Safety Facilities.

13.   Stadia and Sports Arenas.

14.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

15.   Theaters.

16.   Theaters, Outdoor.

17.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    CR District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CR District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Community Gardens.

3.     Day Care, General.

4.     Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

5.     Parking Lot.

6.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

 

D.    CR District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the CR District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Circuses and Carnivals.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

4.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

5.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2003-006 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.212 C-RM District—Use Regulations
 

A.    C-RM District—Permitted Uses within Regional Mall. The following uses are allowed in the C-RM District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming.

3.     Artist’s Studios.

4.     Automobile Rentals. (Permitted use limited to automobile rental office or counter, including on-site drop off or pick-up of rented automobiles, but excluding on-site storage of vehicles. If additional activities are proposed, a use permit for the “Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals” classification shall be required.)

5.     Brewpubs.

6.     Business Services.

7.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

8.     Commercial Parking Facility.

9.     Day Care, General.

10.   Department Stores.

11.   Drugstores.

12.   Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

13.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

14.   Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

15.   Government Offices.

16.   Health and Fitness Centers.

17.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

18.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

19.   Medical Supply Stores.

20.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

21.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

22.   Offices, Business and Professional.

23.   Pharmacies.

24.   Public Safety Facilities.

25.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

26.   Retail Sales.

27.   Retail Services.

28.   Supermarkets.

29.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

30.   Theaters, Small Scale.

31.   Travel Services.

32.   Utilities, Minor.

33.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

 

B.    C-RM—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the C-RM District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Animal Hospitals.

3.     Bars.

4.     Beer and Wine Stores.

5.     Business and Trade Schools.

6.     Commercial Recreation.

7.     Communications Facilities.

8.     Cultural Institutions.

9.     Emergency Health Care.

10.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

11.   Farmers’ Market.

12.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

13.   Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities.

14.   Liquor Stores.

15.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

16.   Massage Therapy.

17.   Mixed Use Residential.

18.   Multi-Family Residential.

19.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

20.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

21.   Theaters.

22.   Two-Family Residential.

23.   Utilities, Major.

24.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

 

C.    C-RM District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the C-RM District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Accessory Uses and Structures.

2.     Animal Boarding, Indoor.

3.     Automatic Teller Machines.

4.     Catering Services.

5.     Community Gardens.

6.     Game Centers.

7.     Nurseries.

8.     Parking Lot.

9.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

 

D.    C-RM District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the C-RM District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Animal Shows.

2.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

3.     Circuses and Carnivals.

4.     Commercial Filming.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Special Promotions, for the regional mall as a whole.

7.     Storage Containers, Temporary. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.216 CS District—Use Regulations
 

A.    CS District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CS District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Boarding.

3.     Animal Grooming.

4.     Animal Hospitals.

5.     Automobile Washing, Attended. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing.)

6.     Brewpubs.

7.     Building Materials and Services.

8.     Business Services.

9.     Business and Trade Schools.

10.   Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

11.   Equipment Sales.

12.   Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

13.   Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

14.   Health and Fitness Centers.

15.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

16.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

17.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

18.   Medical Supply Stores.

19.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

20.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

21.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

22.   Utilities, Minor.

23.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

 

B.    CS District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CS District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Artists’ Studios.

3.     Automobile Washing, Unattended. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing.)

4.     Cultural Institutions.

5.     Drive-up Facilities.

6.     Farmers’ Market.

7.     Industry, Custom.

8.     Industry, Limited.

9.     Massage Therapy.

10.   Public Safety Facilities.

11.   Public Storage.

12.   Recycling Facilities, Small Scale Hazardous Waste. (Use permit requires specific finding that use is consistent with any adopted Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and any provisions of the San Leandro General Plan, specifically applicable to hazardous waste or material. Also subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

13.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

14.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

15.   Utilities, Major.

16.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

17.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

18.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

19.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

20.   Vehicle Storage.

21.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities.

22.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities.

 

C.    CS District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the CS District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

2.     Parking Lot.

3.     Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

4.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

5.     Recycling Facilities, Small Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

6.     Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

7.     Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    CS District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the CS District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

4.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

5.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

6.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.220 DA Districts—Application of DA Zoning Districts to the Downtown Area
 

A.    Relationship to the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy.

 

The DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, and DA-6 zoning districts have been created to implement the Downtown San Leandro Transit Oriented Development Strategy (Development Strategy). The Development Strategy identifies five activity areas. The zoning for these activity areas are generally as follows:

 

TOD Development Strategy District Areas

Corresponding Zoning District

Retail Mixed-Use (East 14th Street between Davis and Castro Streets)

DA-1

Multi-Use Infill (Periphery of Downtown Core)

DA-2

TOD—Transition Mixed-Use (Immediately Adjacent to Retail Core)

DA-3

TOD—Residential Mixed-Use (Near Transit Facilities)

DA-4

Office Mixed-Use (Davis Street at San Leandro Boulevard)

DA-6

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.224 DA-1—Use Regulations
 

A.    DA-1 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-1 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming. (Indoor only.)

3.     Animal Sales.

4.     Artists’ Studios.

5.     Brewpubs.

6.     Business Services.

7.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

8.     Catering Services.

9.     Communication Facilities.

10.   Department Stores. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

11.   Drugstores. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

12.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

13.   Furniture, Electronic, and Appliance Sales. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

14.   Government Offices.

15.   Health and Fitness Centers.

16.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

17.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

18.   Medical Supply Stores.

19.   Mixed-Use Residential. (Subject to Ground Floor Retail Regulations in Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

20.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

21.   Offices, Business and Professional.

22.   Pharmacies. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

23.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.) 

24.   Residential Uses Without Mixed Use Component allowed on Parcels Not Fronting on East 14th Street or Washington Avenue Corridors.

25.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

26.   Retail Sales. (Single tenants, 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

27.   Retail Services.

28.   Theaters, Small Scale.

29.   Travel Services.

30.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    DA-1 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-1 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Bars.

3.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

4.     Beer and Wine Stores. (Beer and wine stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Beer and wine stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing beer and wine store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

5.     Coin-Operated Laundry Businesses.

6.     Commercial Parking Facility.

7.     Commercial Recreation.

8.     Cultural Institutions.

9.     Dance Clubs.

10.   Department Stores. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

11.   Drive-Up Facilities.

12.   Drugstores. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

13.   Emergency Health Care.

14.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

15.   Farmer’s Market.

16.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments. Fast food establishments are not permitted on parcels fronting East 14th Street.)

17.   Furniture, Electronic, and Appliance Sales. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

18.   Game Centers.

19.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

20.   Hotels, Motels and Time-Share Facilities.

21.   Massage Therapy.

22.   Multi-Family Residential.

23.   Neighborhood Specialty Food Markets. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

24.   Pharmacies. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

25.   Public Safety Facilities.

26.   Retail Sales. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

27.   Secondhand Sales.

28.   Service Stations. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

29.   Supermarkets. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

30.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

31.   Theaters.

 

C.    DA-1 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-1 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Business and Trade Schools.

3.     Community Gardens.

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

6.     Maintenance and Repair Services.

7.     Parking Lot.

8.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

9.     Supermarkets. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

10.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    DA-1 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the DA-1 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

4.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

5.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

6.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2011-003 § 1; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2008-003 § 2; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.228 DA-2—Use Regulations
 

A.    DA-2 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-2 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming (Indoor only.)

3.     Artists’ Studios.

4.     Brewpubs.

5.     Business Services.

6.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

7.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

8.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

9.     Medical Supply Stores.

10.   Mixed-Use Residential with ground floor retail and/or office uses.

11.   Multi-Family Residential.

12.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

13.   Offices, Business and Professional.

14.   Pharmacies. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

15.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.)

16.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

17.   Retail Sales. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

18.   Retail Services.

19.   Travel Services.

20.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    DA-2 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-2 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Bars.

4.     Bed and Breakfast Inns.

5.     Catering.

6.     Commercial Parking Facility.

7.     Commercial Recreation.

8.     Convalescent Facilities.

9.     Cultural Institutions.

10.   Drugstores.

11.   Emergency Health Care.

12.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

13.   Farmers’ Market.

14.   Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

15.   Group Housing.

16.   Health and Fitness Centers.

17.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

18.   Hospitals.

19.   Industry, Custom.

20.   Laboratories.

21.   Massage Therapy.

22.   Mortuaries.

23.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

24.   Pharmacies. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 sf in size.)

25.   Public Safety Facilities.

26.   Schools, Public or Private.

27.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

28.   Theaters.

29.   Theaters, Small Scale.

30.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    DA-2 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-2 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Business and Trade Schools.

3.     Community Gardens.

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Stores.

6.     Parking Lot.

7.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine (subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities).

8.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    DA-2 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the DA-2 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Sales, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

7.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2008-003 § 3; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.232 DA-3—Use Regulations
 

A.    DA-3 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-3 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming. (Indoor only.)

3.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

4.     Garage and Yard Sales. (Limited to two times per year on the premises of the property owner or a residential property in the immediate vicinity.)

5.     Multi-Family Residential.

6.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Public.

7.     Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.)

8.     Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    DA-3 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-3 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Bed and Breakfast Inns.

4.     Brewpubs.

5.     Cultural Institutions.

6.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

7.     Group Housing.

8.     Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

9.     Industry, Custom.

10.   Manufactured Home Parks.

11.   Mixed-Use Residential with ground floor office and/or retail.

12.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets. (Single tenants 10,000 square feet in size or less only.)

13.   Park and Recreation Facilities, Private Noncommercial.

14.   Public Safety Facilities.

15.   Restaurants, Full-Service.

16.   Retail Sales.

17.   Retail Services.

18.   Single-Family Residential.

19.   Schools, Public or Private.

20.   Travel Services.

21.   Two-Family Residential.

22.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    DA-3 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-3 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Artist’s Studios.

2.     Business and Trade Schools.

3.     Community Gardens.

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Health and Fitness Centers.

6.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

7.     Offices, Business and Professional.

8.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    DA-3 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the DA-3 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2012-002 § 1; Ord. 2011-003 § 1; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2008-003 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.236 DA-4—Use Regulations
 

A.    DA-4 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-4 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

3.     Garage and Yard Sales. (Limited to two times per year on the premises of the property owner or a residential property in the immediate vicinity.)

4.     Multi-Family Residential.

5.     Offices, Business and Professional.

6.     Park and Recreation Facilities, Public.

7.     Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.)

8.     Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    DA-4 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-4 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

4.     Brewpubs.

5.     Cultural Institutions.

6.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

7.     Group Housing.

8.     Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

9.     Industrial Uses. (Pre-existing industrial uses shall not be considered nonconforming and may continue. Expansion up to 25 percent may be considered with a conditional use permit.)

10.   Industry, Custom.

11.   Mixed-Use Residential with retail and/or office on the ground floor.

12.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets. (Single tenants 10,000 sf in size or less only.)

13.   Park and Recreation Facilities, Private Noncommercial.

14.   Public Safety Facilities.

15.   Restaurants, Full-Service.

16.   Retail Sales.

17.   Retail Services.

18.   Schools, Public or Private.

19.   Single-Family Residential.

20.   Travel Services.

21.   Two-Family Residential.

22.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    DA-4 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-4 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Artist’s Studios.

2.     Business and Trade Schools.

3.     Community Gardens.

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Health and Fitness Centers.

6.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

7.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    DA-4 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the DA-4 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2011-003 § 1; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2008-003 § 5; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.240 DA-6—Use Regulations
 

A.    DA-6 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-6 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Artists’ Studios.

3.     Brewpubs.

4.     Business Services.

5.     Business and Trade Schools.

6.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

7.     Catering Services.

8.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

9.     Health and Fitness Centers.

10.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

11.   Mixed-Use Residential with office and/or retail uses on the ground floor.

12.   Multi-Family Residential.

13.   Offices, Business and Professional.

14.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

15.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These pre-existing residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.)

16.   Pharmacies.

17.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

18.   Retail Sales when in conjunction with mixed-use residential.

19.   Retail Services.

20.   Travel Services.

21.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    DA-6 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-6 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Communication Facilities.

3.     Cultural Institutions.

4.     Drugstores.

5.     Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

6.     Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

7.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

8.     Government Offices.

9.     Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

10.   Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities.

11.   Industry, Custom.

12.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

13.   Schools, Public or Private.

14.   Service Stations. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

15.   Supermarkets.

16.   Theaters.

17.   Utilities, Major.

18.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

 

C.    DA-6 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the DA-6 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Community Gardens.

3.     Day Care, General.

4.     Game Centers.

5.     Parking Lot.

6.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    DA-6 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the DA-6 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

7.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2008-003 § 7; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.244 NA-1 District—Use Regulations
 

A.    NA-1 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the NA-1 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Brewpubs.

3.     Business Services.

4.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

5.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

6.     Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

7.     Health and Fitness Centers.

8.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

9.     Maintenance and Repair Services.

10.   Medical Supply Stores.

11.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

12.   Offices, Business and Professional.

13.   Pharmacies.

14.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

15.   Retail Sales.

16.   Retail Services.

17.   Travel Services.

18.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    NA-1 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the NA-1 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Bars.

3.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

4.     Commercial Recreation.

5.     Drugstores.

6.     Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

7.     Farmers’ Market.

8.     Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

9.     Mixed-Use Residential.

10.   Multi-Family Residential.

11.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

12.   Theaters.

13.   Theaters, Small Scale.

14.   Two-Family Residential.

15.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    NA-1 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the NA-1 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Community Gardens.

3.     Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

4.     Parking Lot.

5.     Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

6.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

7.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    NA-1 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the NA-1 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

7.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

8.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2003-006 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.248 NA-2 District—Use Regulations
 

A.    NA-2 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the NA-2 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Artist’s Studios.

3.     Brewpubs.

4.     Business Services.

5.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

6.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

7.     Furniture, Electronics and Appliance Sales.

8.     Health and Fitness Centers.

9.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

10.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

11.   Medical Supply Stores.

12.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

13.   Offices, Business and Professional.

14.   Pharmacies.

15.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

16.   Retail Sales.

17.   Retail Services.

18.   Travel Services.

19.   Two-Family Residential.

20.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    NA-2 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the NA-2 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Bars.

4.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

5.     Commercial Recreation.

6.     Drugstores.

7.     Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

8.     Farmers’ Market.

9.     Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

10.   Mixed-Use Residential.

11.   Multi-Family Residential.

12.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

13.   Theaters.

14.   Theaters, Small Scale.

15.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    NA-2 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the NA-2 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Community Gardens.

3.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

4.     Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

5.     Parking Lot.

6.     Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

7.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

8.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    NA-2 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the NA-2 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

7.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

8.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2012-002 § 1; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2003-006 § 6; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.252 P District—Use Regulations
 

A.    P District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the P District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Brewpubs.

3.     Business Services.

4.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

5.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

6.     Medical Supply Stores.

7.     Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

8.     Offices, Business and Professional.

9.     Pharmacies.

10.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

11.   Retail Services.

12.   Travel Services.

13.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    P District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the P District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

3.     Commercial Parking Facility.

4.     Convalescent Facilities.

5.     Cultural Institutions.

6.     Emergency Health Care.

7.     Farmers’ Market.

8.     Group Housing.

9.     Health and Fitness Centers.

10.   Hospitals.

11.   Laboratories.

12.   Massage Therapy.

13.   Mixed-Use Residential.

14.   Mortuaries.

15.   Multi-Family Residential.

16.   Public Safety Facilities.

17.   Schools, Public or Private.

18.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

19.   Utilities, Major.

 

C.    P District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the P District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machines.

2.     Day Care, General.

3.     Parking Lot.

4.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities).

5.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    P District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the P District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Commercial Filming.

2.     Real Estate Sales, Temporary.

3.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

4.     Storage Containers, Temporary. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2003-006 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.256 SA Districts—Application of South Area Zoning Regulations to the East 14th Street South Area
 

A.    Relationship to the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy.

 

The South Area 1, 2, and 3 zoning districts have been created to implement the East 14th Street Development Strategy (Development Strategy). The Development Strategy identifies five activity areas. The zoning for these activity areas are as follows:

 

Development Strategy District Name

Corresponding Zoning District

Southern Downtown

DA-1 (Downtown Area)

McKinley Residential

SA-2

Palma

SA-1

International & Cultural

SA-1

Gateway

SA-3

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 3)

 

2.08.260 SA-1 District—Use Regulations
 

A.    SA-1 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-1 District, and a conditional use permit is not required, for tenant spaces up to 25,000 square feet. Spaces in excess of 25,000 square feet can be allowed through the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Animal Sales.

3.     Artists’ Studios.

4.     Brewpubs.

5.     Business and Trade Schools.

6.     Business Services.

7.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

8.     Communications Facilities.

9.     Financial Institutions, Retail.

10.   Government Offices.

11.   Health and Fitness Centers.

12.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

13.   Medical Supply Stores.

14.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

15.   Offices, Business and Professional.

16.   Pharmacies.

17.   Restaurants, Full-Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

18.   Retail Sales.

19.   Retail Services.

20.   Travel Services.

21.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    SA-1 District—Permitted Hours of Operation.

 

The operation of a permitted use in the SA-1 District between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

 

C.    SA-1 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-1 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming.

3.     Animal Hospitals.

4.     Bars.

5.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

6.     Beer and Wine Stores. (Beer and wine stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Beer and wine stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing beer and wine store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

7.     Billiard Parlors.

8.     Coin-Op Laundry and Dry Cleaning Businesses.

9.     Commercial Recreation.

10.   Convalescent Facilities.

11.   Cultural Institutions.

12.   Dance Clubs.

13.   Department Store.

14.   Drive-Up Facility.

15.   Emergency Health Care.

16.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

17.   Farmers’ Market.

18.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

19.   Financial Institutions, Check Cashing and Personal Loans. (Financial institutions, personal loan services uses shall not be located within 1,500 feet from other financial institutions, personal loan services uses. Financial institutions, personal loan services uses may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses.)

20.   Fortunetelling Establishments.

21.   Furniture, Electronic and Appliance Sales.

22.   Game Centers.

23.   Group Housing.

24.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

25.   Hospitals.

26.   Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities.

27.   Laboratories.

28.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

29.   Multi-Family Residential. (For sites 25,000 square feet or larger, and on ground floor next to East 14th Street.)

30.   Massage Therapy.

31.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

32.   Parking Lot.

33.   Public Safety Facilities.

34.   Residential Hotels.

35.   Schools, Public or Private.

36.   Secondhand Sales.

37.   Social Service Facilities.

38.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

39.   Theaters.

40.   Tobacconist/Cigarette Stores (Tobacconist/cigarette stores shall not be located within 1,500 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, or of other tobacconist/cigarette stores, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Tobacconist/cigarette stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses.)

41.   Utilities, Major.

42.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

 

D.    SA-1 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-1 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machine.

2.     Catering Services.

3.     Community Gardens.

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Drugstores.

6.     Fast Food Establishment, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

7.     Live-Work.

8.     Mixed-Use Residential.

9.     Multi-Family Residential (for sites 25,000 square feet or less).

10.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

11.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

12.   Recycling Facilities, Small Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

13.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Supermarkets.

15.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

16.   Theaters, Small Scale.

17.   Two-Family Residential.

 

E.    SA-1 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the SA-1 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

7.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

8.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-009 § 1; Ord. 2004-007 § 3)

 

2.08.264 SA-2 District—Use Regulations
 

A.    SA-2 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-2 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Live-Work.

3.     Mixed-Use Residential.

4.     Multi-Family Residential.

5.     Two-Family Residential.

 

B.    SA-2 District—Permitted Hours of Operation.

 

The operation of a permitted nonresidential use in the SA-2 District between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

 

C.    SA-2 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-2 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Assembly Uses.

3.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns.)

4.     Beer and Wine Stores. (Beer and wine stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Beer and wine stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing beer and wine store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

5.     Business and Trade Schools.

6.     Coin-Op Laundry and Dry Cleaning Businesses.

7.     Convalescent Facilities.

8.     Cultural Institutions.

9.     Drugstore. (Single tenants, 10,000 square feet in size or less, only.)

10.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

11.   Fast Food Establishment, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

12.   Financial Institution, Retail.

13.   Fortunetelling Establishments.

14.   Furniture, Electronic and Appliance Sales. (Single tenants 10,000 square feet in size or less, only.)

15.   Group Housing.

16.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration. (Single tenants 10,000 square feet in size or less, only.)

17.   Library.

18.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

19.   Massage Therapy.

20.   Medical Supply Stores.

21.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

22.   Pharmacies. (Single tenants 10,000 square feet in size or less, only.)

23.   Public Safety Facilities.

24.   Retail Sales. (Single tenants greater than 10,000 square feet in size, only. Single tenants less than 10,000 square feet in size require Administrative Review.)

25.   Retail Services.

26.   Schools, Public or Private.

27.   Social Service Facilities.

28.   Theaters, Small Scale.

 

D.    SA-2 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-2 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Artists’ Studios.

2.     Automatic Teller Machine.

3.     Brewpubs.

4.     Business Services.

5.     Cafés. (Standards for review are specified in Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

6.     Community Gardens.

7.     Day Care, General.

8.     Government Offices.

9.     Health and Fitness Centers.

10.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

11.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

12.   Offices, Business and Professional.

13.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Small Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

17.   Restaurants, Full-Service.

18.   Retail Sales. (Single tenants over 10,000 square feet in size require approval of a conditional use permit.)

19.   Supermarkets.

20.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

21.   Travel Services.

22.   Utilities, Minor.

 

E.    SA-2 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the SA-2 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

7.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

8.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2012-002 § 1; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2004-009 § 1; Ord. 2004-007 § 3)

 

2.08.268 SA-3 District—Use Regulations
 

A.    SA-3 District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-3 District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (A conditional use permit is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

3.     Ambulance Services, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

4.     Animal Sales.

5.     Artists’ Studios.

6.     Brewpubs.

7.     Business and Trade Schools.

8.     Business Services.

9.     Cafés. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

10.   Catering Services.

11.   Communications Facilities.

12.   Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts and Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

13.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

14.   Furniture, Electronic and Appliance Sales.

15.   Government Offices.

16.   Health and Fitness Centers.

17.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

18.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

19.   Medical Supply Stores.

20.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

21.   Offices, Business and Professional.

22.   Pharmacies.

23.   Restaurants, Full Service. (Subject to Section 2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts.)

24.   Retail Sales.

25.   Retail Services.

26.   Supermarkets.

27.   Travel Services.

28.   Utilities, Minor.

 

B.    SA-3 District—Permitted Hours of Operation.

 

The operation of a permitted nonresidential use in the SA-3 District between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

 

C.    SA-3 District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-3 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a conditionally permitted use.

2.     Animal Grooming.

3.     Animal Hospitals.

4.     Automobile Parts Sales.

5.     Automobile Washing, Attended. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing.)

6.     Automobile Washing, Unattended. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing.)

7.     Bars.

8.     Beer and Wine Stores. (Beer and wine stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Beer and wine stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing beer and wine store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

9.     Billiard Parlors.

10.   Bingo Parlors.

11.   Coin-Op Laundry and Dry Cleaning.

12.   Commercial Parking Facility.

13.   Commercial Recreation.

14.   Convenience Stores. (Convenience markets shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Convenience markets may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing convenience store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

15.   Cultural Institutions.

16.   Dance Clubs.

17.   Department Store.

18.   Drive-Up Facility.

19.   Emergency Health Care.

20.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

21.   Farmers’ Market.

22.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

23.   Financial Institutions, Check Cashing/Personal Loans. (Financial institutions, personal loan services uses shall not be located within 1,500 feet from other financial institutions, personal loan services uses. Financial institutions, personal loan services uses may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses.)

24.   Fortunetelling Establishments.

25.   Game Centers.

26.   Group Housing.

27.   Hotels, Motels, and Time-Share Facilities.

28.   Liquor Stores. (Liquor stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Liquor stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. A pre-existing liquor store shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely due to non-compliance with the one 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement.)

29.   Live-Work.

30.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

31.   Massage Therapy.

32.   Mixed-Use Residential.

33.   Multi-Family Residential.

34.   Nurseries.

35.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

36.   Public Safety Facilities.

37.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

38.   Schools, Public or Private.

39.   Secondhand Sales.

40.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

41.   Social Service Facilities.

42.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

43.   Theaters.

44.   Tobacconist/Cigarette Stores. (Tobacconist/cigarette stores shall not be located within 1,500 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park, library, or recreational facilities, or of other tobacconist/cigarette stores, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. Tobacconist/cigarette stores may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless longer hours are allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit, with a finding that the extended hours would not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses.)

45.   Utilities, Major.

46.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

47.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

48.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

49.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rental.

 

D.    SA-3 District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the SA-3 District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Automatic Teller Machine.

2.     Community Gardens.

3.     Drugstores.

4.     Laboratories.

5.     Parking Lot.

6.     Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

7.     Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

8.     Recycling Facilities, Small Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

9.     Theaters, Small Scale.

10.   Two-Family Residential.

11.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

12.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

E.    SA-3 District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the SA-3 District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Real Estate Offices, Temporary.

5.     Retail Sales, Outdoor.

6.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

7.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

8.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2004-009 § 1; Ord. 2004-007 § 3)

 

2.08.272 Additional Use Restrictions: Commercial and Professional Districts
 

All uses not listed as permitted, conditionally permitted, or subject to administrative review are prohibited, unless a decision is made by the Zoning Enforcement Official pursuant to Section 5.04.112 Uses Not Listed.

 

In addition to the uses listed above, the following regulations shall apply:

 

A.    Development of Lots Divided by District Boundaries. Lots located within two districts shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.308 Development on Lots Divided by District Boundaries.

 

B.    Nonconforming Uses. Subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

 

C.    Relocated Buildings. A use permit shall be required for any commercial use, residential use, public or semipublic use, or industrial use occupying a relocated building.

 

D.    Restaurants, Full-Service or Cafés in Various Commercial Districts. Subject to Administrative Review if the proposal has, or would result in, either a gross floor area of 2,000 square feet, or larger, or a dining area of 1,000 square feet, or larger. Zoning permit review pursuant to Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits shall include, but is not limited to, a review of the proposal’s generation of parking demand, hours of operation, and signage. In order to assure consistency with the purpose of the various Commercial Districts as stated in Section 2.08.100 Specific Purposes, the Zoning Enforcement Official may impose conditions to limit hours of operations and signage further than what is prescribed elsewhere in this Code. The standard for approval is the Zoning Enforcement Official’s ability to make the required findings, as listed below:

 

1.     That the proposed location and operation of the restaurant, full-service or café is in accord with the provisions of this Code, and the purposes and specific standards of the Commercial District in which the site is located;

 

2.     That the proposed location of the restaurant, full-service or café and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with the General Plan; will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of persons residing, or working in, or adjacent to, the neighborhood of such use; and will not be detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity, or to the general welfare of the City;

 

3.     That the proposed restaurant, full service or café will not create adverse impacts on traffic, including, but not limited to, on-street parking demand, or create demands exceeding the capacity of public services and facilities which cannot be mitigated.

 

E.    Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale in the CC and SA-3 Districts. Subject to Administrative Review if the proposal is to establish or enlarge a fast food establishment, small scale within 500 feet of a Residential District. Zoning permit review pursuant to Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits shall include, but is not limited to, a review of the proposal’s generation of parking demand, hours of operation, and signage. In order to assure consistency with the purpose of the applicable commercial district, the Zoning Enforcement Official may impose conditions to limit hours of operations and signage further than what is prescribed elsewhere in this Code. The standard for approval is the Zoning Enforcement Official’s ability to make the required findings, as listed below:

 

1.     That the proposed location and operation of the fast food establishment, small scale, is in accord with the provisions of this Code, and the purposes and specific standards of the commercial district in which the site is located;

 

2.     That the proposed location of the fast food establishment, small scale, and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with the General Plan; will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing, or working in, or adjacent to, the neighborhood of such use; and will not be detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity, or to the general welfare of the City;

 

3.     That the proposed fast food establishment, small scale will not create adverse impacts on traffic, including, but not limited to, on-street parking demand, or create demands exceeding the capacity of public services and facilities which cannot be mitigated. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-020 § 2: Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 2. Development Regulations
2.08.300 Property Development Regulations: Commercial and Professional Districts
 

The following sections set forth the property development regulations of the CC, CN, CR, C-RM, CS, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, NA-1, NA-2, P, SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts. In addition, development in the SA-1, SA-2 or SA-3 Districts shall be consistent with the Design Guidelines in the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy. Development in the DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, and DA-6 Districts shall be consistent with the provisions contained in the Design Guidelines in the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.304 Minimum Lot Area and Minimum Lot Width
 

Zoning District

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

CC, CS, NA-1, NA-2

10,000

100

CN, P

5,000

50

CR

10,000

n.a.

C-RM

25 acres (A)

n.a.

DA-1, DA-6

10,000 (A)

100

DA-2, DA-3, DA-4

5,000 (A)

50

SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

5,000

50

 

A.    Exceptions to Minimum Lot Size—C-RM and DA Districts. The Zoning Enforcement Official may administratively approve an exception to the minimum lot size to allow for lots less than the minimum size required by this section if adequate shared ingress, egress and access to parking facilities can be provided to accommodate each proposed new lot. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2005-002 § 1; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.308 Minimum Yards
 

A.    Minimum Building Setback. The minimum setback for building placement, is as prescribed below. Additional building setback may also apply as specified in Subsections B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J.

 


Zoning District

Front (ft.)

Side (ft.)

Corner Side (ft.)

Rear (ft.)

Daylight Plane and Yards Abutting R Districts

CC

10

0

10

0

15 ft. side or rear(J)

CN, P

10

0

10

0

15 ft. side or rear(J)

CR

20

0

20

0

15 ft. side or rear(J)

C-RM

0

0

0

0

40 ft. from a structure in an R District(C)

CS

10

0

10

0

15 ft. side or rear(J)

DA-1

Varies(D)(G)

0

0

Varies(D)(G)

Varies(J)

DA-2; DA-3, DA-6

Varies(E)(G)

0

0

Varies(E)(G)

Varies(J)

DA-4

Varies(F)(G)

0

0

Varies(F)(G)

Varies(J)

NA-1

0

4

0

5

n.a.

NA-2

20 or 25(H)

15(H)

20(H)

15(H)

25 ft. rear for second story

35 ft. rear for third story(H)

SA-1, SA-3

0(I)

0

0(I)

0

8 ft. side or rear(J)

SA-2

Varies(I)

0

0

0

8 ft. side or rear(J)

 

B.    Additional Regulations—All Commercial and Professional Districts.

 

1.     Front, side, corner side, and rear yards shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.312 Building Projections into Yards and Courts.

 

2.     Double-frontage lots shall provide the minimum front setback on each frontage.

 

C.    Additional Building Setback Requirements—CR-M District. No building in the C-RM District shall be constructed within 40 feet of a structure in an R District. Any other restriction on yards shall be as established pursuant to a conditional use approval or development agreement.

 

D.    Additional Building Setback Requirements—DA-1 District.

 

1.     Along East 14th Street, a minimum front setback of seven feet is required to create a minimum 15-foot wide pedestrian zone.

 

2.     Rear yards shall be consistent with the prevailing condition on each block.

 

E.    Additional Building Setback Requirements—DA-2, DA-3, and DA-6 Districts.

 

1.     Front setbacks shall be consistent with the prevailing condition on each block.

 

2.     Where ground floor residential is proposed, a minimum front setback of 10 feet and a maximum of 15 feet shall be provided.

 

3.     For mixed-use buildings, the front setback shall not exceed 10 feet.

 

4.     Rear yards shall be consistent with the prevailing condition on each block.

 

F.     Additional Building Setback Requirements—DA-4 District.

 

1.     Front setbacks shall be consistent with the prevailing condition on each block.

 

2.     Rear yards shall be consistent with the prevailing condition on each block.

 

3.     Along the San Leandro Creek, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall determine the applicable building setback for a creek trail and open space.

 

G.    Pre-Existing Residential in DA Districts. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall determine the applicable building setback standards for modifications or additions to pre-existing residential development based on the prevailing conditions on each block.

 

H.    Additional Building Setback Requirements—NA-2 District.

 

1.     The front setback in the NA-2 District shall be as follows: 20 feet for one- and two-story buildings and 25 feet for three-story buildings.

 

2.     Side setbacks in the NA-2 District shall be 15 feet or one-half the building height, whichever is greater.

 

3.     Corner side setbacks in the NA-2 District shall be 20 feet, or one-half the building height, whichever is greater.

 

4.     Rear yard requirements in the NA-2 District, when adjoining RS Districts, shall be increased to 25 feet for the second story and 35 feet for the third story. Rear yards in the NA-2 District, when adjoining RD or RM Districts, shall be increased to 25 feet.

 

I.      Additional Building Setback Requirements—SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts.

 

1.     If ground floor residential is proposed, a 10-foot building setback shall be required.

 

2.     South of Blossom Way: front setbacks will vary to achieve a 13.5-foot wide sidewalk. No front setback is required.

 

3.     North of Blossom Way: front setbacks will vary to achieve a 13-foot wide sidewalk. A minimum 4.5-foot setback shall be required.

 

J.     Daylight Plane Regulations for Parcels Adjacent to R Districts.

 

1.     For C and P Districts, structures shall not intercept a one-to-one (1:1) or 45 degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of 8 feet above existing grade at the R District boundary line. (Please refer to illustration “Required Daylight Plane at Adjoining Districts—C or P Districts.”)

2018-021

REQUIRED DAYLIGHT PLANE AT ADJOINING DISTRICTS—C OR P DISTRICTS

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

2.     For SA districts, structures shall not intercept a one-to-one (1:1) or 45 degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of eight feet above existing grade at the R District boundary line. (Please refer to illustration “Required Daylight Plane at Adjoining Districts—SA Districts.)

2018-021

REQUIRED DAYLIGHT PLANE AT ADJOINING DISTRICTS—SA DISTRICTS

(The diagram is illustrative. Also refer to the East 14th Street South Area

Design Guidelines)

 

3.     For DA districts, structures shall not intercept a one-to-one (1:1) or 45 degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of eight feet above existing grade at an RS or RD District boundary line. (Please refer to illustration “Required Daylight Plane at Adjoining Districts—DA Districts.”)

2018-021

REQUIRED DAYLIGHT PLANE AT ADJOINING DISTRICTS—DA DISTRICTS

(The diagram is illustrative. Also refer to the Design Guidelines in the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy)

 

4.     In instances in which the zoning district boundary is located at the centerline of an adjacent public right-of-way, the daylight plane shall be measured from the nearest property line.

 

5.     The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception if an applicant cannot meet these provisions per Section 2.08.400 Administrative Exceptions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-009 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.312 Height of Structures
 

Zoning District

Non-Residential Development

Residential and Mixed-Use Residential Development

Minimum Height (ft.)

Maximum Height (ft.)

Minimum Height (ft.)

Maximum Height (ft.)

CC

n.a.

50

n.a.

50

CN, NA-1, NA-2

n.a.

30

n.a.

50

CR, CS

n.a.

40

n.a.

n.a.

C-RM

n.a.

80(A)

n.a.

50

DA-1

n.a. or 24(B)

75(C)

n.a. or 24(B)

75(C)

DA-2

n.a. or 24(B)

50(C)

n.a. or 24(B)

50(C)

DA-3

n.a.

50(C)

n.a.

50(C)

DA-4

n.a.

60-75(C)

n.a.

60-75(C)

DA-6

n.a.

75(C)

n.a.

75(C)

P

n.a.

30

n.a.

30

SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

24

50

24

50

 

A.    Exceptions to Maximum Height—C-RM District. No building in the C-RM District shall exceed a height of 80 feet or four stories unless a greater height is expressly permitted by a Conditional Use Permit or development agreement.

 

B.    Exceptions to Minimum Height—DA-1 and DA-2 Districts. The 24-foot minimum height standard only applies along East 14th Street between Chumalia Street and Georgia Way. No minimum height applies elsewhere in the DA-1 or DA-2 districts.

 

C.    Specific Heights and Height Exceptions—DA Districts. The Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy Figure 8 Building Height Framework establishes the locations of specific height limits. Exceptions to the maximum height requirement may be allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit.

 

D.    Other Exceptions to Height Limits. The maximum height of structures shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.320 Exceptions to Height Limits. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

2.08.316 Lot Coverage
 

Zoning District

Maximum Lot Coverage

CC, CN, CS, P

50%

CR

25%

C-RM, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

100%

 

A.    Exceptions. In calculating the percentage of lot coverage for the purpose of applying the regulations of this Zoning Code, the features of a structure as hereafter set forth shall not be included as coverage:

 

1.     Cornices, canopies, eaves or other projections which do not increase the volume of space enclosed by the building provided that any portion of such projections extending more than two feet from the building shall be included as coverage at a ratio of 1/2 : 1;

 

2.     Fire escapes up to 3 1/2 feet;

 

3.     An uncovered stair and landing which does not extend above a ground floor entrance except for the railing; or

 

4.     Bay windows, balconies or chimneys which project from the wall not more than two feet; provided, that, such features do not in the aggregate occupy more than one-third of the length of a wall which faces an interior side lot line, or more than two-thirds of the length of a wall which faces a street or a rear lot line. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.320 Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 

Zoning District

Minimum FAR

Maximum FAR

CC

n.a.

1.0

CN

n.a.

0.5

CR

n.a.

1.0

C-RM

n.a.

1.0

CS

n.a.

0.5

DA-1

n.a.

3.5

DA-2

n.a.

1.0

Residential or Mixed Use Residential: 1.5(D)

Downtown Mixed Use: 3.5(A)

Transit-Oriented Mixed Use: 4.0(B)

Adjacent to BART: 5.0(C)

DA-3

n.a.

3.5

Transit-Oriented Mixed Use: 4.0(B)

DA-4

n.a.

4.0

Adjacent to BART: 5.0(C)

DA-6

1.0

4.0

Adjacent to BART: 5.0(C)

NA-1, NA-2

n.a.

1.0

Residential or Mixed Use Residential: 1.5(D)

P

n.a.

0.5

Downtown Mixed Use: 3.5(A)

SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

n.a.

1.0

Residential or Mixed Use Residential: 1.5(D)

 

A.    Maximum FAR in Downtown Mixed Use—DA-2, DA-3, and P Districts. Maximum of 3.5 FAR allowed for parcels within the General Plan Downtown Mixed Use land use category.

 

B.    Maximum FAR in Transit-Oriented Mixed Use—DA-2, and DA-3 Districts. Maximum of 4.0 FAR allowed for parcels within the General Plan Transit-Oriented Mixed Use land use category.

 

C.    Parcels Adjacent to BART—DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, and DA-6 Districts. Maximum of 5.0 FAR allowed for parcels within a 0.5 mile radius to a BART station.

 

D.    Maximum FAR for Residential or Mixed-Use Residential Developments—DA-2, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts. Maximum of 1.5 FAR for residential or mixed-use residential development. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.324 Minimum Site Landscaping
 

A.    General Landscape Requirements. In addition to the general requirements prescribed in Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements, the following requirements for minimum site landscaping apply to all property within commercial and professional districts. The minimum percentage of the site that shall be used for landscaping shall be as prescribed below:

 

Zoning District

Minimum Site Landscaping

CN, NA-1, P, SA-1, SA-3

5%(C)(D)

CC, CS, NA-2, SA-2

10%(C)(D)

CR, C-RM, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6

Determined at the time of project Site Plan Review, pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval (C)

 

B.    Landscape Requirements in All Districts. Notwithstanding the minimum setback and landscaped yard requirements of this chapter, all open areas within, and adjacent to, a required front or corner side yard, other than areas used for walks, drives or parking and loading facilities, shall be landscaped. For projects requiring Site Plan Review pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, all landscaping shall be installed consistent with Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements.

 

C.    Minimum Site Landscaping—CC, CN, CR, CS, P, and NA-2 Districts. A landscaped yard or planter strip with a minimum depth of 10 feet shall be provided within the front and corner side setbacks prescribed in Section 2.08.308 Minimum Yards.

 

D.    Minimum Site Landscaping—SA-1, SA-2 and SA-3 Districts. A minimum five foot landscaped yard or planter strip shall be provided for any parking facility or other open space area abutting a public street.

 

E.    Exceptions for Minimum Site Landscaping. As part of the Site Plan Review pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, exceptions to the requirements of this subsection may be permitted if such requirements are found not to be practical due to pre-existing site constraints. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.328 Wall Setback or Offsets
 

A.    Building Articulation. Buildings over 25 feet in height with walls that extend longer than 100 feet shall provide architectural details such as offsets, recesses, reveals, window patterns, columns, or pilasters. Alternative design solutions that achieve an equivalent level of building articulation and visual interest may be approved by the ZEO, or may be approved as part of the site plan review or other approval process by the approval authority. (Please refer to “Maximum Wall Length and Required Break” illustration.)

2018-021

MAXIMUM WALL LENGTH AND REQUIRED BREAK

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.332 Density for Multi-Family Residential and Mixed-Use Residential Development
 

A.    Density for Multi-Family Residential and Mixed-Use Residential Development. The minimum and maximum density for residential and mixed-use development is as prescribed below. For minimum and maximum density calculations that result in fractional amounts, numbers of 0.5 or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole integer, numbers less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole integer.

 

Zoning District

Minimum Density (Dwelling Unit / Acre)

Maximum Density (Dwelling Unit / Acre)

CC, CN, C-RM

n.a.

24(B)

CR, CS

n.a.

n.a.

DA-1

Parcels < 10,000 sf: n.a.

Parcels < 10,000 sf: 24(B)

 

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 35

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 100(B)

DA-2

Parcels < 10,000 sf: n.a.

Parcels < 10,000 sf: 24(B)

 

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 20

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 40(B)

DA-3

Parcels < 10,000 sf: n.a.

Parcels < 10,000 sf: 24(B)

 

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 20

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 60(B)

DA-4

Parcels < 10,000 sf: n.a.

Parcels < 10,000 sf: 24(B)

 

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 60

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 100(B)

DA-6

Parcels < 10,000 sf: n.a.

Parcels < 10,000 sf: 24(B)

 

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: 60

Parcels ≥ 10,000 sf: n.a.

NA-1, NA-2, P

n.a.

24

SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

18(C)

35

 

B.    Small Unit Density Bonus—Downtown Mixed Use. A 20 percent density bonus for average unit size less than 750 square feet is allowed. This bonus may not be added to the State-required density bonus for affordable housing. Only one density bonus program may be applied to any given development.

 

C.    Exceptions to Minimum Density—SA Districts. Exceptions to this minimum density requirement may be approved at the discretion of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

D.    Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units do not count toward the maximum density. See Section 2.04.388 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.336 Open Space for Multi-Family Residential and Mixed-Use Residential Development
 

In addition to the general landscape requirements prescribed in Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements and Subsection A of Section 2.08.324 Minimum Site Landscaping, the following requirements for minimum required open space apply to all multi-family residential and mixed-use residential development in the C, P, NA, DA or SA Districts.

 

Zoning District

Required Open Space (sf / DU)

CN, CC, NA-1, NA-2, P

200

SA-1, SA-2, SA-3, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6

60

 

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4)

 

2.08.340 Additional Property Development Regulations: Commercial and Professional Districts
 

A.    Ground Floor Retail in DA-1. Retail uses required on ground floor on parcels fronting on East 14th Street and Washington Avenue, north of Parrott Street.

 

B.    Views into Buildings. On commercial ground floors in the DA and SA Districts, not less than 50 percent of the first story of that portion of a building facing a street shall consist of opening or clear or tinted glass windows providing views of merchandise displayed, building interiors, or courtyards.

 

C.    Security Roll-Up Doors. Retractable security gates, window bars, and mall-style roll-up doors shall be installed to the inside of existing windows or glass doors for installation of physical security measures on a building façade. A mall-style roll-up door must not be visible during business hours. Metal gates, stored in a wall pocket or similar enclosure so as not to be visible during business hours, and scissor-style security grilles, retracted into casing during business hours, are subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

D.    Other Requirements: C-RM (Commercial—Regional Mall) District. The following additional requirements shall apply to development approvals in the C-RM District at the time when new improvements are constructed and only in that area of the site that is related to such new construction.

 

1.     All signs shall be subject to the Chapter 4.12 Signs with respect to requirements for installation permits and maintenance.

 

2.     All outdoor storage and surface mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets, on-site parking and vehicular or pedestrian circulation areas open to the public.

 

3.     Roof-mounted mechanical equipment either shall be screened from view from public streets, the elevated BART line, and on-site public parking and vehicular or pedestrian circulation areas open to the public, or such equipment shall be designed or treated so as to be unobtrusive or visually attractive.

 

4.     All utilities on-site shall be placed underground. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.08.344 Amenities, Design Criteria for Multi-Family Residential, Mixed-Use Residential Developments
 

A.    Projects subject to Site Plan Review shall include amenities and design criteria that enhance the quality of tenants’ living or the appearance of the project and not cited elsewhere in this chapter. Projects shall include at least seven of these amenities. Amenities and criteria may include:

 

1.     Fitness center

2.     Lap pool

3.     Common areas that are not private balconies

4.     Tenant activity areas. (Examples: joint eating and cooking areas, clubhouse, play areas, screening room)

5.     Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations or 220 V power outlet for 15 percent of required parking spaces.

6.     Use of three or more colors

7.     Use of three or more materials on the façade

8.     Public art

9.     Storage rooms

10.   Main door-staffed with attendant

11.   Bicycle lockers

12.   Permeable concrete pavers in driveway and parking areas

13.   Indoor and outdoor furniture in common areas

14.   Façade or corner modulation of minimum 18-inch depth. (Examples: Bay windows, corner feature)

15.   Playground

16.   Pet relief area

17.   Pet washing facility

18.   On-site commercial child care facility

19.   Study room and/or library

20.   Conference room (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2018-021 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 3. Discretionary Permits
2.08.400 Administrative Exceptions
 

A.    Standards for Which an Administrative Exception May be Approved. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception for the following:

 

1.     Exceptions to the Daylight Plane requirements set forth in 2.08.308 Minimum Yards.

 

B.    Application Requirements. Application for such approval shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Official on a form prescribed by Planning staff, and shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing location and height of all structures on the premises subject to the application and on all abutting premises, and showing location, height and area of the proposal. Reduced copies of these plans shall also be provided. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require further information as is deemed appropriate to the application.

 

C.    Neighborhood Notification. The City shall notify abutting property owners in writing of the proposal. A copy of the reduced plan shall be included.

 

D.    Administrative Review.

 

1.     Findings Necessary for Approval. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve an Administrative Exception upon a determination that the proposal would not be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare and would not cause undue damage, hardship, nuisance or other detriment to persons or property in the vicinity. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall deny, approve or conditionally approve the application.

 

2.     Notice of Decision. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall notify by mail the applicant and all abutting property owners. Said notice shall contain a statement that the action taken will become final within 15 days from the date thereof unless appealed in writing to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The action of the Zoning Enforcement Official shall be final unless an appeal is filed.

 

E.    Appeals. Any person aggrieved with the action of the Zoning Enforcement Official may appeal such action to the Board of Zoning Adjustments, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4)

Chapter 2.12 I Industrial Districts
2.12.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes, the specific purposes of the industrial district regulations are to:

 

A.    Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the General Plan for a broad range of manufacturing, distribution and storage, and service uses.

 

B.    Strengthen the City’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the City and surrounding communities.

 

C.    Provide a suitable environment for various types of industrial uses, and protect them from the adverse impacts of inharmonious uses.

 

D.    Encourage adaptive reuse of existing industrial buildings.

 

E.    Ensure high quality site and building design for new or reused buildings, and that the appearance and effects of industrial uses are compatible with the character of the area in which they are located.

 

F.     Minimize the impact of industrial uses on adjacent residential districts.

 

G.    Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.

 

The additional purposes of each I district are as follows:

 

IL Industrial Limited District. To provide areas appropriate for a wide range of: (1) low- to moderate-intensity industrial uses capable of being located adjacent to residential areas through provision of adequate buffering and attenuation measures; and (2) commercial services and light manufacturing, and to protect these areas, to the extent feasible, from disruption and competition for space from unrelated retail or commercial uses or general industrial uses. Certain types of retail sales are permitted under specified limitations.

 

IG Industrial General District. To provide and protect existing industrial sites and allow for continued operation of existing general industry, subject to performance standards and buffering requirements to minimize potential environmental impacts. Certain types of retail sales are permitted under specified limitations.

 

IP Industrial Park District. To provide and protect industrial lands for the development in a landscaped setting of communities of high technology, research and development facilities, limited industrial activities (including production and assembly but not raw materials processing or bulk handling), small-scale warehousing and distribution, industrial office centers, certain types of specified retail sales, and related uses.

 

IT Industrial Transition District. To provide and protect industrial lands for the development of emerging technologies, artisanal production, and light manufacturing methods, while preserving existing businesses and allowing additional commercial uses under specified limitations and residential development within one-half mile of a BART station. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 1. Use Regulations
2.12.200 IG District—Use Regulations
 

A.    IG District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IG District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a Conditional Use Permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations.)

3.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

4.     Ambulance Services, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

5.     Artists’ Studios.

6.     Automobile Parts Sales.

7.     Building Materials and Services.

8.     Business Services.

9.     Business and Trade Schools.

10.   Catering Services.

11.   Communications Facilities.

12.   Emergency Health Care.

13.   Equipment Sales.

14.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

15.   Food Processing, General.

16.   Food Processing, Limited.

17.   Government Offices.

18.   Health and Fitness Centers.

19.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

20.   Industry, Custom.

21.   Industry, General.

22.   Industry, Limited.

23.   Industry, Research and Development.

24.   Laboratories.

25.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

26.   Marine Sales and Services.

27.   Medical Supply Stores.

28.   Nurseries.

29.   Offices, Business and Professional.

30.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

31.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.)

32.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

33.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

34.   Utilities, Minor.

35.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

36.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

37.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IG District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IG District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Animal Boarding (with outside use).

3.     Bars.

4.     Cannabis Dispensary. (Subject to performance standards in the San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-33 Cannabis Dispensary Permits.)

5.     Corporation Yards.

6.     Cultural Institutions.

7.     Dance Clubs.

8.     Drive-Up Facilities.

9.     Drugstores.

10.   Farmers’ Market.

11.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

12.   Furniture, Electronics and Appliance Sales.

13.   Game Centers.

14.   Industrial Transfer/Storage/Treatment Facilities for Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities.)

15.   Industry, Cannabis Product Manufacturing.

16.   Industry, Hazardous Materials or Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities. Provided that the use is consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the San Leandro General Plan.)

17.   Laboratories, Cannabis Testing Facilities.

18.   Massage Therapy.

19.   Public Safety Facilities.

20.   Public Storage.

21.   Recycling Facilities, Heavy Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

22.   Residuals Repositories for Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities.)

23.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

24.   Small Scale Hazardous Waste Center. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

25.   Supermarkets.

26.   Transfer Stations.

27.   Trucking Terminals.

28.   Utilities, Major.

29.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

30.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

31.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

32.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

33.   Vehicle Storage.

 

C.    IG District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

The following uses are allowed in the IG District, subject to the approval of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor, only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor, only).

3.     Animal Hospital.

4.     Automatic Teller Machines.

5.     Brewpub.

6.     Cafés.

7.     Community Gardens.

8.     Day Care, General.

9.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

10.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

11.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

12.   Parking Lot.

13.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Recycling Facilities, Light Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

17.   Restaurants, Full Service.

18.   Retail Sales.

19.   Retail Services.

20.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

21.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IG District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IG District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Animal Shows.

2.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-014 § 4; Ord. 2017-001 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2014-003 § 3; Ord. 2012-004 § 1; Ord. 2008-012 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.204 IL District—Use Regulations
 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a conditional use permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

A.    IL District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IL District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations.)

3.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

4.     Ambulance Services, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

5.     Animal Hospitals.

6.     Artists’ Studios.

7.     Building Materials and Services.

8.     Business Services.

9.     Business and Trade Schools.

10.   Catering Services.

11.   Communications Facilities.

12.   Emergency Shelters.

13.   Equipment Sales.

14.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

15.   Food Processing, Limited.

16.   Government Offices.

17.   Health and Fitness Centers.

18.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

19.   Industry, Custom.

20.   Industry, Limited.

21.   Industry, Research, and Development.

22.   Laboratories.

23.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

24.   Marine Sales and Services.

25.   Medical Supply Stores.

26.   Nurseries.

27.   Offices, Business, and Professional. (Note: The conversion of an industrial use to an office use is subject to the minimum off-street parking requirements of Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required; as prescribed for changes of use by Subsections A.1 and A.2 of Section 4.08.104 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading)

28.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

29.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming.)

30.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

31.   Utilities, Minor.

32.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

33.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

34.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IL District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IL District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Animal Boarding (with outdoor use).

3.     Automobile Parts Sales.

4.     Bars.

5.     Corporation Yards.

6.     Cultural Institutions.

7.     Dance Clubs.

8.     Drive-Up Facilities.

9.     Drugstores.

10.   Emergency Health Care.

11.   Farmers’ Market.

12.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

13.   Food Processing, General.

14.   Furniture, Electronics and Appliance Sales.

15.   Game Centers.

16.   Industry, Hazardous Materials or Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities. Provided that the use is consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the San Leandro General Plan.)

17.   Massage Therapy.

18.   Public Safety Facilities.

19.   Public Storage.

20.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

21.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

22.   Small Scale Hazardous Waste Center. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage, Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities, and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities.)

23.   Utilities, Major.

24.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

25.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

26.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

27.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

28.   Vehicle Storage.

 

C.    IL District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IL District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor, only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor, only).

3.     Automatic Teller Machines.

4.     Brewpub.

5.     Cafés.

6.     Community Gardens.

7.     Day Care, General.

8.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

9.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

10.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

11.   Parking Lot.

12.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

13.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Light Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Restaurants, Full Service.

17.   Retail Sales.

18.   Retail Services.

19.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

20.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IL District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IL District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2012-004 § 1; Ord. 2011-004 § 2; Ord. 2008-012 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.208 IP District—Use Regulations
 

A.    IP District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IP District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a Conditional Use Permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations.)

3.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

4.     Ambulance Service, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

5.     Artist’s Studios.

6.     Building Materials and Services. (Permitted if the proposed use is within an enclosed structure.)

7.     Business Services.

8.     Business and Trade Schools.

9.     Catering Services.

10.   Communication Facilities.

11.   Equipment Sales.

12.   Food Processing, Limited.

13.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

14.   Health and Fitness Centers.

15.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

16.   Industry, Custom.

17.   Industry, Limited.

18.   Industry, Research and Development.

19.   Laboratories.

20.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

21.   Medical Supply Stores.

22.   Offices, Business and Professional. (The conversion of an industrial use to an office use is subject to the minimum off-street parking requirements of Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required; as prescribed for changes of use by Subsections A.1 and A.2 of Section 4.08.104 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading.)

23.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

24.   Park and Recreational Facilities.

25.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming uses.)

26.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

27.   Retail Services. (As a secondary use in a building.)

28.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

29.   Utilities, Minor.

30.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

31.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

32.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is within an enclosed structure, is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IP District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IP District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Animal Boarding (with outdoor use).

3.     Automobile Parts Sales.

4.     Bars.

5.     Cannabis Dispensary. (Subject to performance standards in the San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-33 Cannabis Dispensary Permits.)

6.     Cultural Institutions.

7.     Dance Clubs.

8.     Drive-Up Facilities.

9.     Emergency Health Care.

10.   Farmers’ Market.

11.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

12.   Food Processing, General.

13.   Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

14.   Industry, Cannabis Product Manufacturing.

15.   Industry, General.

16.   Industry, Hazardous Materials, or Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities. Provided that the use is consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the San Leandro General Plan.)

17.   Laboratories, Cannabis Testing Facilities.

18.   Massage Therapy.

19.   Public Safety Facilities.

20.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

21.   Utilities, Major.

22.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

 

C.    IP District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IP District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor only).

3.     Animal Hospital.

4.     Automatic Teller Machines.

5.     Brewpub.

6.     Cafés.

7.     Community Gardens.

8.     Day Care, General.

9.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

10.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

11.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

12.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers.

13.   Parking Lot.

14.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

17.   Restaurants, Full Service.

18.   Retail Sales.

19.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

20.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IP District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IP District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Commercial Filming.

2.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

3.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-014 § 4; Ord. 2017-001 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2014-003 § 3; Ord. 2012-004 § 1; Ord. 2008-012 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-004 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.212 IT District—Use Regulations
 

A.    IT District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IT District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a conditional use permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

3.     Ambulance Service, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

4.     Artists’ Studios.

5.     Business Services.

6.     Business and Trade Schools.

7.     Catering Services.

8.     Communications Facilities.

9.     Emergency Health Care.

10.   Equipment Sales.

11.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

12.   Food Processing, General.

13.   Food Processing, Limited.

14.   Government Offices.

15.   Health and Fitness Centers.

16.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

17.   Industry, Custom.

18.   Industry, Limited.

19.   Industry, Research and Development.

20.   Laboratories.

21.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

22.   Marine Sales and Services.

23.   Medical Supply Stores.

24.   Nurseries.

25.   Offices, Business and Professional.

26.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming uses.)

27.   Restaurants, Full-Service.

28.   Retail Sales.

29.   Retail Services.

30.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

31.   Utilities, Minor.

32.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

33.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

34.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IT District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IT District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations.)

3.     Animal Boarding (with outdoor use).

4.     Assembly Uses.

5.     Automobile Parts Sales.

6.     Bars.

7.     Bed and Breakfast Inns (within one-half mile of a BART station).

8.     Cannabis Dispensary. (Subject to performance standards in the San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-33 Cannabis Dispensary Permits.)

9.     Coin-Operated Laundry and Dry Cleaning Businesses.

10.   Corporation Yards.

11.   Dance Clubs.

12.   Drive-Up Facilities.

13.   Drugstores.

14.   Emergency Shelters (within one-half mile of a BART station).

15.   Entertainment Events.

16.   Farmers Markets.

17.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

18.   Furniture, Electronics and Appliance Sales.

19.   Game Centers.

20.   Hotels, Motels and Time-Share Facilities.

21.   Massage Therapy.

22.   Mixed-Use Residential. (Within one-half mile of a BART station and with a maximum density of 40 dwelling units per acre).

23.   Multi-Family Residential. (Within one-half mile of a BART station and with a maximum density of 40 dwelling units per acre).

24.   Public Safety Facilities.

25.   Public Storage.

26.   Recycling Facilities, Heavy Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

27. Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

28.   Recycling Facilities, Light Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

29.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

30.   Single-Family Residential (Within one-half mile of a BART station).

31.   Stadia and Sports Arenas.

32.   Supermarkets.

33.   Utilities, Major.

34.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

35.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

36.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

37.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

 

C.    IT District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IT District, subject to the approval of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor, only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor, only).

3.     Animal Hospitals.

4.     Automatic Teller Machines.

5.     Bars (in conjunction with a brewery or winery, when not considered incidental).

6.     Brewpubs.

7.     Building Materials and Services.

8.     Cafés.

9.     Commercial Recreation.

10.   Community Gardens.

11.   Cultural Institutions.

12.   Day Care, General.

13.   Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

14.   Industry, General.

15.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

16.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by the Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

17.   Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets.

18.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

19.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

20.   Parking Lot.

21.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

22.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

23.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

24.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

25.   Theaters.

26.   Theaters, Outdoor.

27.   Theaters, Small Scale.

28.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IT District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IT District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Animal Shows.

2.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

3.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

4.     Circuses and Carnivals.

5.     Commercial Filming.

6.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4)

 

2.12.216 IG(AU) District—Use Regulations
 

A.    IG(AU) District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IG(AU) District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a conditional use permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations)

3.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

4.     Ambulance Service, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

5.     Artists’ Studios.

6.     Automobile Parts Sales.

7.     Building Materials and Services.

8.     Business Services.

9.     Business and Trade Schools.

10.   Catering Services.

11.   Communications Facilities.

12.   Emergency Health Care.

13.   Equipment Sales.

14.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

15.   Food Processing, General.

16.   Food Processing, Limited.

17.   Government Offices.

18.   Health and Fitness Centers.

19.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

20.   Industry, Custom.

21.   Industry, General.

22.   Industry, Limited.

23.   Industry, Research and Development.

24.   Laboratories.

25.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

26.   Marine Sales and Services.

27.   Medical Supply Stores.

28.   Nurseries.

29.   Offices, Business and Professional.

30.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

31.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming uses, but no new uses shall be established.)

32.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

33.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

34.   Utilities, Minor.

35.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

36.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

37.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IG(AU) District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IG(AU) District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Animal Boarding (with outdoor use).

3.     Assembly Uses.

4.     Bars.

5.     Cannabis Dispensary. (Subject to performance standards in the San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-33 Cannabis Dispensary Permits.)

6.     Commercial Recreation.

7.     Corporation Yards.

8.     Cultural Institutions.

9.     Dance Clubs.

10.   Drive-Up Facilities.

11.   Drugstores.

12.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

13.   Farmers’ Market.

14.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

15.   Furniture, Electronics and Appliance Sales.

16.   Game Centers.

17.   Industrial Transfer/Storage/Treatment Facilities for Hazardous Waste.

18.   Industry, Cannabis Product Manufacturing.

19.   Industry, Hazardous Materials or Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities. Provided that the use is consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the San Leandro General Plan.)

20.   Laboratories, Cannabis Testing Facilities.

21.   Massage Therapy.

22.   Public Safety Facilities.

23.   Public Storage.

24.   Recycling Facilities, Heavy Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

25.   Residuals Repositories for Hazardous Waste. (Subject to Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage and Section 4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities.)

26.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

27.   Small Scale Hazardous Waste Center. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

28.   Supermarkets.

29.   Transfer Stations.

30.   Trucking Terminals.

31.   Utilities, Major.

32.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

33.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, Limited.

34.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

35.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

36.   Vehicle Storage.

 

C.    IG(AU) District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IG(AU) District, subject to the approval of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor, only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor, only).

3.     Animal Hospitals.

4.     Automatic Teller Machines.

5.     Brewpubs.

6.     Cafés.

7.     Community Gardens.

8.     Day Care, General.

9.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

10.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

11.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

12.   Parking Lot.

13.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Recycling Facilities, Light Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

17.   Restaurants, Full Service.

18.   Retail Sales.

19.   Retail Services.

20.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

21.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IG(AU) District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IG(AU) District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Animal Shows.

2.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

3.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

4.     Commercial Filming.

5.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-014 § 4; Ord. 2017-001 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2014-003 § 3; Ord. 2012-004 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.220 IL(AU) District—Use Regulations
 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a conditional use permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

A.    IL(AU) District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IL(AU) District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations.)

3.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

4.     Ambulance Service, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

5.     Animal Hospitals.

6.     Artists’ Studios.

7.     Building Materials and Services.

8.     Business Services.

9.     Business and Trade Schools.

10.   Catering Services.

11.   Communications Facilities.

12.   Emergency Shelters.

13.   Equipment Sales.

14.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

15.   Food Processing, Limited.

16.   Government Offices.

17.   Health and Fitness Centers.

18.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

19.   Industry, Custom.

20.   Industry, Limited.

21.   Industry, Research, and Development.

22.   Laboratories.

23.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

24.   Marine Sales and Services.

25.   Medical Supply Stores.

26.   Nurseries.

27.   Offices, Business, and Professional. (Note: The conversion of an industrial use to an office use is subject to the minimum off-street parking requirements of Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required; as prescribed for changes of use by Subsections A.1 and A.2 of Section 4.08.104 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading)

28.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

29.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered non-conforming uses, but no new uses shall be established.)

30.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

31.   Utilities, Minor.

32.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

33.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

34.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IL(AU) District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IL(AU) District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Animal Boarding (with outdoor use).

3.     Assembly Uses.

4.     Automobile Parts Sales.

5.     Bars.

6.     Commercial Recreation.

7.     Corporation Yards.

8.     Cultural Institutions.

9.     Dance Clubs.

10.   Drive-Up Facilities.

11.   Drugstores.

12.   Emergency Health Care.

13.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

14.   Farmers’ Market.

15.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

16.   Food Processing, General.

17.   Furniture, Electronics and Appliance Sales.

18.   Game Centers.

19.   Industry, Hazardous Materials or Hazardous Waste. (Provided that the use is consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the San Leandro General Plan.)

20.   Massage Therapy.

21.   Public Safety Facilities.

22.   Public Storage.

23.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

24.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

25.   Small Scale Hazardous Waste Center. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

26.   Utilities, Major.

27.   Vehicle/Equipment Repair, General.

28.   Vehicle Equipment Repair, Limited.

29.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

30.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals.

31.   Vehicle Storage.

 

C.    IL(AU) District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IL(AU) District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor, only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor, only).

3.     Automatic Teller Machines.

4.     Brewpubs.

5.     Cafés.

6.     Community Gardens.

7.     Day Care, General.

8.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

9.     Instruction and Improvement Services.

10.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

11.   Parking Lot.

12.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

13.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Light Processing. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Restaurants, Full Service.

17.   Retail Sales.

18.   Retail Services.

19.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

20.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IL(AU) District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IL(AU) District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2012-004 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.224 IP(AU) District—Use Regulations
 

A.    IP(AU) District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IP(AU) District, and a conditional use permit is not required. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

In the “S” Overlay District, permitted uses may require a conditional use permit if not regional retail, new auto sales, or other compatible regional market use.

 

1.     Accessory uses, other than entertainment events, when in conjunction with a permitted use.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. (Subject to the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations.)

3.     Ambulance Services, Emergency. (If the proposed use is located within 1,000 feet of either an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility, a conditional use permit shall be required.)

4.     Ambulance Service, Non-Emergency. (An Administrative Review approval is required if located within 1,000 feet of an R District or the boundaries of a site occupied by a public or private school or park and recreation facility.)

5.     Artist’s Studios.

6.     Building Materials and Services. (Permitted if the proposed use is within an enclosed structure.)

7.     Business Services.

8.     Business and Trade Schools.

9.     Catering Services.

10.   Communication Facilities.

11.   Equipment Sales.

12.   Food Processing, Limited.

13.   Financial Institutions, Retail.

14.   Health and Fitness Centers.

15.   Home Improvement and Interior Decoration.

16.   Industry, Custom.

17.   Industry, Limited.

18.   Industry, Research and Development.

19.   Laboratories.

20.   Maintenance and Repair Services.

21.   Medical Supply Stores.

22.   Offices, Business and Professional. (The conversion of an industrial use to an office use is subject to the minimum off-street parking requirements of Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required; as prescribed for changes of use by Subsections A.1 and 2 of Section 4.08.104 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading.)

23.   Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. (Subject to Section 2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts.)

24.   Park and Recreational Facilities.

25.   Pre-Existing Residential Uses. (These residential uses shall be allowed to remain and shall not be considered nonconforming uses, but no new uses shall be established.)

26.   Retail Sales, Big Box.

27.   Retail Services. (As a secondary use in a building.)

28.   Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

29.   Utilities, Minor.

30.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New.

31.   Warehouse—Storage Facilities. (If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

32.   Warehouse—Wholesale/Retail Distribution Facilities. (Permitted if the proposed use is within an enclosed structure, is utilizing an existing building or continuing an existing use. If an existing building will be expanded 10,000 square feet or more to accommodate this use, or if a new building of any size is proposed to accommodate this use, a conditional use permit is required.)

 

B.    IP(AU) District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IP(AU) District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory uses when in conjunction with a conditional use.

2.     Animal Boarding (with outdoor use).

3.     Assembly Uses.

4.     Automobile Parts Sales.

5.     Bars.

6.     Cultural Institutions.

7.     Dance Clubs.

8.     Commercial Recreation.

9.     Drive-Up Facilities.

10.   Emergency Health Care.

11.   Entertainment Events. (Entertainment events, when provided either as a primary use or as an accessory use to permitted and conditionally permitted uses, require use permit approval.)

12.   Farmers’ Market.

13.   Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

14.   Food Processing, General.

15.   Furniture, Electronics, and Appliance Sales.

16.   Industry, General.

17.   Industry, Hazardous Materials, or Hazardous Waste. (Provided that the use is consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the San Leandro General Plan.)

18.   Massage Therapy.

19.   Public Safety Facilities.

20.   Service Stations. (Subject to Section 4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing, and Section 4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages.)

21.   Utilities, Major.

22.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used.

 

C.    IP(AU) District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the IP(AU) District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Animal Boarding (indoor only).

2.     Animal Grooming (indoor only).

3.     Animal Hospital

4.     Automatic Teller Machines.

5.     Brewpubs.

6.     Cafés.

7.     Community Gardens.

8.     Day Care, General.

9.     Fast Food Establishments, Small Scale. (Subject to Section 4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments.)

10.   Instruction and Improvement Services.

11.   Mobile Food Vending. (Subject to approval of operation and restrictions on operation as established by Zoning Enforcement Official and compliance with San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 4-34 Mobile Food Vending.)

12.   Parking Lot.

13.   Recycling Facilities, Bulk Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

14.   Recycling Facilities, Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machines. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

15.   Recycling Facilities, Large Collection. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.232 Recycling Facilities.)

16.   Restaurants, Full Service.

17.   Retail Sales.

18.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

19.   Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers Limited, Used.

 

D.    IP(AU) District—Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the IP(AU) District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Assembly Uses, Temporary.

2.     Commercial Filming.

3.     Storage Containers, Temporary.

4.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2012-004 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.228 Additional Use Restrictions: Industrial Districts
 

In addition to the uses listed above, the following regulations shall apply:

 

A.    Relocated Structures. A use permit shall be required for any commercial use, residential use, day care, animal hospital, or industrial use occupying relocated structures. (See Section 4.04.300 Relocated Buildings.)

 

B.    Industrial Uses. Subject to the regulations in Section 4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage.

 

C.    Temporary Uses. Subject to the regulations in Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

D.    Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers. Subject to Administrative Review in order to occupy 30,000 square feet or more, in a building constructed after August 15, 2001. Administrative Review pursuant to Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits shall include a review of the proposal’s trip generation, potential circulation, and noise generation impacts. Additional information, including but not limited to a traffic study, may be required.

 

The standard for approval is the Zoning Enforcement Official’s ability to make the findings required as listed below:

 

1.     That the proposed location of the Parcel Processing and Shipping Center is in accord with the objectives of this Code and the purposes of the I District in which the site is located;

 

2.     That the proposed location of the Parcel Processing and Shipping Center and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with the General Plan; will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing, or working in, or adjacent to, the neighborhood of such use; and will not be detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity, or to the general welfare of the City;

 

3.     That the proposed parcel processing and shipping center will comply with the provisions of this Code, including any specific condition required for the proposal in the district in which it would be located; and

 

4.     That the proposed parcel processing and shipping center will not create adverse impacts on traffic or create demands exceeding the capacity of public services and facilities, which cannot be mitigated. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 2. Development Regulations
2.12.300 Property Development Regulations: Industrial Districts
 

The following sections set forth the property development regulations of the IG, IL, IP, and IT Districts. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.304 Minimum Lot Area and Minimum Lot Width
 

Zoning District

Minimum Lot Area (square feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

IG

5,000

50

IL

5,000

50

IP

7,500

50

IT

5,000

50

 

Section 4.04.304 Development on Lots Not Meeting Minimum Area or Width. Development on substandard lots shall apply to substandard lots. Smaller lot dimensions may be permitted with an approved development plan and tentative subdivision map. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.308 Minimum Yards
 

A.    Minimum Building Setback and Landscaping. The minimum yard setback for building placement, and minimum area required as a landscaped yard, is as prescribed below.

 

Additional building setback and landscape requirements may also apply as specified in Subsections B, C and D.

 

Zoning District

Front (feet)

Side (feet)

Corner Side (feet)

Rear (feet)

IG

10

0

10

0

IL

10

0

10

0

IP

20

0

20

0

IT

10

0

10

0

 

B.    Minimum Yard Setbacks, Additional Regulations.

 

1.     Front, side, corner side, and rear yards shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.312 Building Projections into Yards and Courts.

 

2.     Double-frontage lots shall provide the minimum front yard setback on each frontage.

 

3.     The setback of an adjacent R, C, or P district applies if within 100 feet.

 

4.     The areas within a minimum required front and corner side yard shall be landscaped, excepting limited areas for driveways and walks, and prescribed by Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements.

 

5.     The maximum allowable height of a fence or wall in minimum yards required by this section is three feet.

 

C.    Additional Setback Requirement for Properties on Doolittle Drive. The minimum required front and corner side yard is 20 feet. As part of the approval of a Site Plan pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, a setback of less than 20 feet, but not less than 10 feet, may be permitted if a 20 foot setback is not practical due to pre-existing site constraints and substantial landscaping is provided to mitigate the reduced yard setback.

 

D.    Additional Setback Requirement for Buildings Over 20 Feet in Height (IG, IL, and IT Districts). For buildings over 20 feet but not over 40 feet in height, the minimum required front and corner side yard of 10 feet shall be increased by one foot for each additional two feet of building height in excess of 20 feet. For buildings over 40 feet in height, the minimum required yard is 20 feet. As part of the approval of a Site Plan pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, a setback of less than 20 feet but not less than 10 feet, may be permitted if a 20 foot setback is not practical due to pre-existing site constraints and substantial landscaping is provided to mitigate the reduced yard setback. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.312 Maximum Height of Structures
 

A.    Maximum Height. The maximum height of structures shall be as prescribed below. Additional height regulations may also apply as specified in Subsection B and C:

 

Zoning District

Height (feet)

IG

35

IL

35

IP

35

IT

35

 

B.    Additional Height Limitations for Buildings within 100 Feet of an R District. The allowed height within 100 feet of an R District building shall be limited to 25 feet.

 

C.    Height Limit May Be Adjusted. A maximum building height of 50 feet in the IG, IL, and IT Districts may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official. The allowed height within 100 feet of an IP District building shall be limited to 35 feet. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

2.12.316 Maximum Lot Coverage and Maximum FAR
 

Zoning District

Maximum Lot Coverage

Maximum FAR

IG

75%

1.0

IL

75%

1.0

IP

40%

0.8

IT

75%

1.0

 

A.    Coverage Exceptions. In calculating the percentage of lot coverage for the purpose of applying the regulations of this Zoning Code, the features of a structure as hereafter set forth shall not be included as coverage:

 

1.     Cornices, canopies, eaves or other projections which do not increase the volume of space enclosed by the building provided that any portion of such projections extending more than two feet from the building shall be included as coverage at a ratio of 1/2 : 1;

 

2.     Fire escapes up to 3 1/2 feet;

 

3.     An uncovered stair and landing which does not extend above a ground floor entrance except for the railing; or

 

4.     Bay windows, balconies or chimneys which project from the wall not more than two feet; provided, that, such features do not in the aggregate occupy more than one-third of the length of a wall which faces an interior side lot line, or more than two-thirds of the length of a wall which faces a street or a rear lot line. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

2.12.320 Minimum Site Landscaping
 

A.    General Landscape Requirements. In addition to the general Landscape Requirements prescribed in Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements, the following requirements for minimum site landscaping apply to all property within any I District. As part of the Site Plan Approval process pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, exceptions to the stated requirements for “minimum site landscaping” may be permitted in cases where such standards are found not to be practical due to pre-existing site constraints.

 

B.    Minimum Site Landscaping. The minimum percentage of the site that shall be used for landscaping shall be as prescribed below:


Zoning District

Minimum Site Landscaping

IG

5%

IL

5%

IP

15%

IT

5%

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.324 Parcels Adjoining Residential Districts—Additional Development Regulations for New Construction
 

A.    Intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce the potential negative impacts of expanding industrial activities to the residents within adjoining Residential Districts by establishing heightened screening and site development standards for new and expanded projects.

 

B.    Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to construction and/or activities within 200 feet from the edge of a Residential District. The requirements of this section do not apply to industrial parcels that are separated from a Residential District by either an active mainline railroad right-of-way or Interstate 880.

 

C.    Development Requirements. Notwithstanding the minimum yard and landscape requirements for property within the IG, IL, IP, and IT Districts, the following additional development standards shall apply:

 

1.     Orientation of Truck and Storage Facilities. The sound, traffic and visual impacts of truck facilities, such as new or expanded truck bays and docks, and truck staging/storage yards, shall be minimized by such design features as building placement, sound walls, and/or landscaping. Truck facilities shall be oriented and/or screened as to provide the greatest possible physical and/or visual separation between the truck facility and the residences.

 

a.     Certain New Facilities Require Site Plan Approval. Per Subsection B.4.d of Section 5.12.104 Applicability, the creation of, or addition to, any substantial outdoor storage area or truck loading bays that would be visible from off-site require Site Plan Approval as prescribed in Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval.

 

2.     Required Installation of Mitigating Features for New Truck Docks. When new truck docks are built, or unused truck docks that have been “glassed in” by previous tenants/users are to be newly used, the following mitigating features are to be installed, and shall be made a requirement of Building Permit approval:

 

a.     Rubber Loading Bay Bumpers shall be installed on all new and newly used truck dock bays.

 

b.     Notification signage, advising employees and truck operators that the subject establishment is adjacent to residences, and that as a courtesy to neighbors, noise from shipping and trucking activity should be kept to a minimum, shall be placed in the truck staging area.

 

3.     Attenuation of Noise Generating Equipment. Noise generating equipment, such as generators, HVAC units, and garbage facilities, shall be located and/or structurally screened, or enclosed, as to minimize impacts on adjacent residents. Prior to issuance of a building permit or electrical permit for the installation of such equipment, the Zoning Enforcement Official may require that the applicant/owner provide a noise study by an acoustical engineer and may impose conditions to reduce noise impacts.

 

a.     Adjustments to Attenuation Requirements for Emergency Generators. The Zoning Enforcement Official, in reviewing a request for a building or electrical permit for the installation of an emergency generator (such as one to be used during temporary power outages or in similar limited use situations), may adjust or reduce the requirements for noise attenuation to correspond to the duration, frequency or intensity that the generator is to operate.

 

4.     Required Separation/Mitigation Adjacent to Residential Parcel. Either a landscaped buffer and/or a masonry wall shall be provided along rear and side property lines, which are adjacent to residential parcels, as required as part of an approved Site Plan per Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval.

 

a.     Option of Yard Setback. In cases where a building would otherwise be permitted with no rear or side yard setback, a minimum side and/or rear yard of 10 feet shall be provided, which shall be used exclusively for the planting of a landscape screen. Evergreen trees with spacing not to exceed 20 feet, and of a minimum 15 gallon size, shall be provided within the required yard. Tree selection shall provide for a near total screen, up to a height of 20 feet within five years from planting. Such landscaping shall be permanently maintained.

 

b.     Option of Masonry Wall. A minimum eight foot high wall shall be provided adjacent to residential parcels, as required by Section 4.04.224 Walls Adjoining Residential Use, or as high as required by acoustical analysis (to be provided by applicant), when a vacant industrial parcel is developed or an existing use is expanded so as to significantly increase the potential for additional traffic and/or noise impacts to the residential areas. A wall will typically be required whenever an active service, staging and/or storage yard is immediately adjacent to a residential parcel. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

2.12.328 Parcels Adjoining Residential Districts—Additional Performance Standards
 

A.    Intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce the potential noise impacts to the residents within adjoining Residential Districts, from late night/early morning activity, by establishing performance standards for all businesses.

 

B.    Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to activities within 200 feet from the edge of a Residential District. The requirements of this section do not apply to industrial parcels that are separated from a Residential District by either an active mainline railroad right-of-way or Interstate 880.

 

C.    Performance Standards for Loading and Shipping Activity. To reduce impacts on adjoining residents, those uses conducting loading and shipping activity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall avoid generating extraneous noise that can be heard by adjoining residents (e.g. loud conversations, playing of recorded music and/or radio broadcasts, or motorized noises from prolonged use of equipment or vehicles).

 

D.    Adjoining Residents May File Complaint Against Industrial Businesses. Residents may file a written complaint against businesses that are alleged to be in violation of the performance standards outlined in Subsection C, above. If the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that the business is in violation, written notification of the violation shall be given to the violator and the complaining party. Determination of a violation, and/or resolution of continuing violations once notification has been made, may be subject to a hearing of the Site Development Sub-Commission. Failure to conform to the requirements of the Sub-Commission hearing may be cited as a violation of this Code, pursuant to Section 5.24.112 Violations as Misdemeanors or Infractions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.332 Additional Property Development Regulations: Industrial Districts
 

In addition to the development regulations listed above, the following regulations shall apply:

 

A.    Fences, Walls, and Hedges. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.364 Fences, Walls, and Hedges.

 

B.    Off-Street Parking and Loading. Subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

 

C.    Signs. Subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.12 Signs.

 

D.    Outdoor Facilities and Outdoor Storage. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.324 Outdoor Facilities and Storage/Loading Facilities and 4.04.344 Earth Station and Microwave Equipment. All outdoor storage and refuse storage areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner and screened so as not to be visible from any street, public way, or R district.

 

E.    Screening of Mechanical Equipment. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.328 Screening of Mechanical Equipment and 4.04.344 Earth Station and Microwave Equipment.

 

F.     Refuse Storage Areas. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.332 Refuse Storage Areas. All outdoor storage and refuse storage areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner and screened so as not to be visible from any street, public way, or R district.

 

G.    Underground Utilities. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.336 Underground Utilities.

 

H.    Performance Standards. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.340 Performance Standards.

 

I.      Airport Safety Zones. Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.352 Airport Safety Zones.

 

J.     Nonconforming Structures and Nonconforming Signs. Subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.12.336 Review of Plans
 

Certain projects shall be subject to Site Plan Review (see Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 2.16 OS Open Space District
2.16.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes the specific purposes of the OS district are to:

 

A.    Provide a suitable classification for large public or private sites permanently designated for park or open space use.

 

B.    Protect public health and safety by limiting lands, which are subject to flooding, slides, or other hazards to open space use.

 

C.    Allow the Planning Commission and City Council to consider the most appropriate use of a site following discontinuance of a large public or private open space use without the encumbrance of a base zoning district that may or may not provide appropriate regulations for development of the site. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.16.104 Applicability
 

The OS district is intended to be the base district for the use classifications listed in Subsections A and B of Section 2.16.200 OS District—Use Regulations and Section 2.16.204 Additional Use Restrictions: OS District where these classifications have a minimum contiguous site area of two acres, including alleys, streets or other rights-of-way and the area has a primarily open or natural character. Open space use classifications on sites of less than two acres shall be subject to the regulations of the base and any overlay districts in which they are located. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

Article 1. Use Regulations
2.16.200 OS District—Use Regulations
 

A.    OS District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the OS District, and a conditional use permit is not required.

 

1.     Managed Open Space intended for the Protection of Natural Habitat.

2.     Utilities, Minor.

3.     Accessory uses are permitted on the site of a permitted use and are limited to facilities incidental to an open space use.

 

B.    OS District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the OS District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses are subject to a use permit when on the site of a conditional use and are limited to facilities incidental to an open space use.

2.     Farmers’ Market.

3.     Park and Recreation Facilities.

4.     Public Safety Facilities.

5.     Placement of Dredged Material from San Francisco Bay.

6.     Utilities, Major. (A use permit is required for electrical substations, switching buildings, recycling or disposal facilities, water storage facilities, water or wastewater treatment facilities, transportation or communication utilities, and similar facilities of public agencies, or public utilities.)

7.     Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

C.    OS District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following use is allowed in the OS District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.) (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.16.204 Additional Use Restrictions: OS District
 

In addition to the uses listed above, the following regulations shall apply: Nonconforming Uses shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 2. Development Regulations
2.16.300 Property Development Regulations
 

Development regulations shall be as specified by the use permit, provided that, if the use permit fails to regulate an element regulated by an abutting base district, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.16.304 Review of Plans
 

Certain projects shall be subject to Site Plan Review (see Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 2.20 PS Public and Semipublic District
2.20.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes, the specific purposes of the PS Public and Semipublic District are to:

 

A.    Allow consideration of a large public or semipublic use separately from regulations for an underlying base zoning that may or may not be appropriate in combination with the public or semipublic use.

 

B.    Allow consideration of establishment or expansion of a large public or semipublic use at rezoning hearings rather than at use permit hearings only, and give notice to all of the extent of a site approved for a large public or semipublic use by delineating it on the zoning map.

 

C.    Allow the Planning Commission and City Council to consider the most appropriate use of a site following discontinuance of a large public or semipublic use without the encumbrance of a base zoning district that may or may not provide appropriate regulations for reuse of the site. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.20.104 Applicability
 

The PS District is intended to be the base district for use classifications listed in Section 2.20.200 PS District—Use Regulations where these have a contiguous site area of two acres or more, including alleys, streets, or other rights-of-way, and the area has a developed or “urban” character. Public and semipublic use classifications on sites of less than two acres shall be subject to the regulations of the base and overlay districts in which they are located. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Article 1. Use Regulations
2.20.200 PS District—Use Regulations
 

A.    PS District—Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the PS District, and a conditional use permit is not required.

 

1.     Utilities, Minor, except recycling centers within convenience zones, as defined by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act.

 

B.    PS District—Conditionally Permitted Uses.

 

The following uses are allowed in the PS District, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Certain uses are subject to special requirements and/or limitations, as prescribed following the individual use classification.)

 

1.     Accessory Uses.

2.     Convalescent Facilities.

3.     Cultural Institutions

4.     Day Care, General.

5.     Detention Facilities.

6.     Government Offices.

7.     Heliports. (Allowed if located more than 1,000 feet from an R District or the site of a public or private school and if applicant obtains a Use Permit and Heliport Permit from the California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics.)

8.     Hospitals.

9.     Maintenance and Service Facilities.

10.   Park and Recreation Facilities.

11.   Public Safety Facilities.

12.   Religious Assembly.

13.   Residential Care, General. (Allowed with a use permit as a secondary use associated with hospitals and convalescent facilities.)

14.   Schools, Public or Private.

15.   Telecommunications, New Monopoles and Towers. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

16.   Utilities, Major. (Recreational vehicle storage within electric power-line transmission corridors may be approved, subject to a use permit. Landscaping and screening requirements may be established as a condition of approval.)

17.   Utilities, Minor. (Recycling centers within convenience zones, as defined by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act require a use permit.)

 

C.    PS District—Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following uses are allowed in the PS District, subject to the approval of an Administrative Review by the Zoning Enforcement Official, as per the requirements of Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits.

 

1.     Telecommunications, Architecturally-Integrated Antennas and/or Co-Locations on Existing Tower Structures. (Subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.)

 

D.    PS District— Temporary Uses Requiring Administrative Review.

 

The following temporary uses are allowed in the PS District, subject to the regulations of Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits.

 

1.     Animal Shows.

2.     Circuses and Carnivals.

3.     Commercial Filming.

4.     Street or Neighborhood Fairs.

5.     Trade Fairs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.20.204 Additional Use Restrictions: PS District
 

In addition to the uses listed above, the following regulations shall apply: Nonconforming Uses shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.20.208 Interim Uses
 

A.    Conversion of buildings and grounds of schools satisfying the requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of California to any of the following uses is permitted provided such uses may only be approved for a maximum interim period of five years; and provided further that such uses do not cause or result in the substantial alteration of any buildings or activity areas on the school site:

 

1.     Public assembly or dance;

2.     Instruction in skills or disciplines not otherwise required by the State of California;

3.     Meetings and offices for community organizations;

4.     Theater, concert or lecture;

5.     Temporary or permanent display of works of art or of historical or cultural significance;

6.     Church or other religious service;

7.     Professional, administrative and executive offices;

8.     Social counseling services;

9.     Recreational classes;

10.   Athletic contests or practices, including offices for athletic clubs or organizations;

11.   Day nurseries, nursery schools, kindergarten and child care centers; and

12.   Assembly and packaging of previously prepared materials provided such activity is conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building.

 

B.    Any such conditional use may be approved for additional periods of up to five years pursuant to Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 2. Development Regulations
2.20.300 Property Development Regulations
 

Development regulations shall be as specified by the use permit, provided that if the use permit fails to regulate an element regulated by an abutting base district, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply to each portion of a PS district. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

2.20.304 Review of Plans
 

Certain projects shall be subject to Site Plan Approval (See Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Title 3—Overlay Zoning Districts
Chapter 3.04 Planned Development Overlay District and Planned Development Project Approval
Chapter 3.08 IS Interim Study Overlay District
Chapter 3.12 CV Conservation Overlay District
Chapter 3.16 S Special Review Overlay District
Chapter 3.20 AU Assembly Use Overlay District
Chapter 3.24 N Nonconforming Use Overlay District
Chapter 3.28 L Landmark Overlay District

Chapter 3.04 Planned Development Overlay District and Planned Development Project Approval
3.04.100 Specific Purposes
 

The specific purposes of this chapter are to:

 

A.    Establish a procedure for the development of larger parcels of land in order to reduce or eliminate the rigidity, delays, and inequities that otherwise would result from application of zoning standards and procedures designed primarily for small parcels.

 

B.    Ensure orderly and thorough planning and review procedures that will result in high-quality urban design.

 

C.    Encourage variety and avoid monotony in large developments by allowing greater freedom in selecting the means to provide access, light, open space, and amenity.

 

D.    Provide a mechanism for considering mixes of uses that can be made compatible by application of careful and imaginative treatment of interrelationships of activity.

 

E.    Encourage allocation and improvement of common open space in residential areas, and provide for maintenance of the open space at the expense of those who will directly benefit from it.

 

F.     Encourage the preservation of serviceable existing structures of historic value or artistic merit by providing the opportunity to use them imaginatively for purposes other than that for which they were originally intended.

 

G.    Encourage the assembly of properties that might otherwise be developed in unrelated increments to the detriment of surrounding neighborhoods. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.104 Land Use Regulations
 

In all base districts where a Planned Development is a conditionally permitted use, the City may process an application for such Planned Development consistent with the requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.108 Rezone to Authorize a Planned Development Designation
 

A zoning amendment to rezone property to a Planned Development Overlay District may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, or by resolution of the Planning Commission or the City Council. If initiated by a property owner and the property is not under a single ownership, all owners shall join in the application, and a map showing the extent of ownerships shall be submitted. In addition to the plans and materials required by Chapter 5.16 Amendments to accompany an application for a zoning map amendment, an application for rezoning to a Planned Development Overlay District shall include a “Planned Development Concept Plan,” which includes the following materials:

 

A.    A conceptual site plan and a vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to the surrounding area.

 

B.    Preliminary calculations in tabular form showing compliance with applicable density, coverage, floor area, parking, and open-space regulations.

 

C.    Conceptual elevations of proposed structures and signs, with exterior materials and wall openings indicated.

 

D.    Photos of the site and of existing development in the immediate vicinity.

 

The Zoning Enforcement Official also may require any of the following items, based on the type, location, and potential impacts of proposed development:

 

A.    A map showing proposed district boundaries and the relationship of the district to uses and structures directly affected by the proposed Planned Development Overlay District. Evidence establishing that the land proposed for rezone to Planned Development Overlay District is owned by one individual or that the application is filed jointly by all property owners owning property in the proposed district or that the application is filed by an agency of the City.

 

B.    A map or aerial photo of the proposed district and 100 feet beyond its boundary showing sufficient topographic data to indicate clearly the character of the terrain; the type, location, and condition of mature trees and other natural vegetation; and the location of existing development.

 

C.    The proposed pattern of land use, with acreage and residential density computations.

 

D.    The proposed street and lot pattern.

 

E.    Scale models or perspective renderings of proposed development.

 

F.     Such other information as is reasonably necessary to describe the Planned Development and its effects on other property or the community. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.112 Rezone Approval Procedures
 

A.    The Planning Commission shall consider an application for rezone to a Planned Development Overlay District as prescribed in Chapter 5.16 Amendments.

 

B.    The Planning Commission may recommend approval of the rezone to a Planned Development Overlay District upon finding that the Planned Development Concept Plan is consistent with the adopted Land Use Element of the General Plan and other applicable policies of the General Plan and is compatible with surrounding development.

 

C.    After approval by the Planning Commission or on appeal from a Planning Commission denial, the City Council shall hold a hearing as provided by Section 5.16.112 Public Hearing Scope and Notice on any application to rezone a property to Planned Development Overlay District. Following the hearing, the City Council may approve a Planned Development Overlay District for the area described in the application if the City Council makes the findings required by Subsection B above.

 

D.    The City Council shall adopt each Planned Development Overlay District by ordinance pursuant to Chapter 5.16 Amendments. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.116 Zoning Map Designation
 

A Planned Development Overlay District shall be noted by the designation “PD.” This reference will follow the designation of the base district the Planned Development Overlay District modifies. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.120 Conditional Use—Planned Development Project Approval
 

In an area that has been zoned to include a Planned Development Overlay District, a Planned Development project, as a form of conditional use permit, may be approved by the City Council, after recommendation by or appeal from the Planning Commission, and in accordance with the following regulations:

 

A.    Minimum Area. The minimum net area of a Planned Development shall be 10,000 square feet for any project. The calculation of areas necessary to qualify for Planned Development consideration shall not include the area in any street or way or public open space existing at the time of application.

 

B.    Residential Unit Density. The number of dwelling units in a Planned Development Project shall be established at the time the Planned Development Project is approved. The minimum residential density in any South Area district, for a stand-alone residential development or a mixed-use development, shall be 18 units per acre. Exceptions to the minimum density requirement shall be considered as part of the Planned Development application, but shall be supported with a preliminary pro forma or other statement from the applicant/developer that indicates reasons for reduced density.

 

C.    Performance Standards. The performance standards prescribed by Section 4.04.340 Performance Standards shall apply.

 

D.    Additional Development Regulations Condition. Additional development conditions may be as established in the Planned Development Project approval. For Planned Developments proposed in any South Area Zoning District, additional development conditions may result to achieve consistency with the Design Guidelines that are contained in the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.124 Planned Development Project Application
 

Every application for Planned Development Project must be accompanied by a proposed time schedule for the development. The Planned Development Project plan shall consist of a site plan of the proposed development drawn accurately to scale and correctly showing the following, as appropriate:

 

A.    The boundary of the area included within the Planned Development Project;

 

B.    Existing and proposed property lines and boundaries within the Planned Development Project;

 

C.    Property lines of adjacent properties and the location and height of each building thereon;

 

D.    Use, location, and height of all proposed structures and signs and existing structures to remain;

 

E.    The width of the existing and proposed right-of-way for each adjacent street, including sidewalks;

 

F.     Vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;

 

G.    Proposed grading, if site is not essentially level;

 

H.    Utility plans indicating provision of services to the development including provision of underground electrical service;

 

I.      Location and height of screen walls or fences;

 

J.     Designation of areas to be reserved or dedicated for public purposes including but not limited to streets;

 

K.    Provisions for conserving non-renewable energy resources, including but not limited to the use of solar energy;

 

L.     A precise site plan accurately drawn to scale showing:

 

1.     The surveyed boundary, complete with bearings, distances, and description of corner monuments shall be shown.

 

2.     Plant materials and initial planting size shall be identified. Irrigation systems shall be shown.

 

M.    Provisions for parking, loading, and access shall be shown in detail. Parking stalls shall be numbered and typical stalls and aisle widths shall be dimensioned;

 

N.    Area and building lighting shall be identified as to its color, intensity and visibility from adjacent public streets and residential areas;

 

O.    Facilities for refuse storage and pick-up, air compressors, incinerators, or other equipment constituting a potential nuisance or undesirable view from adjacent properties or streets shall be identified, and adequate provisions to minimize their undesirable aspects shall be set forth;

 

P.    Detailed elevations of all signs to be erected shall be submitted for approval. Such plans shall accurately show the location of such signs in the development. Signs to be mounted flush with the wall of a building shall be shown on any elevation or rendering of such building;

 

Q.    A time schedule indicating the date by which construction of the project will begin, and the completion date. This schedule, as approved, shall become a part of the Planned Development Project approval; and

 

R.    Major elevations or perspective renderings of all buildings in the Planned Development Project shall be submitted. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, such elevations or renderings must include all buildings to be built in the planned unit to enable the reviewing body to determine whether the entire development will have architectural unity and be in harmony with surrounding development. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.128 Planned Development Project—Hearing
 

A.    Upon receipt of an application for a Planned Development Project as a conditional use, the application shall be set for public hearing before the Planning Commission. The public hearing on any Planned Development Project submitted with a petition to reclassify property to the Planned Development Project District shall be held before the Planning Commission on the same date and in conjunction with the hearing on said reclassification.

 

B.    Notice of the public hearing shall be as specified in Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.132 Planned Development Project—Planning Commission Review
 

A.    Planned Development Plan—Action by Planning Commission. Within thirty (30) days after close of the public hearing on a Planned Development Project, the Planning Commission shall take action on the Planned Development Project unless such time limit is extended by agreement of the parties having an interest in the proceedings. Failure to take action within the time limit or any agreed extension thereof shall constitute a denial of the Planned Development Project. The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove any Planned Development Project. To recommend approval of a Planned Development Project, the Planning Commission must first make the findings provided in Subsection A of Section 5.08.124 Required Findings. The Commission must also find:

 

1.     The Planned Development Project Plan will provide superior urban design in comparison with the development under the base district zoning regulations;

 

2.     The Planned Development project includes adequate provisions for utilities, services, and emergency vehicle access; and that public service demands will not exceed the capacity of existing and planned systems.

 

B.    Planned Development Project—Disapproval of Application. If the action of the Planning Commission is to disapprove an application for a Planned Development Project as a conditional use, its action shall be final unless appealed.

 

C.    Planned Development Project—Report to City Council. If the action of the Planning Commission is to approve, or if an appeal of a disapproval is filed, the Commission shall report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.136 Planned Development Project—Action by City Council
 

Upon receipt of such report or notice of appeal, the City Council shall set the matter for public hearing. Notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as provided in Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing. After conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application for the Planned Development Project as a conditional use. Failure of the Council to act within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of any such public hearing shall constitute disapproval of the application and shall terminate the proceedings thereon. No approval of a Planned Development Project as a conditional use may be made by the Council unless and until the substance thereof has first been referred to and reported upon by the Planning Commission. Prior to approving a Planned Development Project, the City Council must make the findings provided in Subsection A of Section 5.08.124 Required Findings. The City Council must also find:

 

A.    The Planned Development Project Plan will provide superior urban design in comparison with the development under the base district zoning regulations;

 

B.    The Planned Development Project includes adequate provisions for utilities, services, and emergency vehicle access; and that public service demands will not exceed the capacity of existing and planned systems. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.140 Planned Development Project—Exception from Provisions of Zoning Code
 

The Planned Development Project as authorized shall be subject to all conditions so imposed and shall be excepted from other provisions of the Zoning Code to the extent specified in the authorization.

 

Property in any DA Zoning District that has a PD Overlay shall be governed by the design and uses provided in the conditions of the approved PD. Any changes proposed to the property shall be subject to the uses and zoning standards of the underlying DA zone subject to the review, discretion and approval of the Community Development Director. The Director shall review additions or changes to the property relative to the design context and planning issues of the adjacent properties and to the intent of the DA zone, to the TOD strategy, and to the General Plan. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2011-003 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.144 Status of Planned Development Approval
 

A.    A Planned Development Project approval shall expire one year after the approval date unless a building permit has been issued and construction diligently pursued, or unless the Planned Development Project specifies an alternative development or phasing schedule. If a Planned Development Project approval expires, the Planning Commission shall initiate a zoning map amendment, as provided by Chapter 5.16 Amendments, to re-establish the prior district designation or such other district designation as it may deem appropriate.

 

B.    The Planning Commission may renew a Planned Development Project approval for up to two (2) years if it finds the renewal consistent with the purposes of this chapter and that no substantive change has occurred in conditions or circumstances pertinent to the Planned Development or its approval. The Planning Commission may attach additional conditions or require compliance with additional or new development requirements or fees, either in effect at the time of renewal or necessary to make the findings required by Section 3.04.132 Planned Development Project—Planning Commission Review to achieve the purposes of the district and comply with the General Plan. Application for renewal shall be made in writing to the Zoning Enforcement Official not less than 30 days or more than 120 days prior to expiration of the Planned Development approval. Denial of a request for renewal of a Planned Development Project approval may be appealed, as prescribed in Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.04.148 Modification of a Planned Development Project
 

A.    A request for any change in conditions of approval, residential unit density, or other land use and property development regulations set forth in a Planned Development Project approval shall be treated as a new application for a Planned Development Project approval, subject to the submittal requirements of Section 3.04.124 Planned Development Project Application.

 

B.    If the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that the requested changes are minor and do not include substantial alterations to the Planned Development Project approval or conditions of approval and are consistent with the intent of the original Planned Development approval, the Zoning Enforcement Official may approve the changes or may refer the proposed changes to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may either approve or conditionally approve the requested changes or determine that the proposed changes shall be treated as a new application for a Planned Development Project approval. Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed in accord with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 3.08 IS Interim Study Overlay District
3.08.100 Specific Purpose and Applicability
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes the specific purpose of the IS Interim Study Overlay District is to allow discretionary review of development proposals in areas where major changes in zoning regulations and development standards are contemplated and under study. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.08.104 Initiation and Zoning Map Designation
 

The IS Overlay District may be initiated under the procedures for Zoning Map amendments prescribed by Chapter 5.16 Amendments. Prior to or in conjunction with approving an amendment reclassifying land to an IS Overlay District, the Planning Commission and City Council shall approve a study plan that identifies regulatory problems and state land-use and development issues to be resolved for the area proposed for reclassification. The IS Overlay District may be combined with any base district. Each IS Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map with an “-IS” designator. A reference to the enacting ordinance and the expiration date of the IS Overlay District also shall be included on the Zoning Map. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.08.108 Land Use Regulations
 

A.    Use Permit Required. Approval of a use permit shall be required for establishment of a new or expanded use in an IS Overlay District and may be approved for any use classification permitted or conditionally allowed with a use permit in the base district with which the IS Overlay District is combined.

 

B.    Required Findings. In addition to the findings required for use permits by Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions and additional findings that may be required for specific use classifications, approval of a use permit in the IS Overlay District shall require a finding that the proposed use does not fall within the scope of the land-use and development issues to be resolved for the area at the time the IS Overlay District was adopted. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.08.112 Property Development Regulations
 

Development regulations for the IS Overlay District shall be specified by a use permit or shall be those of the base district with which the IS Overlay District is combined. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.08.116 Expiration of IS District Ordinance—Renewal
 

An ordinance establishing an IS Overlay District shall contain a provision terminating the IS designation not more than two years from its effective date. An ordinance establishing an IS Overlay District may be amended, reenacted, or superseded by a zoning map amendment adopted as prescribed by Chapter 5.16 Amendments. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.08.120 Resubmittal of Development Proposals
 

Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions, a use permit application that has been denied or approved subject to conditions unacceptable to the applicant may be resubmitted on or after the effective date of a zoning map and/or text amendment superseding an IS Overlay District designation. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 3.12 CV Conservation Overlay District
3.12.100 Specific Purposes and Applicability
 

The CV Conservation Overlay District is intended for property owners to initiate and implement programs for the revitalization or conservation of areas or districts possessing distinctive features, identity, or character worthy of retention and enhancement. The CV district takes effect through adoption of a plan and a set of regulations that will facilitate maintenance and upgrading of the neighborhood and development of vacant or under- used lots while reducing or eliminating incompatible mixes of uses. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.104 Area Requirements
 

Each CV Overlay District shall include a minimum contiguous area of three acres, including intervening streets and alleys, and shall contain at least three separate parcels. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.108 Status of CV Overlay District and Approved Plans
 

A.    Adoption of a CV Overlay District proposal shall be by amendment to the Zoning Map, in accord with the provisions of Chapter 5.16 Amendments, but the map amendment shall not alter the use regulations or development standards of the underlying sub-district. A use permit approving a Neighborhood Conservation Plan shall be approved by the City Council at the same time as the map amendment is adopted and shall establish standards and conditions for development consistent with the purposes of the Plan.

 

B.    All development shall be in accordance with an approved Neighborhood Conservation Plan and the use permit, which may be amended as provided in the conditions of approval. The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may approve amendments to the Neighborhood Conservation Plan to allow development in accordance with the underlying zoning regulations rather than as specified by the Conservation Plan if the Commission and Council find that the Conservation Plan, as approved, is unlikely to be implemented for the site in question and if limitations on development of the site have not been recorded as a condition of approval of development elsewhere within the Conservation Plan area. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.112 Allowable Modifications to Land Use Regulations and Property Development Standards
 

After a duly noticed public hearing, the following changes in use regulations and development standards may be approved as part of a Neighborhood Conservation Plan:

 

A.    Regulations for specific use classifications may be modified by the Neighborhood Conservation Plan to accommodate unique or mixed uses serving the neighborhood consistent with the General Plan.

 

B.    Site development standards may be modified by the Neighborhood Conservation Plan consistent with the General Plan. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.116 Application for Zoning Map Designation
 

A.    Owners of 51 percent or more of the land in an area meeting the area requirements of Section 3.12.104 Area Requirements and one or more of the criteria of Subsection C of Section 3.12.120 Adoption Procedures may file an application with the City for the designation of the area as a CV Conservation Overlay District. The application may include lots within one or more base zoning districts. The City Council or Planning Commission may initiate a Conservation Overlay District as prescribed in Chapter 5.16 Amendments.

 

B.    The application shall include the following:

 

1.     A statement of purpose and explanation of how the criteria of Subsection C of Section 3.12.120 Adoption Procedures are met.

 

2.     A map indicating the boundaries of all lots in the proposed Conservation Overlay District and the base district(s) contained within the proposed CV Overlay District.

 

3.     A Neighborhood Conservation Plan consisting of a map and such other textual and graphic material as may be necessary, indicating land uses, building types and designs, site development requirements, signing, circulation, off-street parking, and modifications in base district regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.120 Adoption Procedures
 

A.    The Planning Commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the application in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.16 Amendments. Following the hearing, the Commission may recommend approval or conditional approval of the Neighborhood Conservation Plan if it implements the purposes for which designation of the CV Overlay District is proposed and is consistent with the General Plan and shall transmit the application and the plan with its recommendation to the Council.

 

B.    The City Council shall hold a hearing in accord with the provision of Chapter 5.16 Amendments on any application and plan transmitted to it by the Planning Commission.

 

C.    Following the hearing, the City Council may approve or conditionally approve a Neighborhood Conservation Plan and adopt a CV Conservation Overlay District for the area described in the application if the area meets one or more of the following criteria:

 

1.     Distinctive building features, such as period of construction, style, size, scale, rhythm, mass, color, and material;

 

2.     Distinctive features or articles associated with the streetscape, such as light fixtures and devices, signs, benches, curb markers, kiosks, and bollards;

 

3.     Distinctive site planning and natural features, such as lot platting, street layout, setbacks, alleyways, sidewalks, creek beds, parks, and gardens; or

 

4.     Distinctive land uses or land-use patterns, such as mixed or unique uses or activities, not permitted by base district regulations without modification.

 

D.    The City Council shall adopt each Conservation Overlay District by ordinance pursuant to Chapter 5.16 Amendments. The adopting ordinance shall include a reference to the approved Neighborhood Conservation Plan for the district, a statement of purposes, and a list of the modifications to the base district regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.124 Zoning Map Designation
 

Each Conservation Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by a “-CV” designator applied to the base district designations. A reference to the enacting ordinance also shall be included on the zoning map. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.12.128 Building Permits to Conform to Adopted Plan
 

Applications for building permit for projects located in a Conservation Overlay District shall be accepted only if project plans are consistent with the adopted CV Overlay District ordinance and the approved Neighborhood Conservation Plan and all other applicable requirements of this Code and the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 3.16 S Special Review Overlay District
3.16.100 Specific Purposes and Applicability
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes the specific purpose of the S Special Review Overlay District is to provide for discretionary review of development proposals in the Marina Automall area and in other geographic areas of the City with unique needs, which may be designated by the City Council, consistent with General Plan policies. This will ensure an orderly transition from older obsolete uses to new activities that are compatible with adjacent uses and will prevent development that may be detrimental to the community. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.16.104 Applicability and Zoning Map Designation
 

The S Special Review Overlay District may be combined with any zoning district. It may be initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission under the procedures established by Chapter 5.16 Amendments. Each S Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by adding an “-S” to the base district designation. The zoning map also shall include a reference to the adopting ordinance establishing the S Overlay District. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.16.108 Land Use and Property Development Regulations
 

The land use and development regulations applicable in an S Overlay District shall be those of the base zoning district with which the S Overlay District is combined unless modified by another overlay district or by the ordinance establishing the S Overlay District. The requirements of the applicable S Overlay District shall govern where conflicts arise. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.16.112 Use Permit Required
 

A use permit is required for any of the following actions within an S Overlay District:

 

A.    Establishment of any new land use and/or structure, excluding accessory structures that are minor in nature.

 

B.    Substantial expansion or alteration of any existing land use and/or structure.

 

C.    Approval of any tentative or parcel map.

 

D.    Any other action specified by the City Council at the time of the establishment of an S Overlay District.

 

E.    In addition to or in lieu of a use permit, the City Council may establish other review procedures or requirements at the time of establishment of an S Overlay District or necessary to assure conformance of uses and buildings with purposes and objectives of the S District.

 

F.     Exceptions. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive the requirement for a use permit or other specified discretionary approval for the following activities, provided that any such waiver is not inconsistent with any policy directive or review criteria incorporated in the legislation establishing the S Overlay District. These exceptions include alterations of existing structures that are minor in nature or that do not add more than 10 percent to existing floor area, and maintenance or repair of existing structures. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.16.116 Review Criteria
 

In addition to the requirements of Sections 5.08.124 Required Findings and 5.08.128 Conditions of Approval, the City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may establish specific review criteria for each S Overlay District. These may address the relationship of the proposed land use and/or development to the surrounding area, site planning and architectural design, landscaping, parking and loading, access and on-site public facilities, the displacement and relocation of existing uses, and any policies or aspects of the General Plan or any Specific Plan applicable to the area. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.16.120 Conditions of Approval
 

In addition to the conditions of approval that may be imposed under Section 5.08.128 Conditions of Approval, the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Adjustments may impose reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with the specific purposes and intent of the applicable S Overlay District, including time limits or restrictions on certain improvements to mitigate potential adverse effects, protect existing uses, and/or facilitate orderly change, at a later date, consistent with the General Plan. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.16.124 Procedures
 

A.    General Procedures. An application for approval of a use permit in an S Overlay District shall be processed in accord with the procedures established by Sections 5.08.112 Initiation and 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing and any additional requirements applicable to that S district.

 

B.    Additional Requirements. The ordinance establishing the S Overlay District may impose additional requirements for information to be submitted with each application, such as an independent analysis of economic and fiscal impacts, an independent evaluation of compatibility between the new use(s) and adjacent development, or an assessment of alternative development concepts. If required, this information shall be considered by the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Adjustments in making a decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a use permit or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 3.20 AU Assembly Use Overlay District
3.20.100 Specific Purposes and Applicability
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes, the specific purpose of the AU Assembly Use Overlay District is to provide for discretionary review of assembly uses on certain non-residentially zoned properties which may be designated by the City Council, consistent with General Plan policies. This allows Assembly Uses, as defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, to be considered on non-residentially zoned properties on a conditional use basis, beyond the residential-zoned properties for which they are already conditionally permitted. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-005 § 3)

 

3.20.104 Applicability and Zoning Map Designation
 

The AU Assembly Use Overlay District may be combined with any zoning district. It may be initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission under the procedures established by Chapter 5.16 Amendments. Each AU Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by adding an “-AU” to the base district designation. The zoning map also shall include a reference to the adopting ordinance establishing the AU Overlay District. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-005 § 3)

 

3.20.108 Land Use and Property Development Regulations
 

The land use and development regulations applicable in an AU Overlay District shall be those of the base zoning district with which the AU Overlay District is combined unless modified by another overlay district or by the ordinance establishing the AU Overlay District. The requirements of the applicable AU Overlay District shall govern where conflicts arise. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-005 § 3)

 

3.20.112 Use Permit Required
 

A use permit is required for any of the following actions within an AU Overlay District:

 

A.    Establishment of any new assembly use.

 

B.    Substantial expansion or alteration of any existing assembly use and/or structure.

 

C.    In addition to or in lieu of a use permit, the City Council may establish other review procedures or requirements at the time of establishment of an AU Overlay District or necessary to assure conformance of uses and buildings with purposes and objectives of the AU District.

 

D.    Exceptions. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive the requirement for a use permit or other specified discretionary approval for the following activities, provided that any such waiver is not inconsistent with any policy directive or review criteria incorporated in the legislation establishing the AU Overlay District. These exceptions include alterations of existing structures that are minor in nature or that do not add more than 10 percent to existing floor area, and maintenance or repair of existing structures. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-005 § 3)

 

3.20.116 Review Criteria and Conditions of Approval
 

The review criteria and conditions of approval shall be as required in Sections 5.08.124 Required Findings and 5.08.128 Conditions of Approval. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-005 § 3)

 

3.20.120 Procedures
 

An application for approval of a use permit in an AU Overlay District shall be processed in accord with the procedures established by Sections 5.08.112 Initiation and 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing and any additional requirements applicable to that AU district. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2007-005 § 3)

Chapter 3.24 N Nonconforming Use Overlay District
3.24.104 Specific Purposes
 

The N Nonconforming Use Overlay District is intended to modify the regulations governing the required termination of nonconforming uses, as prescribed in Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures, in order to promote the timely and orderly conversion to conforming use in areas that have several properties occupied by nonconforming uses. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.24.108 Applicability and Zoning Map Designation
 

The N Nonconforming Use Overlay District may be combined with any base district. Where so combined, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to require termination of certain nonconforming uses, in lieu of the comparable provision of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures. The N Overlay District boundaries shall be shown on the zoning map by adding the “-N” designator to the base district regulations. A reference to the enacting ordinance also shall be included on the zoning map. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.24.112 Requirements for Establishment of District
 

The N Nonconforming Use Overlay District may be established only when the Planning Commission recommends and the City Council makes the following findings:

 

A.    That the proposed district contains three or more nonconforming uses covering one-third or more of the parcels in a prescribed area;

 

B.    That the formation of such district would tend to reduce deterioration, blight, long-term vacancies, or other adverse conditions in the proposed district; and

 

C.    That the formation of such district would not be injurious to the property or to improvements for conforming uses within the proposed district and the immediately surrounding area. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

3.24.116 Initiation and Adoption Procedures
 

The N Overlay District may be initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission under the procedures for zoning map amendments prescribed by Chapter 5.16 Amendments. The City Council shall adopt each N Overlay District by ordinance after holding a public hearing and receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.24.120 Alternative Schedule for Termination of Nonconforming Use
 

Upon establishment of an N Nonconforming Use Amortization Overlay District, the Planning Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall adopt a time schedule for required termination for nonconforming uses within the district, which are subject to termination as provided in Section 4.20.124 Elimination of Nonconforming Uses (Abatement). In establishing the district, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may provide that the district and time schedules shall apply to some or to all nonconforming uses or conditions within the district. This time schedule shall apply to nonconforming uses within the N District and shall supersede the time periods set forth in Section 4.20.124 Elimination of Nonconforming Uses (Abatement). Any ordinance enacted pursuant to this chapter shall state the applicable amortization period. In recommending and adopting such time periods, the Planning Commission and City Council shall take into consideration but not be limited to the nature of construction of the structures within the district subject to amortization, the ages of such structures, the nature of the existing zoning, and the ability to convert such structures to accommodate conforming uses. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 3.28 L Landmark Overlay District
3.28.100 Specific Purposes
 

The specific purposes of the L Landmark Overlay District are to:

 

A.    Implement the City’s General Plan with respect to the City’s historical, cultural, or architectural heritage.

 

B.    Deter demolition, destruction, alteration, misuse, or neglect of historic or architecturally significant buildings that form an important link to San Leandro’s past.

 

C.    Promote the conservation, preservation, protection, and enhancement of landmarks and historic districts.

 

D.    Stimulate the economic health and residential quality of the community and stabilize and enhance the value of property.

 

E.    Encourage development tailored to the character and significance of each landmark or historic district through a Landmark District Conservation Plan that includes goals, objectives, and design criteria. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.104 Applicability and Zoning Map Designator
 

The L Landmark Overlay District may be combined with any zoning district. Each L Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by adding an “-L” designator to the base district designation. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

3.28.108 Land Use and Property Development Regulations
 

The land use and development regulations applicable in an L district shall be as prescribed for the base district with which it is combined unless modified by another overlay district or by the ordinance establishing the L Overlay District, provided that the requirements of the Landmark District Conservation Plan shall govern where conflicts arise.

 

A.    Exceptions for Historic and Architecturally Significant Structures.

 

The Board of Zoning Adjustments may grant a use permit for an exception to the land use regulations of the base district with which an L District is combined when such an exception is necessary to permit the preservation or restoration of a historic or architecturally significant building, structure, or site.

 

Applications for such use permits shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Official. The Board of Zoning Adjustments may refer applications for an exception under this section to the Library-Historical Commission for a report and recommendation to be submitted to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. In making a decision, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall make a written finding that shall specify the facts relied upon in rendering their decision. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.112 Criteria for Establishment of L District
 

An area shall be eligible for inclusion in an L district if one or more of the following criteria are met:

 

A.    The area possesses character, interest, or value as part of the heritage of the City.

 

B.    The area is the location of a significant historical event.

 

C.    The area is identified with a person or group that contributed significantly to the culture and development of the City.

 

D.    Structures within the area exemplify a particular architectural style or way of life important to the City.

 

E.    Structures within the area are the best remaining examples of an architectural style in a neighborhood.

 

F.     The area or its structures are identified as the work of a person or group whose work has influenced the heritage of the City, the state, or the United States.

 

G.    The area or its structures embody elements of outstanding attention to architectural or landscape design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship.

 

H.    The area is related to a designated historic or landmark building or district in such a way that its preservation is essential to the integrity of the building or district.

 

I.      The area’s unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood.

 

J.     The area has potential for yielding information of archaeological interest.

 

K.    The area’s integrity as a natural environment strongly contributes to the well-being of the people of the City.

 

Portions of a base zoning district that do not meet the above criteria may be included in an L District if inclusion is found to be essential to the integrity of the district. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.116 Criteria for Designating Landmark Buildings
 

Individual buildings may be designated as historic or architecturally significant landmarks if one or more of the criteria set forth in Section 3.28.112 Criteria for Establishment of L District are met. A landmark so designated shall be eligible for the same review procedures as buildings and structures within an L District. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.120 Conservation Plan Required
 

Prior to filing an application for an L District, the applicant shall prepare a Landmark District Conservation Plan with the assistance of the Development Services Department. Each Landmark District Conservation Plan shall contain:

 

A.    A map and description of the proposed district, including boundaries; the age, setting, and character of structures; urban design elements and streetscapes; major public improvements; and proposed objectives to be achieved.

 

B.    A statement of the architectural or historical significance of the proposed district.

 

C.    A list of specific alterations that should be subject to design review in order to protect the architectural or historical character of the proposed district.

 

D.    A set of specific performance guidelines for new construction and alterations necessary to preserve the character of the proposed district.

 

E.    Proposed rules and regulations for design review. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

3.28.124 Application Requirements
 

A.    Initiation. An application for an L District or landmark designation may be initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council, or by owners of 51 percent or more of the property within the proposed district.

 

B.    L District Application. If initiated by property owners, the application for an L District designation shall include:

 

1.     A proposed Landmark District Conservation Plan for the district as prescribed by Section 3.28.120 Conservation Plan Required;

 

2.     A form bearing the signatures of the owners of 51 percent of the land area within the proposed district; and

 

3.     The required fee.

 

C.    Landmark Building Applications. An application for a landmark building designation shall include:

 

1.     A map showing the location of the building or structure and building plans or photographs of the building exterior;

 

2.     A statement of the architectural or historical significance of the building and description of the particular features that should be preserved;

 

3.     Except when initiated by the City, the consent of the owner or authorized agent to the proposed designation is required. For purposes of this section, each condominium owners’ association shall be deemed the property owner of common areas. Prior to accepting the application as complete, the Zoning Enforcement Official may request additional information, plans, or materials deemed necessary to support the application. Upon referral, a Library-Historical Commission public review of the application shall be held within 60 days of the date the application is accepted as complete; and

 

4.     The required fee. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.128 Review and Approval
 

A.    Neighborhood Workshop on Proposed Districts. Prior to public review of application, the Library-Historical Commission may conduct a neighborhood workshop in the proposed district to explain the proposal and the amendment process to neighborhood residents. Notice of any workshop shall be given in the same manner prescribed for zoning map amendments by Section 5.16.112 Public Hearing Scope and Notice.

 

B.    Notice and Public Hearing. After any neighborhood workshop deemed appropriate, the proposed district shall be the subject of public hearings before the Planning Commission and the City Council.

 

C.    Contents of Public Notice. In addition to the information prescribed by Section 5.16.112 Public Hearing Scope and Notice, notice of a public hearing for the establishment of an L District or designation of a landmark shall include a statement that original petitioners have the right to withdraw their support of the district at any time prior to the hearing, and that property owners who have not signed the petition have the right to do so prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.132 Establishment of L Districts
 

A.    Required Findings. In addition to the findings required by Subsection B of Section 5.16.116 Duties of Planning Commission, the Planning Commission and City Council shall find that the proposed district or landmark has a significant architectural or historical character that can be preserved and enhanced through appropriate controls on new development and alterations to existing buildings and landscaping.

 

B.    Adoption of Conservation Plan. An ordinance establishing an L District shall include a Landmark District Conservation Plan in the form submitted or as revised by the City Council. The Plan’s performance guidelines may modify the land use and development regulations of the base zoning district, but shall not significantly alter the regulations. A performance guideline shall be found to be a significant alteration of base district regulations if it substantially prevents property from being used in accord with the provisions of the base district or creates a substantial number of nonconforming uses or structures.

 

C.    Effect on Projects Initiated Prior to Effective Date. No provision of this chapter shall apply to projects initiated prior to the effective date of an ordinance establishing an L District or designating a landmark. Such projects shall be considered nonconforming uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures. For the purposes of this subsection, a project shall be deemed initiated if an application, plans, and materials for concept or development plan review have been filed and accepted as complete.

 

D.    Amendments to Adopted Conservation Plans. Procedures for an amendment to an adopted Landmark District Conservation Plan shall be initiated in the same manner as an application for a zoning map amendment (see Chapter 5.16 Amendments). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

3.28.136 Issuance of Building Permits
 

The Building Official shall not issue a permit for construction, alteration, enlargement, or demolition of a building or structure located in an L District or of a designated landmark except in accordance with the requirements of the L Overlay District and approved Landmark District Conservation Plan. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

3.28.140 Maintenance of Structures and Premises
 

All property owners in L Districts and owners of designated landmarks shall have the obligation to maintain structures and premises in good repair. Structures and premises in good repair shall present no material variance in apparent condition from surrounding structures in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Good repair includes and is defined as the level of maintenance that ensures the continued availability of the structure and premises for a lawfully permitted use and prevents deterioration, dilapidation, and decay of the exterior portions of the structure and premises. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Title 4—Regulations Applying in All or Several Districts
Chapter 4.04 Development Regulations
Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Chapter 4.12 Signs
Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements
Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures

Chapter 4.04 Development Regulations
4.04.100 Specific Purposes and Applicability
 

This chapter contains development regulations, other than parking, loading, sign, and landscape regulations that are applicable to development in all or several districts. These regulations shall be applied as specified in Title 2—Base District Regulations, Title 3—Overlay Zoning Districts Regulations, and as presented in this Chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 1. Nonresidential Districts
4.04.200 Fast Food Establishments
 

The following supplementary development regulations shall apply to fast food establishments, large scale and fast food establishments, small scale use classifications.

 

A.    No Exterior Walk-Up Service. Food shall be delivered to patrons within a car or within a building, or enclosed or covered outdoor eating area.

 

B.    Minimum Separation. Fast food establishment, large scale uses on separate freestanding sites that are: (a) not associated as being either a part of or within a shopping center; and (b) have independent access to adjoining parking shall not be closer than 500 feet to a public or private school, park, library, or playground. This minimum separation requirement does not apply to the fast food establishment, small scale classification.

 

C.    Litter Control. Fast food establishment operators shall be responsible for pick-up of patrons’ litter within a minimum of 1,000 feet from the restaurant site. Identifiable containers and napkins shall be used for all carryout food, and all litter resulting shall be promptly removed. A condition of use or zoning permit approval may require the operator to retain a contract litter cleanup service or to take other litter clean-up measures if the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that a litter problem exists. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2004-004 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.204 Entertainment Activities
 

The following regulations shall apply to any use offering entertainment activities as defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions, more than six times per calendar year:

 

A.    Exits, not limited to emergency-use-only, shall not be opposite a Residential (R) District adjoining the site.

 

B.    A use permit shall establish conditions ensuring that no litter problem will exist.

 

C.    A use permit for entertainment activities shall apply only to the type of entertainment approved, and a different type of entertainment shall require approval of a new use permit.

 

D.    A use permit may limit hours, duration, or days on which entertainment activities is provided. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.208 Service Stations and Automobile Washing
 

The following supplementary development regulations shall apply to the Service Stations and Automobile Washing use classifications.

 

A.    Site Layout. Conditions of approval of a use permit may require buffering, screening, planting areas, or limit hours of operation necessary to avoid adverse impacts on properties in the surrounding area.

 

B.    Planting Areas. Perimeter planting areas shall be provided, as required for parking lots by Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, except where a building adjoins an interior property line. Required interior planting areas may adjoin perimeter-planting areas.

 

C.    Storage of Materials and Equipment. The provisions of Section 4.04.324 Outdoor Facilities and Storage/Loading Facilities shall apply. Storage of inoperative vehicles is prohibited. The location of display racks and vending machines shall be specified by the use permit.

 

D.    Automobile Washing. Automobile washing or cleaning shall not be permitted in conjunction with a service station unless specifically approved by the use permit. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.212 Hazardous Materials Storage
 

A.    Definitions. See Section 1.12.108 Definitions “Hazardous Substances.”

 

B.    Permit Required. A use permit shall be required for any new commercial, industrial, or institutional use, or accessory use, or major addition or alteration to an existing use that involves the manufacture, storage, handling, or processing of hazardous substances in sufficient quantities that would require permits for hazardous materials under Section 105 of the California Fire Code, with the following exceptions:

 

1.     Underground storage of bulk flammable and combustible liquids complying with requirements of the San Leandro Fire Code;

 

2.     Hazardous substances in container sizes of 10 gallons or less that are stored or maintained for the purposes of retail or wholesale sales; and

 

3.     Any manufacture, storage, handling, or processing of hazardous substances which the Zoning Enforcement Official, after consultation with the Fire Marshall and review of any required hazardous materials response plan (“business plan”) determines is not likely to substantially and adversely affect property in the vicinity.

 

C.    Above-Ground Storage Tanks. Aboveground storage tanks for any flammable liquids shall not be allowed except as permitted in the California Fire Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.216 Game Centers
 

The following supplemental regulations shall apply in addition to the requirements of Section 4-3-110 Amusement Center of the Municipal Code to the operation of game centers, including mechanical or electronic games or any other similar machine or device.

 

A.    Restrictions. The Zoning Enforcement Official may impose reasonable restrictions on the physical design, location, and operation of a game center in order to minimize the effects of noise, congregation, parking, and other nuisance factors that may be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding community.

 

B.    Appeals. Any person may appeal the decision of the Zoning Enforcement Official on an application for an initial permit or a renewal of a permit for a game center to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.220 Cannabis Product Manufacturing
 

The following supplemental regulations shall apply to the permitting and operation of any land use involving the manufacturing of cannabis products.

 

A.    Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit shall be required for cannabis product manufacturing.

 

B.    State Licensure Required for Operation. Cannabis product manufacturers and all third-party distributors responsible for the delivery of cannabis and finished cannabis products to and from cannabis product manufacturing facilities shall hold a valid State license.

 

C.    Public Sale Limited to Dispensaries. The direct sales, distribution, delivery, and dispensing of manufactured cannabis products to the public shall be limited to licensed cannabis dispensaries.

 

D.    Findings for Approval. In addition to the required findings for all use permits, the following additional findings shall be made:

 

1.     The cannabis product manufacturing facility is situated in an appropriate location where schools, residences, childcare centers, parks, or other sensitive land uses will not be adversely impacted.

 

2.     Appropriate measures have been taken to address nuisances related to odor, noise, exhaust, and waste.

 

3.     The cannabis product manufacturing facility is suitably designed to be secure and aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area.

 

4.     The cannabis product manufacturing facility will not place a burden on the provision of public services disproportionate to other industrial uses. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-014 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.224 Walls Adjoining Residential Use
 

A solid masonry or concrete wall at least six feet and not more than eight feet high shall adjoin the property line of the site of a new nonresidential use abutting an existing ground-floor residential use. However, where the portion of the site within 10 feet of the property line is occupied by planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line, the Zoning Enforcement Official may grant an exception to this requirement. A wall within 15 feet of a street property line shall not exceed three feet in height. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.228 Concurrent Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel and Alcoholic Beverages
 

No person shall engage in the concurrent sale of motor vehicle fuel and alcoholic beverages unless authorized as a conditional use in accord with Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions, subject to the minimum standards for approval established by this section and any additional conditions of approval determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustments to be reasonable and necessary.

 

A.    Minimum Standards for Approval. All persons applying for conditional use approval to engage, and all persons actually engaged as of January 1, 1988, in the concurrent sale of motor vehicle fuel and alcoholic beverages shall comply with all of the following minimum standards:

 

1.     No alcoholic beverages shall be displayed within five feet of the cash register or the front door of the establishment, unless it is in a permanently affixed cooler;

 

2.     No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-up window;

 

3.     No display of alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub;

 

4.     No alcoholic beverage advertising shall be located on motor fuel islands or otherwise visible from outside the building in which the alcoholic beverage is sold; and

 

5.     Employees on duty between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. shall be at least 21 years of age to sell alcoholic beverages.

 

B.    Conditions of Approval. In addition to the minimum standards set forth, the Board of Zoning Adjustments may provide that any approvals for the concurrent sale of motor vehicle fuel and alcoholic beverages be contingent upon acceptance and observance of specified conditions or limitations determined by the Board to be reasonable and necessary in order to make the required findings, including but not limited to any of the following conditions or limitations relating to:

 

1.     Additional limitations on advertising and display of alcoholic beverages;

 

2.     Banning of video game machines and/or jukeboxes or similar devices where concurrent sale of motor vehicle fuel and alcoholic beverages take place;

 

3.     Limitations on hours of operation and on amount of shelf space devoted to alcoholic beverages;

 

4.     Requirement for security guards and other security devices on the premises;

 

5.     Minimum parking lot lighting and fencing;

 

6.     Minimum training for sales personnel and/or security guards;

 

7.     Policies to discourage drinking alcoholic beverages outside the premises; or

 

8.     A minimum distance required between businesses engaged in the concurrent sale of motor vehicle fuel and alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.232 Recycling Facilities
 

A.    Definitions. See Section 1.12.108 Definitions for definitions of: Recycling; Recyclable Material; Recycling Facility; Collection Facility (Small Collection Facility, Large Collection Facility); Processing Facility (Light Processing Facility, Heavy Processing Facility); Reverse Vending Machine (Single-Feed Reverse, Bulk Reverse); and Small Scale Hazardous Waste Center.

 

B.    Permits Required. No person shall permit the placement, construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a permit as follows:


Type of Facility

Districts Permitted

Permit Required

Single-Feed Reverse Vending Machine(s)

CC, CN, C-RM, CS, DA-1, DA-2, I (AU), NA, P, SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

Admin. Review

Bulk Reverse Vending Machine

CC, CN, CS, I, I (AU), NA, SA-1, SA-2, SA-3

Admin. Review

Small Collection

CC, CS, CN, SA-1, SA-2 and SA-3

Admin. Review

Small Scale Hazardous Waste Center

CS

Admin. Review

Large Collection

CC, CS, IG, IG(AU), IL, IL(AU), IP, IP(AU)

Admin. Review

IT

Use Permit

Light Processing

IL, IL(AU), IG and IG(AU)

Admin. Review

IT

Use Permit

Heavy Processing

IG, IG(AU), and IT

Use Permit

1.    The Zoning Enforcement Official shall be the decision-maker but may refer to the Board of Zoning Adjustments for a Conditional Use Permit.

 

C.    Permits for Multiple Sites.

 

1.     The Zoning Enforcement Official may grant a single zoning permit to allow more than one reverse vending machine or small collection facility located on different sites under the following conditions:

 

a.     The operator of each of the proposed facilities is the same;

 

b.     The proposed facilities are determined to be similar in nature, size, and intensity of activity; and

 

c.     All the applicable criteria and standards set forth in Subsection D are met for each such proposed facility.

 

D.    Design Criteria and Standards.

 

1.     Reverse Vending Machine(s).

 

a.     Each machine shall be located so as not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

 

b.     No required parking space shall be occupied, and machine shall not encroach into aisles.

 

c.     Each machine shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of space, including any protective enclosure, and shall not exceed eight feet in height.

 

d.     Each machine shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.

 

e.     The maximum sign area is four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions of Subsection D.1.d, above;

 

f.      Adequate nighttime lighting shall be provided, if warranted.

 

2.     Small Collection Facilities.

 

a.     Small collection facilities shall be no larger than 500 square feet, shall be set back at least 10 feet from a front or side property line, and 20 feet from an R district boundary or lot developed for residential use, and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation or parking areas. Small collection facilities shall be located no closer than one-half mile distance from one another.

 

b.     Applicants of small collection facilities shall submit an Administrative Review application, along with a site plan showing the proposed location and written authorization from a property or business owner for each separate facility location.

 

c.     No power-driven processing equipment shall be used except for reverse vending machines.

 

d.     All containers shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when the site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected.

 

e.     All recyclable material shall be stored in containers or in a mobile unit vehicle.

 

f.      Attended facilities located within 100 feet of the boundary of an R district shall operate only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

 

g.     Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name, address, website and telephone number of the facility operator or organization and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers.

 

h.     The maximum sign area shall be 16 square feet exclusive of informational requirements and operational instruction of Subsection c above. Directional signs bearing no advertising message may be installed if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.

 

i.      No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space may be provided for the attendant, if needed.

 

j.      Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present.

 

k.     No required parking spaces shall be occupied by the facility.

 

3.     Large Collection Facilities.

 

a.     A large collection facility shall be located at least 200 feet from an R district.

 

b.     Each facility shall be in an enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a fence at least eight feet in height that substantially screens the site.

 

c.     Six parking spaces shall be for customers and one parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility.

 

d.     Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light-processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material may be allowed if noise and other conditions are met.

 

4.     Processing Facilities.

 

a.     Light processors shall operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage, in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section 4.04.324 Outdoor Facilities and Storage/Loading Facilities.

 

b.     Heavy processors shall operate in a wholly enclosed building, except for incidental storage or within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque fence or wall not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages located at least 150 feet from an R district.

 

c.     Power-driven processing shall be permitted provided all noise-level requirements are met.

 

d.     If the facility is open to the public, space shall be provided for a minimum of 10 customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety.

 

e.     One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center.

 

5.     All Collection and Processing Facilities.

 

a.     No facility shall occupy a required front or corner side yard, and all regulations applicable to the principal structure on the site shall apply to collection and processing facilities except as provided in this section.

 

b.     A large collector or processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

c.     All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable material. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing.

 

d.     Noise levels shall not exceed sixty decibels (60 dBA) as measured at the property line of an R district or otherwise shall not exceed seventy decibels (70 dBA).

 

e.     All facilities shall be administered by on-site personnel during hours the facility is open. If a large collection or processing facility is located within 500 feet of an R district, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

 

f.      Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from authorized entry or removal of materials.

 

g.     The site of the facility shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers shall be displayed.

 

h.     Sign requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. In addition, each facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

 

i.      No dust, fumes, smoke vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2008-013 § 1; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

Article 2. All Districts
4.04.300 Relocated Buildings
 

In addition to the requirements of San Leandro’s Municipal Code, Title 5, Chapter 5-1, Article 5 Moving Buildings, Oversized Vehicles or Objects, a permit for relocation of a building shall be required. This permit, to be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Official, shall establish conditions necessary to ensure that the relocated building and its new site will be compatible with its surroundings in terms of architectural character, height and bulk, and quality of exterior appearance. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.304 Development on Lots Not Meeting Minimum Area or Width
 

A legally created lot having a width or area less than required for the base district in which it is located may be occupied by a permitted or conditional use if it meets the following requirements:

 

A.    R Districts. Such lots shall be subject to the same yard, setback, density, and FAR requirements as a standard lot. One dwelling unit, notwithstanding accessory dwelling units, may be located on a lot of less than required area or width if it conforms to all requirements for a single-family dwelling in the RS District. A use permit shall be required for any other proposed new use.

 

B.    Other Districts. A use permit shall be required for any proposed new use. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.308 Development on Lots Divided by District Boundaries
 

The regulations applicable to each district shall be applied to the area within that district, and no use other than parking serving a principal use on the site shall be located in a district in which it is not a permitted or conditional use. Pedestrian or vehicular access from a street to a use shall not traverse a portion of the site in a district in which the use is not a permitted or conditional use. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.312 Building Projections into Yards and Courts
 

Projections into required yards or required open space shall be permitted as follows. In addition, all development proposals in the SA Districts shall be reviewed by City staff to ensure general consistency with the provisions contained in the Design Guidelines in the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy.

 

A.    Cornices, eaves, mechanical equipment, and ornamental features: Two feet.

 

B.    Uncovered porches, terraces, platforms, decks, subterranean garages, and patios not more than 30 inches in height: Three feet in a side yard, and six feet in a front or rear yard for a length of 10 feet parallel to the adjoining property line.

 

C.    Balconies, stairs, canopies, awnings, and covered porches: Six feet into a front or rear yard, and two feet into an interior side yard.

 

D.    Fire escapes: Three and one-half feet.

 

E.    Bay windows: Two and one-half feet for a width of no more than eight feet.

 

F.     Chimneys: Two feet, except where the required setback from an interior property line is three feet or less in which case no projection is permitted.

 

G.    Wheelchair Ramps. Ramps constructed as part of an accessible route are permitted in required front or side yard (for corner properties) setbacks with administrative approval. Ramps shall not be allowed to encroach into the City right-of-way. In addition, ramps shall not block access to or encroach into any required off-street parking space or driveway leading to such place; unless there is no other feasible location for the ramp. Ramps may be constructed of concrete and wood or galvanized metal/aluminum and shall comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) Section 4.8 Ramps. Wood railings shall be stained or painted to be compatible with the color/trim of the home. Metal handrails, spindles and hardware shall be powder-coated to be compatible with the color/trim of the home. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-011 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.316 Supportive and Transitional Housing
 

Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65583(c)(3), supportive and transitional housing must be considered a residential use of property, subject only to restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the applicable zoning districts in the Code. See Section 1.12.108 Definitions for definitions of supportive housing, transitional housing, and target population. Applicable parking standards for supportive and transitional housing can be found in Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4)

 

4.04.320 Exceptions to Height Limits
 

Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, elevator penthouses, water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, theater scenery lofts, radio and television antennas, transmission towers, fire towers, and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances covering not more than 10 percent of the ground area covered by the structure to which they are accessory may exceed the maximum permitted height in the district in which the site is located by no more than 10 feet, unless the Board of Zoning Adjustments approves a Conditional Use Permit that authorizes additional height. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.324 Outdoor Facilities and Storage/Loading Facilities
 

A.    Outdoor Storage—Location.

 

1.     IG District—Permit Not Required. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment is allowed in the IG district, subject to the screening requirements prescribed in Subsection C Outdoor Storage and Loading Facilities—Screening Required below. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be strictly related to the operation of the principal use. In no case shall this section permit outdoor storage or display of merchandise, goods, or materials for retail or wholesale sales, unless a Temporary Use Permit is obtained in accordance with Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits. If the outdoor sales exceed 90 consecutive days in duration, an Outdoor Facilities Permit shall be required, per Subsection A.2.

 

2.     Other Commercial and Industrial Districts—Outdoor Facilities Permit Required. Outdoor storage and display of merchandise, materials, or equipment, including display of merchandise, materials, and equipment for customer pick-up shall be subject to approval of an Outdoor Facilities Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Official in the CC, CN, CS, CR, C-RM, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, IG, IL, IP, IT, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts subject to screening requirements prescribed in Subsection C below. Sidewalk cafés and outdoor food service accessory to an Eating and Drinking Establishment or a retail use shall be permitted subject to approval of an Outdoor Facilities Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Official in the CC, CN, CR, C-RM, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, IG, IL, IP, IT, NA-1, NA-2, OS, P, SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts and shall be subject to Subsection B. Temporary displays for Outdoor Retail Sales may be allowed with a Temporary Use Permit up to 90 days in accordance with Section 5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits, consistent with the applicable base district land use regulation, as modified by an overlay district.

 

B.    Outdoor Facilities Permits—Conditions of Approval and Grounds for Denial. The Zoning Enforcement Official may impose conditions of approval on any permit for outdoor storage, display, or food service issued under this section, including requirements for yards, screening, or planting areas where it is determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official that such conditions are necessary to prevent adverse impacts on surrounding properties and uses. If the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that such impacts cannot be adequately mitigated, the permit shall be denied.

 

C.    Outdoor Storage and Loading Facilities—Screening Required:

 

1.     Outdoor storage areas and truck bays/loading dock areas, shall be screened by the placement of a solid wall, fence, landscaping, and/or building location in order to substantially obscure visibility from a public street. Limited visibility of truck staging areas, as necessary only for truck access to and from the site, may be permitted if no other alternative layout is practical.

 

2.     The storage of merchandise, materials, and/or equipment at height above the screening wall is not permitted, unless administrative approval is given by the Zoning Enforcement Official, who in order to give approval shall find that: (a) the limitation in storage would not be practical for the subject business, and (b) such stored items would not be visually obtrusive from a public street or neighboring property.

 

D.    Exemptions. Notwithstanding the permit regulations of Subsections A and B above, and the screening requirements prescribed in Subsection C above, unscreened outdoor storage and display may be permitted, subject to any restrictions and/or limitations within project specific conditions attached to a use permit, site plan approved pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, or zoning approval, in conjunction with the following use classifications in districts where they are permitted or conditionally permitted, and provided outdoor storage and display shall be limited to vehicles or equipment:

 

1.     Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New

 

2.     Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, Used

 

3.     Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Rentals

 

E.    Vehicles/Equipment as Advertisement. No vehicle or equipment shall be stored with mast arms in an elevated position. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2008-003 § 8; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.328 Screening of Mechanical Equipment
 

A.    General Requirement. Except as provided in Subsection B below, all exterior mechanical equipment, except solar collectors in any district and operating mechanical equipment in an IG District located more than 500 feet from a C, NA, OS, PD, PS, R, or SA district boundary, shall be screened from view on all sides. Except to the extent restricted by public utility companies, equipment to be screened includes but is not limited to heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive the screening requirement in C, I, NA or SA District for equipment not visible from a public street or R district.

 

B.    Utility Meters. Utility meters shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way, but need not be screened on top or when located on the interior side of a single-family dwelling. Meters in a required front yard or in a side yard adjoining a street shall be enclosed in subsurface vaults.

 

C.    Screening Specifications. Screening materials may have evenly distributed openings or perforations averaging 50 percent of the surface area and shall effectively screen mechanical equipment, so that it is not visible from a street or adjoining lot. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.332 Refuse Storage Areas
 

Except as exempted by the Zoning Enforcement Official, a refuse storage area screened on all sides by a six foot solid wood or masonry wall or located within a building, shall be provided prior to occupancy for all commercial, industrial, and public/semipublic uses. Locations, horizontal dimensions, and general design parameters of refuse storage areas shall be in accord with standards established by the Zoning Enforcement Official, subject to appeal to the Planning Commission. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive the screening requirement for dumpsters and equipment for refuse collection and storage in a CS, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, or I District, which are not visible from a public street or from an R district. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2008-003 § 9; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.336 Underground Utilities
 

All new electrical, telephone, CATV, and similar distribution lines providing direct service to a development site, and any existing such service on the site, shall be installed underground within the site unless the Zoning Enforcement Official finds such installation is unfeasible. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.340 Performance Standards
 

The following performance standards shall apply to all use classifications in all zoning districts:

 

A.    Noise. All uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of the San Leandro Noise Regulations (Municipal Code Chapter 4-1-11 Noise).

 

B.    Vibration. No use, activity, or process shall produce vibrations that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of a site.

 

C.    Dust. No use, process, or activity shall produce objectionable dust that is perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of a site.

 

D.    Glare.

 

1.     From Glass. Mirror or highly reflective glass shall not cover more than 20 percent of a building surface visible from a street unless an applicant submits information demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Official that use of such glass would not significantly increase glare visible from adjacent streets or pose a hazard for moving vehicles.

 

2.     From Outdoor Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall comply with Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. Security lighting in any district may be indirect or diffused, or shall be shielded or directed away from an R district within 500 feet. Lighting for outdoor court or field games within 300 feet of an R district shall require approval of a use permit.

 

E.    Combustibles and Explosives. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the provisions of the San Leandro Uniform Fire Code and any other applicable laws.

 

F.     Radioactive Materials. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of radioactive materials shall comply with the provisions of the California Radiation Control Regulations and any other applicable laws.

 

G.    Hazardous and Extremely Hazardous Materials. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of hazardous and extremely hazardous materials, including biologically hazardous material, shall comply with the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials Regulations and the San Leandro Uniform Fire Code.

 

H.    Heat and Humidity. Uses, activities, and processes shall not produce any unreasonable, disturbing, or unnecessary emissions of heat or humidity, at the property line of the site on which they are situated that cause material distress, discomfort, or injury to a reasonable person.

 

I.      Electromagnetic Interference. Uses, activities, and processes shall not cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site on which they are situated.

 

J.     Evidence of Compliance. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require such evidence of ability to comply with performance standards as he or she deems necessary prior to issuance of a zoning permit or any other required permit. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.344 Earth Station and Microwave Equipment
 

A.    Purpose. To ensure that amateur radio antennas and satellite and microwave dish earth stations and equipment do not have an adverse impact on aesthetic values and public safety in residential, commercial, and industrial areas, installation of these earth stations and equipment is governed by the following controls. The intent of these regulations is only to locate such earth stations and equipment where they are least visible from public rights-of-way in the vicinity, while not burdening adjacent property owners with adverse visual impacts. The intent is not to discriminate against dish earth stations in favor of other communications facilities.

 

B.    Permit Required. A zoning permit shall be required for the installation of amateur radio antennas, a satellite or microwave-receiving earth station, and a use permit shall be required for the installation of microwave transmitting and relay equipment. In considering a permit application, the Zoning Enforcement Official or Board of Zoning Adjustments shall balance the imposition of all applicable codes, regulations, and standards of the City of San Leandro with the applicant’s right to receive satellite transmissions without unreasonable limitations on transmission reception or the imposition of costs which are excessive in light of the purchase cost of the equipment.

 

C.    Location Criteria: Amateur Radio. An amateur radio antenna may be installed on a lot in any district if it complies with the following criteria:

 

1.     Setbacks. Five feet from interior side or rear property line.

 

2.     Maximum Height. Ten feet above the district height limit, provided that additional height may be authorized with a use permit.

 

3.     Surface Materials and Finishes. Highly reflective surfaces shall not be permitted.

 

D.    Location Criteria: Satellite. A satellite earth station may be installed on a lot in any zoning district if it complies with the following criteria:

 

1.     Placement on Lot. The preferred placement of a satellite earth station shall be in the rear yard or interior side yard of a given parcel, no closer than five feet to the side or rear property line, or to the front street-side setback line. The placement of a satellite earth station on a roof, shall be allowed only upon proof, presented to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Official by the property owner at the time of application for a permit, that placement of the earth station at other preferred locations would unreasonably limit reception of satellite transmission.

 

2.     Maximum Height. Ten feet, measured from ground level, or the point of attachment on the roof, immediately under the earth station to the highest point of the earth station or any appurtenance attached to it.

 

3.     Screening.

 

a.     If other than roof-mounted, the satellite earth station must be effectively screened by a solid screen fence, wall, or hedge six feet in height, so as not to be visible from public streets. The fence, wall, or hedge shall be located no closer than five feet to the satellite earth station.

 

b.     If roof-mounted, the satellite earth station must be effectively screened so as not to be visible from public streets. Where possible, all roof-mounted satellite earth stations shall be painted to match the existing roof color. No satellite earth stations shall be more than ten feet in height above the point of attachment, or four feet in height above any peak of a pitched roof or parapet of a flat roof unless it is demonstrated that this height limit unreasonably restricts reception of a signal.

 

The above requirements for screening shall not apply in an “I” District unless the earth station is readily visible from an R District.

 

4.     Undergrounding. All wires and/or cables necessary for operation of the earth station or reception of the signal shall be placed underground, except for wires or cables attached flush with the surface of a building or the structure of the earth station.

 

5.     Surface Materials and Finishes. Highly reflective surfaces shall not be permitted, nor shall any lettering or emblem be allowed, except the name of the manufacturer in letters not to exceed two inches in height.

 

E.    Locational Criteria. Microwave Receiving. Microwave receiving earth stations may be installed if they comply with the following criteria:

 

1.     CC, CS, I, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts. Installation is prohibited in any required front or street side setback area, and all wires or cables necessary for the operation of the earth station or reception of the signal shall be placed underground, except those wires or cables attached flush with the surface of a building or structure of the earth station. Landscaping or solid screening shall be placed around the base of any tower to screen the tower from view and to provide a physical separation between the tower and any pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

 

2.     CN, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6 and P Districts. Installation is permitted only if the earth station is attached to the rear half of a roof or is fully screened from view from any adjacent public street or R district.

 

F.     Location Criteria: Microwave Transmitting and Relay Equipment. Microwave transmitting and relay equipment may be installed in any zoning district subject to the requirements of a use permit and the criteria of Subsection E above. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2008-003 § 10; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.348 Bed and Breakfast Inns
 

The following regulations shall apply to bed and breakfast inns.

 

A.    Location. Bed and breakfast inns are conditionally permitted in the CC, CN, CR, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, IT, NA-1, NA-2, P, RM, SA-1, and SA-2 Districts or in any L Overlay District in owner-occupied landmark buildings.

 

B.    Use Permit Required. A use permit issued by the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall be required for bed and breakfast inns. Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Division accompanied by: the required fee; plans and elevations showing any proposed modifications to the existing exterior of the structure, descriptions of landscaping, exterior finishes, signs, and parking to be provided; and any other information required by the Zoning Enforcement Official to determine whether the proposed bed and breakfast inn conforms to all the requirements of this ordinance.

 

The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall approve a bed and breakfast inn after a duly noticed public hearing upon finding that:

 

1.     The bed and breakfast inn will be operated by a property owner or resident manager living on the premises;

 

2.     The bed and breakfast inn conforms to the design and development standards of Subsection C of this section and is compatible with adjacent buildings in terms of building materials, colors and exterior finishes; and

 

3.     Public and utility services including emergency access are adequate to serve the bed and breakfast inn.

 

C.    Design and Development Standards.

 

1.     Number of Guest Rooms. No more than six rooms shall be rented for lodging.

 

2.     Parking. A minimum of one independently accessible, off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room plus one for the resident owner. This requirement may be reduced to one space for each two rooms for a bed and breakfast inn provided that the Board of Zoning Adjustments finds that on-street parking in the vicinity is not subject to time restrictions that would interfere with the hours normally required for guest parking.

 

3.     Signs. No identifying sign shall be displayed other than one sign no larger than six square feet per frontage identifying the name of the establishment. The face of the sign may be indirectly illuminated by an exterior light source entirely shielded from view, but no illumination from an internal light source shall be permitted. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2008-003 § 11; Ord. 2004-007 § 5; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

4.04.352 Airport Safety Zones
 

The following regulations shall apply to land uses occurring within airport safety zones established for Metropolitan Oakland International Airport by the Alameda County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) and set forth in the Airport Land Use Policy Plan. Maps of airport safety zone boundaries as established by the Airport Land Use Policy Plan are kept on file with the Zoning Enforcement Official. The airport safety zone boundaries shall also be delineated on the Zoning Map with reference to applicable regulations.

 

A.    Purposes. The specific purposes of the Airport Safety Zone regulations are to ensure land use compatibility with airport operations in proximity to San Leandro and to provide for the safe operation of aircraft. The airport safety zone consists of two areas, an inner portion and an outer portion, for which different land use regulations apply. The four air safety considerations addressed by these regulations are:

 

1.     Height Limits. The prevention of obstacles to air navigation caused by tall objects, structures, or buildings.

 

2.     Hazards. The prevention of hazards to air navigation caused by smoke, glare, electrical interference, bright or concentrated beams of light, and concentrations of birds.

 

3.     Ground Safety. The exposure of persons on the ground to accidents, especially where land uses are characterized by concentrations of persons.

 

4.     Noise. The exposure of persons on the ground to noise from aircraft operations, especially jet aircraft.

 

B.    Inner Portion. Within the inner portion of the airport safety zone, extending to 1,400 feet from the end of the runway, the following uses and structures are not permitted:

 

1.     Permanent structures or objects projecting above the level (elevation) of the primary surface of the runway.

 

2.     Any land use that on a regular basis would result in a concentration of persons exceeding 25 persons per net acre.

 

3.     Compatible land uses in this portion of the safety zone include limited horticulture provided that no nursery equipment or materials shall be stored and no structures erected, open space for natural resources (wetlands), open space for the managed production of resources (water areas necessary to commercial fisheries), and open space for public health and safety (uses related to flood control such as retention ponds, drainage easements, or flood plains).

 

C.    Outer Portion. Within the outer portion of the airport safety zone, extending beyond 1,400 feet to 5,300 feet, new uses shall be nonresidential low-density.

 

1.     Uses which will have a density of more than 25 persons per net acre over an eight hour period or a density of more than 50 persons per net acre for more than two hours per day are considered incompatible and shall not be allowed. In addition, retail sales, eating and drinking establishments, schools, hospitals, places of public or religious assembly, and detention facilities are prohibited land uses.

 

2.     Compatible land uses include all those allowed in the inner portion of the airport safety zone. Additional compatible land uses are open space for outdoor recreation, limited warehousing and storage, vehicle storage, and limited industry provided these land uses comply with density regulations specified in Subsection C.1 above and height restrictions on structures and facilities contained in FAR Part 77, including Subpart D. (FAR Part 77 is included in Appendix C to the Airport Land Use Policy Plan and kept on file with the Zoning Enforcement Official.)

 

3.     Within the overall density limits established in Subsection C.1 above, clustering of uses within a parcel may be compatible where such clustering provides emergency landing areas, avoids concentration of development along the extended runway centerline, and does not pose a hazard to air navigation.

 

4.     Flammable liquids, as defined in the Uniform Fire Code, shall be stored underground.

 

D.    Use Permit Required. Any new development proposed for a parcel located within the airport safety zone must secure a use permit from the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The Board shall approve a use permit if it makes the findings required by Section 5.08.124 Required Findings and determines that the proposed development is a compatible land use in that portion of the safety zone in which the project will be located and meets the requirements of this section.

 

E.    Noise and Aviation Easement. No land division shall be approved nor shall a permit of any type be issued for any development within the airport safety zone until the City is provided with a noise and aviation easement permitting the right of flight in the airspace above the site. Such easement shall be supplied in a form prescribed by the City Attorney and shall be recorded on the title of the property. The purpose of the easement is to ensure that prospective property owners and developers are informed and aware of the potential impacts of airport over-flights and operations.

 

F.     Recorded Notice of Aircraft Over-flight Required. No land division shall be approved nor shall a permit of any type be issued for any development activity within the airport safety zone until a notice has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, stating that the property is subject to aircraft over-flight. Such a notice shall include a map showing the boundaries of the airport safety zone as adopted by the Alameda County Airport Land Use Commission. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.356 Restrictions on Use of Razor/Barbed Wire
 

A.    Razor/Barbed Wire Materials, Such as Wire Strips or Coiled (“Concertina”) Wire Attached to a Fence or a Building. The installation of razor wire shall be permitted only in the CS, IG, and IL Districts, prohibited in all other zoning districts, and is subject to the following restrictions where permitted and must meet the following criteria:

 

1.     Razor/barbed wire, on either a fence, wall or building, is prohibited within 300 feet of the public street frontage, unless such installations will not be visible from any public street as to be determined by and subject to the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official prior to installation.

 

2.     Razor/barbed wire shall not extend over a property line or over the public right-of-way.

 

3.     Razor/barbed wire shall not be located within 200 feet of a residential district.

 

4.     The height of the fence, with the razor/barbed wire, cannot exceed the fence height limits established in the fence regulations.

 

B.    Removal of Nonconforming Razor/Barbed Wire. In regards to use and/or development applications for properties with razor/barbed wire installations, which are not in compliance with the regulations prescribed in Subsection A above, the nonconforming razor/barbed wire shall be removed as a condition of approval for any zoning permit, conditional use permit, or site plan approval given after August 15, 2001. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.360 Site Remediation Screening Review
 

Prior to the removal or on-site remediation of contaminated soil or water, details on screening of the site and noise mitigation measures for any mechanical equipment used in the process shall receive approval of the Community Development Director if the removal or remediation process will exceed 21 days in length. Screening of the site shall be by an obscure material and allowable noise shall not exceed the levels provided in the General Plan. This section shall apply in all zoning districts. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.364 Fences, Walls, and Hedges
 

A.    Residential, Open Space and Public/Semi-Public Districts. Except as provided for in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 below, the maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge shall be seven feet except in required front or corner side yards abutting a street where the maximum height shall be three feet. All fences, walls, and hedges shall be subject to the driveway visibility requirements of Section 4.08.148 Driveways—Visibility.

 

1.     RO District. The maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge in the RO District shall be six feet except in required front or corner side yards abutting a street where the maximum height shall be three feet.

 

2.     Corner lots in the RO, RS, RS-40, RS-VP, and RD Districts. Starting from the back wall of the house, the maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge on a corner lot in the RO, RS, RS-40, RS-VP or RD District shall follow the gradient formula diagram below, which allows for an increase in height of one foot for each two and one-half feet back from the street side property line, up to a maximum of six feet in the RO District, and seven feet in the RS, RS-40, RS-VP and RD Districts. The area in front of the fence shall be required to be planted with a combination of groundcovers, shrubs, and/or small trees and shall also have irrigation installed. Over-height fences along the side of the house shall continue to require review and approval of a fence modification.

 

4

 

CORNER LOT FENCE IN THE RO, RS, RS-40, RS-VP, AND RD DISTRICTS

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

 

3.     RS-VP District. In order to protect the existing view corridor, the maximum height of a solid fence, wall or hedge in the RS-VP District shall be no more than three feet above finished grade. The portion of a permitted fence between the heights of three feet to seven feet shall be constructed with glass to allow for continued enjoyment of the view. Transparent materials do not include chain link, mini-mesh, chicken wire, wood or lattice materials. Non-transparent structural materials necessary for the support of the fence are permitted every four feet.

 

The views currently enjoyed by neighbors shall be respected. The proposed construction shall not unreasonably block or diminish neighbors’ views of distant and scenic features, such as the San Francisco Bay and surrounding open spaces and skylines, while balancing the applicant’s ability to improve the subject property in accordance with the applicable restrictions. Fences proposed in side and rear yards where no views as defined above are significantly affected are not subject to this section as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

The Zoning Enforcement Official may modify the standards referenced herein subject to the approval of a Fence Modification Permit.

 

B.    Commercial, Professional and Industrial Districts.

 

1.     Maximum Height. The maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge shall be eight feet except in required front or corner side yards where the maximum height shall be three feet.

 

2.     Minimum Standards for fences Along Street Frontages. Fences that are adjacent to the required minimum front, corner side and/or rear yard with frontage along a public street frontage shall be constructed of either: (a) tubular steel, or of equally high quality “visually transparent” style; or (b) a solid architectural wall compatible with the building colors and materials.

 

In addition, all fences, walls, and hedges shall be subject to the driveway visibility requirements of Section 4.08.148 Driveways—Visibility. Walls adjoining residential uses shall be subject to the regulations of Section 4.04.224 Walls Adjoining Residential Use.

 

C.    Fence Modifications. Approval to vary from the standards of this section may be granted with the approval of a fence modification application.

 

1.     The Zoning Enforcement Official May Approve Modifications. The Zoning Enforcement Official in a hearing following informal notice as specified in paragraph 4 below may modify the requirements for the maximum height, minimum setback, and material of construction for fences as established in the Zoning Code.

 

2.     Noticing Requirements. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, on or adjacent to the property involved, and mailed at least 10 days prior to the hearing to the owners of adjacent property.

 

3.     Standards for Approval.

 

a.     The fence is not detrimental to adjacent property;

 

b.     The fence is compatible with the neighborhood in terms of aesthetics;

 

c.     The fence does not create a sight distance hazard; and

 

d.     The fence is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.

 

4.     Referrals and Appeals. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer a fence modification request to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall also review fence modification(s) requests that are made in conjunction with an application for either a conditional use permit or variance. Appeals of the decision of the Zoning Enforcement Official approving or denying a fence modification shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2012-001 § 3; Ord. 2008-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.368 Adult-Oriented Business Regulations
 

A.    Purpose and Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult-oriented businesses in certain areas.

 

B.    Location Standards.

 

1.     Subject to the provisions of this chapter, adult-oriented businesses shall be permitted only in the Industrial General (IG), Industrial Limited (IL), Industrial Park (IP), and Industrial Transition (IT) Districts, provided:

 

a.     Each adult-oriented business shall, prior to commencement or continuation of such business, first apply for and receive zoning approval from the Community Development Department.

 

b.     Each such adult-oriented business must, prior to commencement or continuation of such business, first apply for and receive an adult-oriented business license.

 

c.     Each such adult-oriented business must comply with all applicable development and design regulations of the applicable zone.

 

d.     No adult-oriented business shall be located in any zoning district with an overlay zone.

 

e.     No adult-oriented business shall be located on any parcel that contains frontage on Merced Street, Alvarado Street, Williams Street, Doolittle Drive or Fairway Drive.

 

2.     No adult-oriented business shall be established or located within 1,000 feet of the following:

 

a.     Any place of religious assembly;

 

b.     Any residentially zoned land, whether in the City of San Leandro, in an adjoining city, or within the unincorporated area;

 

c.     Any public park, or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action, and a public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, libraries, nursery schools, pre-schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; schools includes the school grounds, but does not included facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;

 

d.     Any boys club, girls club, or similar youth organization; or

 

e.     Any large family, general, or limited day care facility licensed by the State of California.

 

f.      Any establishment that holds a state license for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages, except this definition shall not include restaurants that have a bar on site so long as more than 50 percent of the customer seating is dedicated to restaurant patrons. This definition applies solely to the location criteria of this section.

 

The uses and zones set forth herein shall be collectively known as “impacted uses.”

 

3.     No adult-oriented business may be established or located within 1,000 feet of any other adult-oriented business, whether in the City of San Leandro, in an adjoining city, or within the unincorporated area.

 

4.     If any portion of a property fails to meet the distance criteria set forth above, the entire property shall be ineligible for an adult-oriented business use.

 

C.    Design Standards. Per Zoning Code Section 2.12.100 Specific Purposes, the purpose of the industrial district regulations include ensuring that “the appearance and effects of industrial uses are compatible with the character of the area in which they are located.” The Zoning Enforcement Official shall review and approve all plans and elevations of buildings housing adult-oriented businesses to determine whether they meet this standard. This review will consider building color, massing, architectural features and other exterior details. A decision on this design compliance for a new business shall be given within 30 days of the granting of an Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit; any changes to the exterior of the building after the initial review shall also be subject to review and approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

D.    Appeal. Any decision of the Zoning Enforcement Official made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 5.20 Appeals. Any administrative action made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.372 Hazardous Waste Facilities
 

A.    Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards, land-use regulations and a permit process for controlling the location, design, maintenance and safety of off-site hazardous waste facilities. These standards, regulations and processes are intended to be consistent with Article 8.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, applicable portions of the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the City of San Leandro General Plan.

 

B.    Applicability.

 

1.     The specific requirements of this ordinance are applicable to the siting and development of off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage, or transfer facilities. Off-site hazardous waste facilities mean those facilities which treat, store, recycle, incinerate or transfer hazardous wastes from at least two producers of hazardous wastes which are not located on the same property of the hazardous waste facility. Consistent with the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, off-site hazardous waste facilities only include those facility types as defined by the Plan for small-scale transfer and storage including hazardous waste collection facilities, industrial transfer, storage and treatment facilities, and residual repositories.

 

2.     The off-site facility definition does not apply to:

 

a.     Transportable Treatment Units (TTUs), which are designed to be moved either intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited period of time; or

 

b.     Permanent on-site hazardous waste facilities at locations where hazardous waste is produced and which are owned by, leased to, or under the control of the producer of the waste.

 

3.     All such facilities (i.e., off-site, on-site, household hazardous waste collection, and TTUs) shall obtain all necessary state licensing and Certified Unified Program Agencies (CUPA) approvals to install and operate.

 

4.     A conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility shall be granted for only those substances and quantities identified in the conditions of approval. No additional types of wastes or increases in the quantity of approved wastes shall be allowed beyond those specified in the approved permit, unless a separate application is made, which shall satisfy the same procedures and contents as those required in an initial application.

 

C.    Procedure. Applications for hazardous waste facilities as defined by this section shall follow the procedure specified by Article 8.7 of the State Health and Safety Code and Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions of the Zoning Ordinance pertaining to use permits.

 

D.    Application Requirements.

 

The information listed below is required at the time a hazardous waste facility application for an off-site facility is submitted to the Community Development Department:

 

1.     A complete development case application signed by the property owner or their authorized representative.

 

2.     A non-refundable deposit or fee as set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.

 

3.     Any deposit for technical assistance pursuant to Section 25199.7(g) of the State Health and Safety Code.

 

4.     A letter of justification describing the proposed project and explaining how it will satisfy the findings in Subsection J of this section.

 

5.     Information required for public meetings and hearings, as determined by the Community Development Director.

 

6.     A scaled, fully-dimensioned site plan and development plan drawn in sufficient detail to clearly describe the following:

 

a.     Physical dimensions of property and structures;

 

b.     Location of existing and proposed structures;

 

c.     Setbacks;

 

d.     Methods of circulation and location of truck routes;

 

e.     Ingress and egress;

 

f.      Utilization of property under the requested permit;

 

g.     The distance from the project property lines to the nearest residential structure;

 

h.     Proximity of the project to 100 year floodplain areas;

 

i.      Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones;

 

j.      The relationship of the proposed project to all aboveground water supplies, as well as known underground aquifers that could conceivably suffer contamination;

 

k.     Topographic description of the property and surrounding area;

 

l.      Existing and proposed utilities that service or will be needed to service the facility;

 

m.    Identification of surrounding zoning and land uses;

 

n.     Landscape plans showing theme and location of all landscape areas;

 

o.     Building elevations showing building height, exterior materials, and architectural theme; and

 

p.     Other information as required by the Community Development Director.

 

7.     A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area, which includes a soils analysis down to the depth of the deepest known aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers.

 

8.     Identification of all wastewater, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility and the method and place of final discharge.

 

9.     Identification of the amounts (tonnage) and types of hazardous wastes to be treated at the proposed facility; the sources of these wastes; the ultimate disposition of the wastes; and the anticipated life of the facility. Information shall be provided on the amount, sources, and types of hazardous wastes to be treated based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and, thereby, be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility.

 

10.   A plan that clearly delineates all public involvement with the proposed project prior to any formally advertised and scheduled public hearings. Said plan will provide for adequate public testimony on the project in an effort to mitigate all public concerns prior to the approval body reviewing the case.

 

11.   A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program to ensure no unintentional release of any hazardous substance from the site. This shall include any ongoing monitoring necessary by other permitting agencies such as State Department of Health Services, the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board, etc.

 

12.   A preliminary contingency plan for emergency procedures designed to minimize hazards to human health or the environment from fires, explosions, or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, or surface water. The plan shall provide for its immediate implementation whenever there is a fire, explosion, or release of hazardous waste constituents, which could threaten human health or the environment. The preliminary contingency plan shall address the requirements included in Subsection G.3.

 

13.   Other information as required by the Community Development Director to demonstrate compliance with the facility siting criteria as outlined in Subsection F.

 

E.    Environmental Review.

 

1.     The project shall be subject to environmental analysis according to the City’s environmental guidelines pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000-21177; 15000-15387).

 

2.     The environmental analysis shall address, but not be limited to, the following:

 

a.     Describe at least two reasonable alternative sites to the project; these alternatives shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act [Public Resources Code, Section 15060(d)].

 

b.     An analysis of visual, noise, and any olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures.

 

c.     An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area.

 

d.     A health and safety assessment that analyzes in detail all probabilities of accidents or spills at the site, as well as transportation-related accidents from the point of origin to the facility. Such analysis shall identify mitigation measures to reduce identified risks. The health and safety assessment shall identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous wastes to the facility within Alameda and, if applicable, Contra Costa or Santa Clara counties.

 

e.     An analysis of traffic impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures.

 

f.      An analysis of all anticipated water quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation to ensure no degradation of water quality in the area.

 

g.     Other information as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

 

F.     Facility Siting Criteria and Permitting Requirements.

 

The following siting criteria has been established for use by hazardous waste facility project proponents in locating and designing suitable facility sites and appropriate facilities and by the City in evaluating proposed sites and facility projects. The purpose of the criteria is to reduce public health and environmental risks and governmental costs associated with development of off-site hazardous waste facilities.

 

1.     Protect the Residents of Alameda County (and the City of San Leandro).

 

a.     Health and Safety Assessment.

 

i.      All Facilities. Facilities shall be sited so as not to create significant risks or cause adverse impacts to the health and safety of populations in surrounding public and private areas, as determined by a health and safety assessment. A health and safety assessment by a qualified preparer is required for a proposed facility prior to approval of a local permit, to provide technical and environmental evaluation of the proposed facility, site, and surrounding area. A health and safety assessment will provide the information and analysis needed to demonstrate compliance of the proposed facility with the siting criteria. The scope of the assessment will vary according to the size, type, and proposed location of the facility. It is not intended that the health and safety assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, state or federal regulations. When environmental impact reports and health risk assessments are required, their scopes should provide the information and analysis required, and, thereby, suffice for the health and safety assessment.

 

ii.     The health and safety assessment shall evaluate the potential impact of the proposed facility on existing and planned residences and immobile populations, at minimum, the buffer area prescribed by the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. Immobile populations include those in schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, jails, and other similar facilities within the area of potential impact. The health and safety assessment must consider the quantities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of waste that would be handled, the facility design features, and planned operations practices. The justification for any reduction in buffer areas of the facility from residential areas or immobile populations than that prescribed by the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan will be identified. The assessment must include a hydrologic evaluation and must assess risks due to physical hazards, such as flooding and earthquakes and potential water or air pollution. The assessment will detail credible potential accidents, including the distance over which effects would carry a variety of options for reducing risks, and procedures for dealing with the effects. The assessment will identify the capabilities (including equipment and trained personnel) and response times of existing emergency services with regard to accidents at the facility and will provide an emergency evacuation plan. If existing emergency services are deemed inadequate, the local agency may require the developer to supplement those services with on-site trained personnel and equipment.

 

iii.    Avoidance or mitigation of potential significant health or safety risks must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local permitting agency and the California Department of Health Services.

 

b.     Distance from Populations.

 

All Facilities. Facilities shall comply with local minimum Zoning Code setbacks, unless a greater buffer distance from other uses is deemed necessary based on a required health and safety assessment.

 

2.     Ensure the Structural Stability of the Facility.

 

a.     Floodplains.

 

i.      All Facilities. Facilities must be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to preclude failure due to flooding, per flood control authorities and requirements. Provisions must be made to contain and test storm runoff prior to discharge in areas subject to contamination by waste or treated material. The required health and safety assessment will address flooding risks associated with the facility.

 

ii.     Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities may be located in areas subject to 100 year flooding only if protected by offsetting engineered improvements, such as berms or raising the facility above flood levels. This includes areas subject to flooding by dam or levee failure and natural causes such as river flooding, flash floods, rainfall or snowmelt, tsunamis (tidal waves), seiches (earthquake-induced waves in lakes), and coastal flooding. A structural analysis or engineering design study must be provided which shows methods to prevent undulation or washout.

 

iii.    Residuals Repositories. Repositories are prohibited from locating in floodplain areas subject to 100 year flooding from natural causes or dam failure, even with protection, per Code of Federal Regulation (CFR), Title 40, Section 264.18(b) and California Administrative Code (CAC), Title 22, Section 66391(a)(11)(b).

 

b.     Earthquakes.

 

All Facilities. Facilities must have a minimum 200 foot setback from active or recently active earthquake faults, per the California Administrative Code (CAC), Title 22, Section 6391(a)(f11)A(1) and (2). The required health and safety assessment will address earthquake safety of the facility.

 

c.     Unstable Soils.

 

i.      Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change unless the facility and its containment structures have engineered design features to assure structural stability. This includes areas with unstable soils, steep slopes, and areas subject to liquefaction, subsidence, or other severe geologic constraints. The required health and safety assessment will include a geologic report defining any such constraints and engineered solutions.

 

ii.     Residual Repositories. Repositories are prohibited from locating in areas within 25 percent slope or greater or in areas subject to liquefaction or subsidence.

 

3.     Protect Surface and Groundwater Quality.

 

a.     Groundwater.

 

i.      All Facilities. Facilities shall be fully enclosed by containment structures of impermeable materials, which would contain any unauthorized release of hazardous material. Facilities shall be equipped with leak detection and spill control and recovery capability.

 

ii.     Facilities are also encouraged to locate outside of areas where groundwater is within 20 feet of the natural land surface. Facilities may locate in these areas only with increased engineered design features such as horizontal and vertical containment and monitoring systems to ensure protection. Subsurface storage or treatment operation is prohibited.

 

b.     Surface Water Quality.

 

All Facilities. Developers, Operators and Owners shall comply with the requirements of the Statewide General Stormwater Permits; the Municipal Regional Stormwater Permit and Alameda Countywide Clean Water Program requirements.

 

c.     Wastewater.

 

All Facilities. Facilities operating wastewater should locate in areas with adequate industrial sewer capacity. The quality of wastewater must meet all federal, state, and local sewering agency discharge requirements, and the facility must obtain a valid industrial wastewater discharge permit.

 

4.     Protect Air Quality.

 

a.     Air Quality Non-Attainment and PSD Areas.

 

All Facilities. Facilities may be sited in non-attainment and PSD (prevention of significant deterioration) areas only if they meet the requirements of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District. The required health and safety assessment will identify air emissions, impacts and mitigation associated with the facility.

 

5.     Protect Environmentally Sensitive Areas.

 

a.     Wetlands.

 

All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating in wetlands, such as salt-water, fresh water and brackish marshes, swamps and bogs, as defined in local regional and state plans and policies (generally, areas inundated by surface water or groundwater with a frequency to support, under normal circumstances, a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life, which requires saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction).

 

b.     Animal and Plant Habitats.

 

All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating within critical habitats of endangered species, defined as areas known to be inhabited permanently or seasonally or known to be critical at any stage in the life cycle of any species of wildlife or vegetation identified or being considered for identification as “endangered” or “threatened” by the U.S. Department of Interior or the State of California.

 

c.     Prime Agricultural Lands.

 

All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating on prime agricultural lands, as defined in California law and local plans, unless an overriding public need is served and demonstrated.

 

d.     Recreational, Cultural, and Aesthetic Resources.

 

i.      Small-Scale Transfer and Storage Facilities. Low-volume transfer and storage facilities may locate in protected, recreational, cultural, or aesthetic resource areas, as defined by local, regional, state, or national plans or policies, only if necessary to handle hazardous wastes generated by workers, residents, or visitors in these areas.

 

ii.     Industrial Facilities and Residuals Repositories. Facilities are prohibited from locating in protected recreational, cultural and aesthetic resource areas, as defined by local, regional, state, or national plans or policies.

 

e.     Mineral Resource Areas.

 

All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating on lands containing significant mineral deposits, as classified by local plans or California’s mineral land class maps and reports, if the extraction of the mineral deposit would be precluded.

 

6.     Ensure Safe Transportation of Hazardous Waste.

 

a.     Proximity to Waste Generation Areas.

 

i.      Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities shall locate in Light Industrial and General Industrial Districts at locations close to sources of hazardous waste generation to minimize the risks of transportation.

 

ii.     Residuals Repositories. Repositories may be located more distant from waste generation sources than other facilities because of the need for large land areas.

 

b.     Proximity and Access to Major Routes.

 

All Facilities. Facilities shall locate to minimize distance from major transportation routes. Facilities must have good access by roads designed to accommodate heavy vehicles. Travel routes from facilities to major transportation routes shall be on industrial streets, accessible to designated truck routes, not pass through residential neighborhoods, shall minimize residential frontages, and shall be demonstrated as safe with regard to road design and construction, accident rates, excessive traffic, etc. The required health and safety assessment will evaluate risks associated with transportation of hazardous wastes.

 

7.     Protect the Social and Economic Goals of the Community.

 

a.     Consistency with General Plan and Zoning.

 

All Facilities. Facilities must be consistent with local planning policies, including the City General Plan and zoning ordinance.

 

b.     Fiscal Impact.

 

All Facilities. A facility’s fiscal impact to the City, whether positive or negative, must be demonstrated.

 

c.     Socioeconomic Impacts.

 

All Facilities. The City may require the facility developer to fund an independent study on socioeconomic impacts of the facility.

 

d.     Proximity to Public Services.

 

All Facilities. Facilities shall be served by necessary public services, including but not necessarily limited to sewer, water, electricity, gas, and telephone. Potential adverse impacts which could occur because of proximity to public facilities shall be determined as a part of the risk assessment conducted in the permitting process. This should consider the physical and chemical characteristics of the wastes that will be handled and the design features of the facility. Proximity to other public facilities such as corporation yards, utilities, roads, and state school lands in remote areas may be acceptable. The response time from the nearest fire station shall also be considered.

 

e.     Consistency with Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

All Facilities. Facilities shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, and must demonstrate compliance with the siting criteria established by this section. Facilities shall be consistent with the fair-share principal, and with any inter-jurisdictional agreements on hazardous waste management. Local needs are to be the primary basis for facility siting criteria decisions, along with regional commitments; facilities are to be designed and sized primarily to meet the hazardous waste management needs of Alameda County, or to meet the county’s broader regional commitments under an inter-jurisdictional agreement.

 

G.    Special Development Requirements.

 

1.     General Conditions.

 

The City may impose conditions on the granting of a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility in order to achieve the purposes of this Chapter and the General Plan and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community.

 

2.     Safety and Security.

 

a.     The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry and minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry of persons or livestock onto any portion of the facility.

 

b.     The operator shall provide a 24-hour surveillance system (e.g., television monitoring or surveillance by guards or facility personnel), which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility.

 

c.     An artificial or natural barrier (e.g., a wall or a wall combined with a landscaped berm) shall be constructed to completely surround the facility.

 

d.     All gates or other entrances into the facility shall be provided with adequate means to control entry at all times. Signs with the legend, “Danger - Hazardous Waste Area - Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out,” shall be posted at each entrance to the facility and at other locations in sufficient numbers to be seen from any approach. The legend shall be written in English, Spanish, and any language predominant in the area surrounding the facility and shall be legible from a distance of at least 25 feet. Existing signs with a legend other than “Danger - Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out” may be used if the legend on the sign indicates that only authorized personnel are allowed to enter the active portion and that entry onto the active portion can be dangerous.

 

3.     Contingency Plan.

 

a.     The hazardous waste facility is required to have a contingency plan designed to minimize hazards to human health and the environment from fires, explosions, or unplanned release of hazardous waste to air, soil, or surface water. The plan shall be carried out immediately whenever a fire, explosion, or unplanned release occurs.

 

b.     The contingency plan shall include:

 

i.      The actions employees must take in response to a fire, explosion, or unplanned release of hazardous waste.

 

ii.     Arrangements agreed to by local emergency response officials.

 

iii.    The names, addresses, and telephone numbers (office and home) of all persons qualified to act as emergency coordinator. [If more than one name is listed, the order in which they may assume authority shall be given, with one person designated as primary coordinator.] The emergency coordinator shall be available to respond to all emergency response measures. The emergency coordinator shall be familiar with all aspects of the contingency plan, all operations and activities of the facility, the location and characteristics of wastes handled, and general facility layout. The emergency coordinator shall have the authority to commit the resources needed to carry out the contingency plan.

 

iv.    A listing of all emergency equipment at the facility, including its location and an outline of its capabilities.

 

v.     An evacuation plan for employees where evacuation may be necessary, including signals used to begin evacuation, primary evacuation routes, and alternate routes.

 

c.     Facility emergency coordinator responsibilities shall be identified in the contingency plan to include, at minimum, the following:

 

i.      In the event of a fire, explosion, or release of any hazardous material, the emergency coordinator shall immediately activate facility alarms to notify employees and shall contact appropriate state or local emergency response agencies.

 

ii.     In the event of a fire, explosion, or release of any hazardous material, the emergency coordinator shall immediately identify the character, exact source, amount, and aerial extent of any released materials. Concurrently, the emergency coordinator shall assess possible hazards, both direct and indirect, to human health or the environment that may result from the emergency.

 

iii.    If the emergency coordinator determines that the facility has had a release, fire, or explosion which could threaten human health and the environment outside the facility, the emergency coordinator shall report his or her findings as per the following Subsections 4 and 5.

 

iv.    If evacuation is necessary, local officials shall be so notified.

 

v.     The emergency coordinator shall in every situation notify the State Office of Emergency Services and the Alameda County Fire Department, providing the following information:

 

(a)   Name and telephone of person reporting;

 

(b)   Name and address of facility;

 

(c)    Time and type of incident;

 

(d)   Name and quantity of material(s) involved;

 

(e)   Extent of injuries; and

 

(f)    Possible hazard to human health and the environment outside facility.

 

vi.    During the emergency, the emergency coordinator shall take all reasonable measures to ensure that fires, explosions, and releases do not occur or spread, including such measures as:

 

(a)   Stopping operations;

 

(b)   Collecting and containing released waste; and

 

(c)    Removing or isolating containers.

 

vii.   If the facility stops operations during an emergency, the emergency coordinator shall monitor for leaks, pressure build-up, gas generation, or ruptures in valves, pipes or other equipment as appropriate.

 

viii.  Immediately after an emergency, the emergency coordinator shall provide for treating, storing or disposing of recovered waste, contaminated soil or surface water, or any other material resulting from a release, fire, or explosion.

 

ix.    Other activities required of the emergency coordinator after an emergency are:

 

(a)   No wastes incompatible with the released material is handled until cleanup is completed; and

 

(b)   Emergency equipment is cleaned and ready for use before operations are resumed.

 

d.     Owner/operator responsibilities shall be identified in the contingency plan to include, at minimum, the following:

 

i.      Notify the State Department of Health Services and appropriate state and local authorities that the above requirements have been met before operations are resumed in the affected area.

 

ii.     Record the time, date and details of any incident, which requires implementing the contingency plan.

 

iii.    Within 15 days, submit a written report on the incident to the State Department of Health Services. The report shall include:

 

(a)   Name, address and telephone number of owner/operator;

 

(b)   Name, address and telephone number of the facility;

 

(c)    Date, time, and type of incident;

 

(d)   Name and quantity of materials involved;

 

(e)   Extent of injuries;

 

(f)    Assessment of actual or potential hazards to human health or the environment, where applicable; and

 

(g)   An estimate of the quantity of material recovered and its disposition.

 

iv.    A copy of the contingency plan shall be maintained at the facility. A copy shall be sent to City of San Leandro Hazardous Materials Division, surrounding hospitals, Alameda County Health Care Agency, and other regulatory agencies as deemed appropriate.

 

v.     The contingency plan shall be reviewed and amended when any of the following occur:

 

(a)   The facility permit is revised.

 

(b)   Applicable regulations are revised.

 

(c)    The plan fails in an emergency.

 

(d)   Operations at the facility change in a way that materially increases the potential of fire, explosion, or unplanned release of hazardous waste.

 

(e)   The list of emergency coordinators changes.

 

(f)    The list of emergency equipment changes.

 

4.     Monitoring.

 

a.     Upon reasonable notice, the City, their designated representatives of other agencies, may enter a parcel on which a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility has been granted for the purpose of monitoring the operation of the facility.

 

b.     All structures shall remain accessible for inspection purposes.

 

5.     Closure Plan.

 

The owner or operator of a hazardous waste management facility shall submit a written closure plan. A copy of the approved plan and all revisions to the plan shall be kept at the facility until closure is completed. The plan shall identify steps necessary to completely or partially close the facility at the end of its intended operating life. The closure plan shall include at least:

 

a.     A description of how and when the facility will be partially closed, if applicable, and finally closed. The description shall identify the maximum extent of the operation that will be open during the life of the facility.

 

b.     An estimate of the maximum inventory of wastes in storage and in treatment at any time during the life of the facility.

 

c.     A description of the steps needed to decontaminate facility equipment during closure.

 

d.     An estimate of the expected year of closure and a schedule for final closure. The schedule shall include, at a minimum, the initial time required to close the facility and the time required for intervening closure activities, which will allow tracking of the progress of closure.

 

The owner or operator may amend his or her closure plan at any time during the active life of the facility. (The active life of the facility is that period during which wastes are periodically received.) The owner or operator shall amend the plan whenever changes in operating plans or facility design affect the closure plan or whenever there is a change in the expected year of closure. When the owner or operator requests a permit modification to authorize a change in operating plans or facility design, a modification of the closure plan shall be requested at the same time.

 

e.     The plan shall clearly indicate an effective and ongoing use for the facility after closure. The plan will identify how the subject property will be used after the anticipated life of the project, the nature and type of reclamation, provisions for maintenance of the project, and, finally, the requirements for long-term monitoring of the reclaimed area to ensure no hazardous materials are leaking from the site.

 

f.      The plan shall indicate financial arrangements (irrevocable trust or other form of security arrangement) for the purpose of providing funds for the closure of its site and its long-term, post-closure monitoring maintenance, per Subsection H.3 below.

 

H.    Financial Responsibility.

 

The owner/operator shall show proof of liability insurance as follows:

 

1.     The types, amounts, periods of coverage, and provisions for periodic review as to adequacy of coverage shall be specified in the conditions of approval. Required insurance shall include, but not be limited to: general liability insurance, automotive liability insurance, environmental impairment liability insurance, and architect’s and engineer’s professional liability insurance.

 

All such insurance shall name the City as an additional insured and shall be maintained for the life of the site and such additional periods as shall be specified in the conditions of approval.

 

2.     Additionally, coverage will be provided for workers compensation insurance and such other insurance as may be required. Said insurance will name the City as either additional insured or as an additional loss payee. Certificates of insurance will be submitted to the City annually.

 

3.     An irrevocable trust will be established to provide funds for closure of the site and its long-term post-closure and monitoring and maintenance. Funds for this trust would be provided by the owner/operator of the facility quarterly, based on quantity and types of percentage of gross income. The terms of the trust would be as agreed upon by the project owner/operator and the City. The terms will be reviewed annually in regards to the amount of funds in the trust and anticipated closure monitoring and maintenance costs. Applicants shall provide a bond in an amount to be determined by the City for purposes of closure of the site.

 

4.     The owner/operator shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, servants, and employees, from all claims, actions, or liabilities arising out of the issuance of this permit, operations at the facility, and transportation of wastes to and from the facility.

 

I.      Local Assessment Committee (LAC).

 

1.     Pursuant to Section 25199.7 (d) of the State Health and Safety Code, the City Council shall appoint a seven member Local Assessment Committee (LAC). The membership, responsibilities, and duties shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 25199.7 of the State Health and Safety Code. The LAC shall cease to exist after the final administrative action has been taken by the state and local agencies on the permit applications for the project for which the LAC was formed.

 

2.     The City Council shall provide staff resources to assist the LAC in performing its duties. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(3) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

 

3.     If the LAC and the applicant cannot resolve any differences through the meetings specified by state law, Office of Permit Assistance (OPA) may assist in this resolution pursuant to Section 25199.4 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(h) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

 

J.     Hearings and Notice.

 

Hearings and public notices shall be consistent with the applicable requirements of Article 8.7 of the State Health and Safety Code and Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions, of the City of San Leandro Zoning Ordinance.

 

K.    Findings.

 

In order for the Board of Zoning Adjustments to approve a hazardous waste facility application, the Board must act on this application prior to approving a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall find that:

 

1.     The project is consistent with the City’s General Plan and zoning ordinance.

 

2.     The project is not detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare of the community.

 

3.     The project site is or will be adequately served by roads and other public or private service facilities.

 

4.     The project is consistent with the regional fair-share facility needs assessment and siting policies established in the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

 

5.     The project complies with the facility siting criteria per Subsection F of this section.

 

L.     Appeal.

 

An applicant or an interested person may file an appeal of a land-use decision made by the City to the Governor’s Appeal Board within thirty (30) days after the date the City takes final action on the land-use decision pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 25199.9. Procedures for filing an appeal are outlined in Section 25199.14 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

M.    Time Limits.

 

1.     A conditional use permit granted for an off-site hazardous waste facility shall be exercised within two years from the effective date thereof, or within such additional time as may be set in the conditions of approval, which shall not exceed a total of seven years; otherwise, the permit shall be null and void. The term “exercised” shall mean the beginning of substantial construction of the use that is authorized, which construction must thereafter be pursued diligently to completion.

 

2.     Permit review and renewal shall be determined at the time of approval and shall not exceed five years.

 

N.    Household Hazardous Waste Collection Facilities.

 

Household hazardous waste collection facilities which meets the requirements of Article 10.8 of the State Health and Safety Code shall meet the requirements of this section provided that the Community Development Director may exempt informational or analysis requirements of Subsections D, F, and G where the data are determined to be nonessential for the approval of the permit.

 

O.    Conflicts with Industrial Zone Standards.

 

Where conflicts in standards and requirements may exist between this section and Chapter 2.12 I Industrial Districts, the provisions of this section shall take precedence.

 

P.    Severability.

 

In the event that any one or more of the phrases, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or sections contained in this ordinance shall be declared invalid or unenforceable by a valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or sections of this ordinance which are hereby declared as several and shall be interpreted to carry out the intent hereunder. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.376 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
 

A.    Title, Purpose and Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be known as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities regulations. The purpose and intent of these regulations are to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development, location, siting, design and installation of wireless telecommunications facilities. These regulations are intended to balance the needs of the wireless communications providers, the regulatory functions of the City of San Leandro, the mandates of State and Federal law and the potential impacts on the community and neighboring property owners in the design and siting of wireless facilities. The regulations are designed to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and visual quality of the City of San Leandro while encouraging the appropriate development of telecommunications activities and site sharing throughout the City. These regulations shall apply to telecommunications projects.

 

B.    Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, as they relate to wireless telecommunications facilities:

 

1.     “Alternative tower structure” shall mean stealth facilities like freestanding support structures, man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers so that the purpose of the freestanding facility or structure is not readily apparent to the casual observer.

 

2.     “Antenna” shall mean any communications equipment that transmits and receives radio-frequency signals used in the provision of all types of wireless telecommunications services.

 

3.     “Architecturally-integrated” shall mean that the wireless telecommunications facility is designed to closely blend into the surrounding environment and to be minimally visible to the casual observer (i.e., stealth). Antennas and related equipment are either not readily visible beyond the property on which it is located, or if visible, appear to be part of the existing building or environment rather than a wireless facility. The wireless facility may be incorporated into a building’s architectural features, such as a steeple, parapet wall, clock tower, flagpole, cupola, chimney, vent pipe or light standard or be screened by an equipment screen or other equally suitable method. It may include alternative tower structures, such as freestanding flagpoles, treepoles, windmills, signs and similar support structures that conceal the presence of a wireless facility within that structure. Related equipment shall be designed to match the architecture of adjacent buildings and/or be screened from public view by walls, fences, parapets, landscaping, and similar treatments.

 

4.     “Base station” shall mean the equipment and non-tower supporting structure or enclosure at a fixed location that enables licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications between user equipment and a communications network, including, but not limited to, an antenna, transceiver, coaxial cable, power supply and other associated equipment.

 

5.     “Co-location” shall mean the location of two or more wireless telecommunications facilities on a single existing, previously-approved tower, building, or other support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. Co-locations that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing support structure as defined herein and by Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Jobs Creation Act of 2012 may be processed through an eligible facilities request to the Community Development Department.

 

6.     “Eligible facilities request” shall mean any request for the modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that involves: (a) co-location of new transmission equipment; (b) removal of transmission equipment; or (c) replacement of transmission equipment pursuant to Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012. Such a request to the Community Development Department shall show the baseline height and width of the existing facility in relation to the proposed changes to demonstrate that the proposed changes do not result in a substantial modification to the physical dimensions of the existing support structure (i.e., a maximum increase of 10 percent surface area in antennas and related equipment).

 

7.     “FAA” shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.

 

8.     “FCC” shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.

 

9.     “Governing authority” shall mean the City Council of the City of San Leandro.

 

10.   “Ground-mounted facility” shall mean a wireless telecommunications facility consisting of one or more poles or posts mounted on the ground that are used to support antennas. Any ground-mounted facility that is over 15 feet in height shall be considered a monopole.

 

11.   “Height” shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.

 

12.   “Maintenance” shall mean the following: (a) scheduled preventive inspections and activities per manufacturer’s instructions or regulatory requirements; (b) corrective maintenance including modification to existing equipment to repair physical damage or correct internal faults; (c) minor repositioning or changes in internal components to improve performance or energy efficiency or increase power output; and (d) other changes to the existing equipment that does not substantially change its physical appearance.

 

13.   “Minor modification” shall mean a change to an existing wireless telecommunications facility, whether emergency or routine, provided there is little or no change in the visual appearance (i.e., a maximum increase of 10 percent surface area in antennas and related equipment) and does not constitute a substantial modification, as defined herein (see Subsection B.16 Substantial modification). Minor modifications are those modifications to conforming wireless telecommunications facilities that meet the performance standards set forth in these regulations.

 

14.   “Monopole” shall mean a single, freestanding pole, treepole, flagpole, post, tower or alternative tower structure over 15 feet in height that is used to support equipment associated with a wireless telecommunications facility.

 

15.   “Pre-existing wireless telecommunications facility” shall mean any wireless telecommunications facility for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section and shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of Subsection C.4 Exclusions: Pre-Existing Wireless Telecommunications Facility. Any such facility shall be referred to in this section as “pre-existing wireless telecommunications facility.”

 

16.   “Substantial modification” shall mean substantially changing the physical dimensions of a tower or base station on an existing wireless telecommunications facility, such that it meets one or more of the following criteria:

 

a.     Height. Increases the existing vertical height by more than 10 percent for towers other than towers in the public right-of-way or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this paragraph if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas.

 

For other, eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater.

 

b.     Width. Involves adding an appurtenance to the silhouette of a tower for towers other than towers in the public right-of-way that would protrude horizontally from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, as seen from an elevation perspective, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this paragraph if necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable.

 

For other, eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet.

 

c.     Equipment Cabinets. Involves the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets necessary for the technology involved, not to exceed four cabinets; or for towers and base stations in the public right-of-way, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure.

 

d.     Excavation/Deployment Beyond Site. Involves any excavation or deployment outside the current site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site; and for other, eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

 

17.   “Tower” shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more wireless telecommunications facilities, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, utility poles, treepoles, monopoles, alternative tower structures, or architecturally-integrated facilities. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, and certain co-locations not otherwise governed by Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.

 

18.   “Wireless telecommunications facility” shall mean a commercial facility that is licensed by the FCC to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or radio-frequency waves, including, but not limited to, towers, existing tower structures, monopoles, utility poles, alternative tower structures, co-locations, architecturally-integrated facilities, antennas, and distributed antenna systems. It includes all related equipment which is ancillary to the transmission and reception of a wireless telecommunications facility, including, but not limited to, coaxial cable, electrical and telco conduit and connectors, electrical meters, equipment cabinets, and equipment compounds and shelters. Amateur radio operators are not included in this definition.

 

C.    Exclusions. The following activities shall be exempt from these regulations:

 

1.     District Height Limitations. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location of wireless telecommunications facilities that exceed and that are installed at a height in excess of the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to wireless telecommunications facilities.

 

2.     Public Property. Wireless telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City or by any other government-operated public safety network shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a license or lease authorizing such facility has been approved by the City.

 

3.     Amateur Radio: Receive-Only Antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is less than 10 feet in height above the district height limit and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur (“ham”) radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.

 

4.     Pre-Existing Wireless Telecommunications Facility. Any wireless telecommunications facility for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of Subsection F. Any such facilities shall be referred to in this section as “pre-existing wireless telecommunications facilities.” Any nonconforming facilities may continue to be operated, repaired, and maintained but shall not be enlarged, expanded, relocated, or modified in any material manner, as determined within the reasonable discretion of the Community Development Department.

 

5.     Satellite Antenna. This section shall not apply to any satellite antenna placed in residential zones that is one meter or less in diameter nor to any other satellite antenna located in any other zone that is two meters or less in diameter.

 

6.     Exempted by State and/or Federal Regulations. The Community Development Department may grant an exception to any requirement of this section upon making findings that: (a) strict compliance precludes the reasonable accommodation of the communication needs of the operator as set forth in State and/or Federal rules and regulations; (b) there are no other feasible alternatives; and (c) either State or Federal rules and regulations requires the Department to issue the exception or that the exception will serve the public interest despite conflict with the mandatory standards herein.

 

D.    Restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to wireless telecommunications facilities:

 

1.     No new unscreened wireless telecommunications facility shall be permitted 300 feet or less away from any residential property line or residential zoning district boundary. 

 

E.    General Guidelines and Requirements. All wireless telecommunications facilities must comply with the following except when impractical or technologically infeasible. The burden shall be on the applicant to provide evidence as part of the application showing why and how complying with these standards would be impractical or technologically infeasible.

 

1.     Principal or Accessory Use. Wireless telecommunications facilities may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a wireless telecommunications facility on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a wireless telecommunications facility complies with zoning district development regulations, including, but not limited to, set-back requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the wireless telecommunications facility may be located on leased parcels within such lots.

 

2.     Co-Location. All new wireless telecommunications facilities shall co-locate with other existing or with planned new wireless telecommunications facilities whenever feasible and when doing so will minimize potential visual impacts. Co-locations shall be processed in accordance with the prevailing State and/or Federal rules and regulations.

 

F.     Specific Design Criteria. The following design standards shall govern the siting, design and location of all wireless telecommunications facilities; provided, however, that the Board of Zoning Adjustments may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this section are better served thereby.

 

1.     Freestanding Towers and Ground-Mounted Facilities.

 

a.     Freestanding towers and ground-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted a neutral color, as determined by the City, so as to reduce visual impacts and blend into the landscape or visual backdrop against which they will be seen to the greatest extent possible, unless otherwise required by the FAA.

 

b.     Freestanding and ground-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall incorporate camouflaging techniques, such as alternative tower structures, wherever feasible and shall be located in areas where existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening to minimize visual impacts.

 

c.     Alternative tower structures, such as treepoles shall incorporate enough architectural branches (including density, needle count and vertical height), three (3) dimensional bark cladding, and other design materials or appropriate techniques to cause the structure to appear as a natural element of the environment. Treepoles shall be integrated into the surrounding environment through the planting of trees and/or shrubs distributed around the entire facility to appear as a naturally occurring or integrated landscape element.

 

d.     Alternative tower structures, such as flag poles shall be tapered to maintain the appearance of an actual flag pole. A flag shall be flown from the wireless facility and properly lighted and maintained at all times, in accordance with the U.S. Flag Code.

 

e.     Freestanding towers and ground-mounted facility sites shall incorporate ancillary buildings and equipment, such as equipment shelters that, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the facilities to the natural setting and built environment.

 

f.      Freestanding towers and ground-mounted facilities shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority or unless they contain a U.S. Flag. If lighting is required, the Zoning Enforcement Official may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Any exterior lighting shall be manually operated or on an automatic timer and used only during night, during periods of maintenance or during an emergency situation, unless otherwise required by applicable Federal law. Lighting shall be shielded or directed to minimize glare as viewed from off-site locations.

 

g.     Freestanding towers and alternative tower structures shall incorporate coaxial cable and electrical and telco conduits inside the pole structure and underground, whenever feasible.

 

2.     Building-Mounted Facilities.

 

a.     Building-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall be architecturally-integrated into the building design and otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible, whenever feasible. Antennas shall be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to be completely screened from view. Where feasible, antennas can be placed directly above, below or incorporated with the vertical design elements of a building and painted to match the background color of the building to help in camouflaging the facility. (See Subsection B.3: Definitions: Architecturally-Integrated.)

 

b.     Building-mounted designs shall ensure that the antenna(s) and ancillary equipment, such as cable trays and coaxial cables and electrical and telco conduits are located within existing building walls, whenever feasible, or inside cable trays painted a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the background color of the supporting building or structure so as to make them as visually unobtrusive as possible. All ancillary equipment shall be sited and designed to appear as an integral part of the building or structure. (See Subsection B.3: Definitions: Architecturally-Integrated.)

 

c.     Building-mounted and roof-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities, including any screening devices, may not exceed a height of 15 feet above the roof or parapet, whichever is higher, of the building on which it is mounted unless approved through a Conditional Use Permit.

 

d.     Building-mounted and roof-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities located on the façade of the building parapet or rooftop penthouse shall be painted and/or textured to match the background color of the existing structure. Façade-mounted or flush-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall not extend more than 24 inches out from the building face. If a building-mounted wireless telecommunications facility is mounted flush against a building wall, the color and material of the antenna and other equipment shall match the exterior of the building. If there is a discernible gap between the antenna and the façade, the antenna shall be screened so as to hide the gap.

 

e.     Roof-mounted antennas and associated equipment shall maintain a 1:1 ratio (i.e., a 10 foot high antenna requires a 10 foot setback from façade; a six foot high cabinet requires a six foot setback from façade) and shall be located as far back from the edge of the roof as is technically feasible in order to minimize visibility from residences, public rights-of-way and significant view corridors. Where appropriate, construction of a rooftop parapet or wall to hide the antenna or equipment may be required to minimize visual impacts. Roof-mounted facilities shall also be screened from above, if visible from adjacent properties.

 

f.      Building-mounted facilities and support structures may not be illuminated unless specifically required by the FAA or other governmental agencies.

 

3.     Equipment.

 

a.     The ancillary equipment, associated with the base station, such as equipment cabinets, shelters and compounds, for all wireless telecommunications facilities shall use materials, colors and textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the equipment into the natural setting and built environment as much as possible.

 

b.     Related equipment for co-located wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located within an existing equipment enclosure or compound, whenever feasible, or located as close to the existing equipment enclosure or compound as possible and shall match the materials, color, and texture of the existing enclosure as much as possible.

 

4.     Noise. Wireless telecommunications facilities operating in excess of the maximum sound levels permitted by the City’s Noise Ordinance shall be enclosed to achieve compliance with the Noise Ordinance. Back-up generators or similar equipment that operates only during power outages or other emergencies are exempt from this requirement. Testing of such back-up generators or similar equipment may only occur during standard daytime hours.

 

5.     Dimensions. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be no greater in diameter or any other cross-sectional dimension than is reasonably necessary for the proper functioning and physical support of the facility and future co-location of additional wireless telecommunications facilities.

 

6.     Security Fencing. Freestanding wireless telecommunications facilities and alternative tower structures shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height. Such facilities shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, provided however, that the Zoning Enforcement Official may waive such requirements, as appropriate. Chain-link fencing material is only permitted in association with a wireless telecommunications facility in an industrial zone where the fence is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent non-industrial zone. Preferred fencing materials shall consist of wood, tubular steel or other architecturally-appropriate fencing material.

 

7.     Landscaping. Facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the facility from adjacent off-site properties. Wireless telecommunications facilities adjacent to residential uses shall incorporate landscaping that will maximize screening of the site from those residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least five feet wide outside the perimeter of the facility to provide a visual buffer of any ground-mounted ancillary equipment. These requirements may be waived by the Zoning Enforcement Official if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. Consideration shall also be given to the fact that vegetation can impede radio-frequency signals.

 

8.     Signage. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall post a sign in a readily visible location identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency. No signs, flags, banners, or any form of advertising shall be attached to a wireless telecommunications facility except for government-required certifications, warnings, or other required seals or signs.

 

9.     Federal and State Requirements. All wireless telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, the California Public Utilities Commission and any other agency of the Federal or State government with the authority to regulate wireless telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the wireless telecommunications facilities governed by this section shall bring such wireless telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling Federal or State agency. Failure to bring wireless telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the wireless telecommunications facilities at the owner’s expense.

 

 

Table 1. Table Summarizing the Review Process for a
Wireless Telecommunications Facility based on the Zoning District

Zoning Districts

New Monopoles and Towers

Architecturally-Integrated Antennas

Co-Locations & Modifications to Existing Tower Structures*

R Residential Districts

RD  Residential Duplex

NP

AR

AR

RM  Residential Multi-Family

NP

AR

AR

RO Residential Outer

NP

AR

AR

RS  Residential Single-Family

NP

AR

AR

Commercial and Professional Districts

CC Community Commercial

CUP

P

P

CN Community Neighborhood

CUP

AR

AR

CR Community Recreation

CUP

P

P

C-RM Community Regional Mall

CUP

P

P

CS Community Services

CUP

P

P

DA-1 Downtown Area 1

CUP

AR

AR

DA-2 Downtown Area 2

CUP

AR

AR

DA-3 Downtown Area 3

NP

AR

AR

DA-4 Downtown Area 4

NP

AR

AR

DA-6 Downtown Area 6

NP

AR

AR

NA-1 North Area 1

CUP

AR

AR

NA-2 North Area 2

CUP

AR

AR

P Professional

CUP

AR

AR

SA-1 South Area 1

CUP

AR

AR

SA-2 South Area 2

NP

AR

AR

SA-3 South Area 3

CUP

AR

AR

I Industrial Districts

IG Industrial General

AR

P

P

IG(AU) District

AR

P

P

IL Industrial Limited

AR

P

P

IL(AU) District

AR

P

P

IP Industrial Park

AR

P

P

IP(AU) District

AR

P

P

IT Industrial Transition

AR

P

P

OS Open Space District and PS Public and Semipublic Districts

OS Open Space

CUP

AR

AR

PS Public & Semipublic

CUP

AR

AR

Table abbreviations: P-Permitted, AR-Administrative Review, NP-Not Permitted, CUP-Conditional Use Permit.

 

*      Co-locations that meet the standards set forth by Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act may submit an eligible facilities request to Community Development.

 

G.    Permitted Uses. The wireless telecommunications facilities listed as “P” in Table 1 are deemed to be permitted uses in certain zoning districts, such as the CC, CS, CR, C-RM, IL, IL(AU), IG, IG(AU), IP, and IP(AU) Districts. These permitted wireless telecommunications facilities are to be architecturally-integrated or co-located on an existing tower or other support structure. Permitted uses shall not require discretionary review unless the applicant seeks a modification of the basic development standards set forth herein. Permitted uses shall comply with the general requirements of Subsection F, “Specific Design Criteria” as well as building permit requirements.

 

H.    Administrative Review Applications. The wireless telecommunications facilities listed as “AR” in Table 1 are deemed to be allowable uses with an Administrative Review approval in certain zoning districts. New monopoles and towers are allowable uses in the IG, IG(AU), IL, IL(AU), IP, IP(AU), and IT Districts with an Administrative Review approval. Architecturally-integrated facilities are allowed in the RD, RO, RM, RS, CN, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, P, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, SA-3, OS and PS Districts. Co-locations not otherwise governed by Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 are allowed in the RD, RM, RO, RS, CN, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, NA-1, NA-2, P, SA-1, SA-2, SA-3, OS and PS Districts. Administrative Review applications shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official, unless the Zoning Enforcement Official defers action to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. Administrative Review approvals shall comply with the general requirements of Subsection F: Specific Design Criteria, as well as building permit requirements.

 

1.     The Planning Division shall respond to each Administrative Review application within 30 days after deeming the application complete by either approving or denying the application. If the Planning Division fails to notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of application submittal, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.

 

2.     If an Administrative Review application is denied by the Zoning Enforcement Official, the applicant may appeal said denial to the Board of Zoning Adjustments.

 

3.     A decision by the Board of Zoning Adjustments may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals of the Zoning Code.

 

I.      Conditional Use Permit Applications. The wireless telecommunications facilities listed as “CUP” in Table 1 are deemed to be allowed by a Conditional Use Permit approval in certain zoning districts. New monopoles and towers are allowed with a Conditional Use Permit in the CC, CN, CR, C-RM, CS, DA-1, DA-2, NA-1, NA-2, P, SA-1, SA-3, OS and PS Districts. Conditional Use Permits shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Zoning Adjustments. Conditional Uses shall comply with the general requirements of Subsection F: Specific Design Criteria, Subsections J.11 to J.13, as well as building permit requirements.

 

1.     The Planning Division shall respond to each Conditional Use Permit application in writing within 30 days after deeming the application complete. If the Planning Division fails to respond to the applicant within 30 days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.

 

2.     If a Conditional Use Permit application is denied by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, it may be appealed to the City Council.

 

J.     Application Requirements. Each applicant requesting an Administrative Review under this section shall submit the following:

 

1.     A scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, tower dimensions of antennas, ancillary equipment and antenna support structures, setbacks, ingress and egress, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the Planning Division or Board of Zoning Adjustments to be necessary to assess compliance with this section.

 

2.     A completed planning application.

 

3.     A signed letter of authorization from the underlying property owner.

 

4.     Photo-simulations of the proposed facility that identifies potential visual impacts. Consideration should be given to views from nearby residential areas, public rights-of-way, parks and open space, and other public viewshed areas.

 

5.     Manufacturer’s specification sheets for the proposed antennas and ancillary equipment.

 

6.     Photographs of the existing site conditions, as well as the surrounding land uses.

 

7.     A copy of the carrier’s current FCC license.

 

8.     A stamped and signed radio-frequency report prepared by a qualified engineer.

 

9.     A written description of the proposed project, including a description of the type of proposed installation and the location and dimensions of the proposed antennas, antenna support structures, and all ancillary equipment.

 

10.   For treepoles, provide bark cladding and branch with leaf/needle samples for review and selection.

 

In addition to the requirements listed above, each applicant submitting a Conditional Use Permit application under this section shall submit the following additional application materials:

 

11.   A five year master plan, drawn to a reasonable scale, for all of the applicant’s existing, planned or reasonably anticipated wireless telecommunications facility locations within the jurisdiction of the City or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, indicating the service area covered by each such facility and including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility.

 

12.   An alternatives analysis that demonstrates what other sites were considered by the carrier within the coverage area.

 

13.   Radio-Frequency Emissions. Within 30 calendar days of activation of the facility, the applicant shall submit a Radio-Frequency Compliance Report demonstrating that the facility meets the FCC standards for radio-frequency emissions. This report is required in order to verify compliance with prevailing standards for public exposure and will be prepared by a qualified engineer. Such documentation shall include the following:

 

a.     The make and model (or other identifying information) of the equipment tested;

 

b.     The date and time of the inspection and the methodology used to make the determination;

 

c.     The name and title of the person(s) conducting the tests, and a certification that the unit is properly installed and working within applicable FCC standards;

 

d.     Documentation indicating that cumulative levels of radio-frequency emissions from the wireless telecommunications facility and all co-located wireless telecommunications facilities are in compliance with FCC standards, including, but not limited to, FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio-frequency Electromagnetic Fields, as amended;

 

e.     If the documentation demonstrates that the cumulative levels of radio-frequency emissions exceed or may exceed FCC standards, the Zoning Enforcement Official may require the applicant to modify the location or design of the wireless telecommunications facility and/or implement other mitigation measures to ensure compliance with FCC standards. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require additional independent technical evaluation of the wireless telecommunications facility, at the applicant’s sole expense, to ensure compliance with FCC standards.

 

K.    Factors Considered in Evaluating Applications. The City shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve an application although the City may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the City concludes that the goals of this Ordinance are better served thereby, or if the submittal is eligible under Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.

 

1.     Height of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

 

2.     Proximity of the facility to residential structures, residential property lines, residential district boundaries, and elementary schools.

 

3.     Visual and other potential impacts to surrounding land uses.

 

4.     Surrounding topography.

 

5.     Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.

 

6.     Design of the facility with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual impacts.

 

7.     Existing and proposed parking, as well as site ingress and egress.

 

8.     Availability of suitable existing towers, buildings and structures that would provide site sharing and co-location opportunities in the project vicinity.

 

L.     Availability of Suitable Co-Locations. No new monopole or tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that no existing or planned tower, alternative tower structure, building or structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna(s). Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, alternative tower structure, building, or structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

 

1.     No existing towers, alternative tower support structures, building-mounted or roof-mounted, or architecturally-integrated wireless telecommunications facilities or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant’s coverage objectives.

 

2.     Existing wireless telecommunications facilities are not of sufficient height to meet applicant’s coverage objectives.

 

3.     Existing wireless telecommunications facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna(s) and related equipment. The City may, at its discretion, require the applicant to submit a structural report prepared by a qualified engineer as verification.

 

4.     The applicant’s proposed wireless telecommunications facility would cause radio-frequency interference with an existing facility, or the existing facility would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

 

5.     The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing wireless telecommunications facilities unsuitable.

 

M.    Discontinued Facilities and Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such facility shall remove same, and restore the site to its pre-installation condition, within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Community Development Department Director notifying the owner of such abandonment. The notice shall specify that the owner has the opportunity to request a public hearing on the removal of the facility. If such facility is not removed within said 90 days, the Community Development Director may remove such facility at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.

 

Any wireless telecommunications facility shall be removed within 30 calendar days of the discontinuation of the use and shall be restored to its previous condition. The service provider shall provide the Community Development Department with a notice of intent to vacate the site a minimum of 30 calendar days prior to vacation and shall obtain building permits prior to removal of equipment. For facilities located on City property, this requirement shall be included in the terms of the lease. For facilities located on other sites, the property owner shall be responsible for removal of all antennas, structures and related equipment within 30 calendar days of the discontinuation of use. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.04.380 Community Gardens
 

A.    Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards, land-use regulations and a permit process for controlling the location, design, and maintenance of Community Gardens.

 

B.    Site Criteria and Permitting Requirements. The following siting criteria has been established for use by community garden project proponents in locating and designing suitable garden sites. The purpose of the criteria is to reduce public health and reduction of potential nuisance issues. Community gardens are subject to the following regulations, and the following physical and operational standards shall apply:

 

1.     Compost areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from property line or 15 feet from dwelling unit, whichever is greater. Compost storage is limited to 10 percent of total site area and must not be visible from adjacent properties. All organic materials must be managed to avoid rodents, pests, odors and leachates;

 

2.     If the community garden is enclosed by fencing, the fencing shall be wood fencing or ornamental fencing. If chain-link or woven wire fencing is proposed, over half of the fence area that borders a public right-of-way shall be covered by plant material or other vegetative screening within three years of the fence installation. All fencing shall comply with height and setback requirements in Section 4.04.364 Fences, Walls, and Hedges;

 

3.     Use of mechanized farm equipment is generally prohibited; provided, however, that during the initial site preparation of the land heavy equipment may be used. Landscaping equipment designed for household use shall be permitted;

 

4.     All farm equipment shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from sight. Chemicals and fuels shall be locked in a structure when site is unattended;

 

5.     Site drainage must be managed to comply with Alameda County Stormwater Permit regulations;

 

6.     Commercial deliveries and pickups are limited to one time per day;

 

7.     Row crops that reach 36 inches in height, except for trees, are not permitted in required front and corner side yards;

 

8.     Trash receptacles must be provided and screened on at least three sides from public view;

 

9.     Structures shall not exceed 500 square feet in floor area and are limited to 12 feet in height;

 

10.   All lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare and off-site impacts; and

 

11.   A community garden manager must be identified for each site and contact information for said manager shall be provided on a posted sign. Said signage shall be limited to two square feet in area.

 

C.    Application Requirements. Administrative Review approval is required for all community gardens in accordance with Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits. The information listed below is required at the time an application for an Administrative Review is submitted:

 

1.     A scaled, fully-dimensioned site plan showing physical dimension of property and structures, distance from the project property lines to the nearest residential structure, existing and proposed utilities that service the proposed community garden, and proposed areas of compost, planting and storage;

 

2.     Identification of community garden manager and description of management plans, responsible parties, and proposed contact information signage;

 

3.     Description of proposed farm equipment and time periods for their use;

 

4.     Statement of intent to spray or use chemicals;

 

5.     Sediment and erosion control plan; and

 

6.     Other information as required by the Zoning Enforcement Official. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2)

Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
4.08.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 1.04 Title, Components, and Purposes the specific purposes of the off-street parking and loading regulations are to:

 

A.    Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are provided for new land uses and for major alterations and enlargements of existing uses (except single-family and two-family uses) in proportion to the need for such facilities created by each use.

 

B.    Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed in a manner that will ensure efficiency, protect the public safety, and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from adverse impacts. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.104 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading
 

A.    When Required. At the time of initial occupancy of a site, construction of a structure, or a “major alteration or enlargement” of a site or structure as defined below, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accord with the regulations prescribed in this chapter.

 

1.     Definition of “Major Alteration or Enlargement.” “Major alteration or enlargement,” as used in this section, shall have the following meaning: Any expansion or enlargement of the site, any facilities on the site, or any change or expansion of uses on the site that increases the number of parking spaces or loading berths required under this chapter by both 20 percent or more and by five spaces or berths or more.

 

2.     Change in Use. For the purpose of determining compliance with paragraph 1, above, a “change of use” shall be considered to occur only when a new occupancy and/or new activity falls under a different “use classification category” than the former use. The use classification categories are as set forth in Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required, and are as follows: “Residential, General”; “Residential, Single-Family”; “Residential, Two-Family”; “Residential, Mixed-Use and Multi-Family”; “Public and Semipublic”; “Commercial”; and “Industrial.” A change of occupancy and/or activity that is within the same use classification category as the former use is not subject to the requirements to provide additional parking unless the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that the new use has the potential to create a new and significant parking impact on adjacent properties, business, and/or uses.

 

3.     Exemption for Expansion of Single-Family and Two-Family Residences. This subsection does not apply to single-family and two-family residences undergoing major alterations or enlargements.

 

B.    Nonconforming Parking or Loading. Subject to Subsection A above, no existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking or loading facilities required by this chapter provided that facilities being used for off-street parking and loading as of the date of adoption of this chapter shall not be reduced.

 

C.    Spaces Required for Alteration or Enlargement Shall be in Addition to Existing. The number of parking spaces or loading berths required for an alteration or enlargement of an existing use or structure or for a change of occupancy shall be in addition to the number of spaces or berths existing prior to the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy unless the preexisting number is greater than the number prescribed in this chapter. In this case, the number of spaces or berths in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in determining the required number of spaces or berths.

 

D.    Spaces Required for Multiple Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, if more than one use is located on a site, the number of off-street parking spaces and loading berths to be provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements pre-scribed for each use. This requirement applies not only to multiple uses under separate ownership but also to multiple uses in the same ownership. If the gross floor area of individual uses on the same site is less than that for which a loading berth would be required, but the aggregate gross floor area of all uses is greater than the minimum for which loading berths would be required, the aggregate gross floor area shall be used in determining the required number of loading berths.

 

E.    Joint Use. Off-street parking and loading facilities required by this Code for any use shall not be considered as providing parking spaces or loading berths for any other use except where the provisions of Section 4.08.112 Collective Provision of Parking apply or a joint facility apply. Such a facility shall contain not less than the total number of spaces or loading berths as determined individually, subject to the provisions of Subsections F: Location and Ownership and H: Common Loading Facilities, below, or fewer spaces may be permitted where adjoining uses on the same site have different hours of operation and the same parking spaces or loading berths can serve both without conflict. A determination of the extent, if any, to which joint use will achieve the purposes of this chapter shall be made by the Zoning Enforcement Official, who may require submission of survey or other data necessary to reach a decision.

 

F.     Location and Ownership. Parking required to serve a residential use shall be on the same site as the use served, except that subject to approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official, parking for Group Residential and Residential Care may be located on a different site under the same or different ownership within 150 feet of the use served, measured from the parking facility to the public entrance of the use served via the shortest pedestrian route. Parking required to serve a nonresidential use may be on the same or a different site under the same or different ownership as the use served, provided that parking shall be within the following distances of the use served, measured from the near corner of the parking facility to the public entrance of the use served via the shortest pedestrian route:

 

Customer/Visitor Spaces

Employee Spaces

200 feet

400 feet

 

No enclosed parking space in any district shall have the entrance door less than 20 feet from an existing public sidewalk, which distance shall be measured in a straight line from the center of the doorway of such parking structure to the center of the driveway at the sidewalk line. In the event there is no existing public sidewalk the entrance door to any enclosed parking structure shall be not less than 20 feet from the street lot line. In no event shall the door of any such enclosed parking structure be closer than 20 feet to an established right-of-way line.

 

G.    Life of Facility. Facilities for off-site parking shall be restricted to that use by a recorded deed, easement, lease, or agreement acceptable to the City Attorney and for a period of time consistent with the use permit requiring the parking, provided that the Zoning Enforcement Official may lift the restriction upon finding that substitute parking facilities meeting the requirements of this Code are provided. No use shall be continued if the required parking is removed unless substitute-parking facilities are provided to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

H.    Common Loading Facilities. The off-street loading facilities requirements of this chapter may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the prescribed number of berths for each use in a common truck loading facility provided that the total number of berths shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. As a requirement of approval, an attested copy of a contract between the parties concerned setting forth an agreement to joint use of a common loading facility shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit. The City may record the contract.

 

I.      Computation of Spaces Required. If after calculating the number of required off-street parking spaces, a quotient is obtained containing a fraction of one-half or more, an additional space shall be required; if such fraction is less than one-half, it may be disregarded.

 

J.     Other Parking Specifications. All parking specifications not listed in this chapter are found in specifications developed and maintained by the City Engineer. A copy of the parking specifications shall be available for public review during normal working hours at the Development Services Department counter.

 

K.    TOD Strategy Parking Requirements. New residential uses adjacent to the BART station shall be provided at a ratio of 1.0 space per dwelling unit. An allowance of unbundled flex parking of 0.25 to 0.50 parking space per unit may be provided above 1.0 space per unit, subject to approval of a Site Plan Review under Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2011-003 § 1; Ord. 2008-014 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required
 

A.    Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accord with the following list. For off-street loading, references are to Table A, which sets space requirements and standards for different groups of use classifications and sizes of buildings. References to spaces per square foot are to be computed on the basis of gross floor area, unless otherwise specified, and shall include allocations of shared restroom, halls, and lobby area, and mechanical equipment or maintenance areas, but shall exclude area for vertical circulation, stairs, or elevators.

 

B.    Where the use is undetermined, or not specified herein, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall determine the probable use and the number of parking and loading spaces required. In order to make this determination, the Zoning Enforcement Official may require the submission of survey or other data from the applicant or have data collected at the applicant’s expense.

 

 

OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES REQUIRED

Use Classification

Off-Street Parking Spaces

Off-Street Loading Spaces Per Group Classification (See Table A)

1. RESIDENTIAL

 

 

Article I.   Residential, Single-Family and Two-Family

Single-Family Dwelling

2 covered, per unit. New single-family dwellings or additions with more than 4 bedrooms or over 4,000 square feet of livable area shall require one additional space which may be uncovered and in tandem if it is located a minimum of 30 feet back from the front property line.

 

Two-Family Dwelling

2, including 1 covered, per unit

(SA Only)

2, including 1 covered, per unit (tandem allowed)

(DA Only)

1 covered per unit for areas adjacent to BART

 

1.5, including 1 covered, per unit for all other areas

 

Article II. Residential, Mixed Use & Multi-Family (3 or more units)

Studio or One-Bedroom Unit

1.0 covered space, plus 0.5 uncovered spaces per unit; 0.25 space per unit must be designated guest parking

(SA Only)

1.0 covered space, plus 0.5 guest space, per unit (tandem may be considered)

(DA Only)

≤ 0.25 mile to BART: 1.0 space per unit (plus allowance of unbundled flex parking of 0.25 to 0.50 spaces/unit at developer’s option)

 

> 0.25 mile to BART: 1.5 spaces per unit (0.25 to 0.50 spaces/unit may be unbundled flex parking)

 

Two-Bedroom Unit

2.0 covered spaces, plus 0.25 uncovered spaces per unit; 0.25 space per unit must be designated guest parking

(SA Only)

1.0 covered space, plus 0.75 guest space, per unit (tandem may be considered)

 

Three-Bedroom or Larger Unit

2.0 covered spaces, plus 0.5 uncovered spaces per unit; 0.25 space per unit must be designated guest parking

(SA Only)

1.0 covered space, plus 1.0 guest space, per unit (tandem may be considered)

 

Article III.               Residential, General

Live-Work

N/A

(SA Only)

2.0 per unit, including 1 covered, plus 0.75 space for guest/employee not residing in unit (tandem may be considered)

N/A

 

Senior Citizen

1.2 per unit, including 1 covered space and one space per employee

(SA Only)

0.6 per unit, plus 1.0 space per employee. All resident spaces to be covered

(DA Districts ≤ 0.25 mile to BART)

0.4 per unit, plus 1.0 space per employee. All resident spaces to be covered

 

Cottage Food Operation

1 uncovered space per employee

 

Group Housing

1 per 2 beds; plus 1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes, or as required by use permit or Planned Development approval

A

Supportive Housing

Subject to parking standards for the applicable residential type in the applicable residential zone

 

Transitional Housing

Subject to parking standards for the applicable residential type in the applicable residential zone

 

Residential Congregate Care

This classification is not a mixed or multi-family use. Parking requirement to be based on the unit’s regular residential parking requirement.

 

Type of Parking Facilities

Shared parking arrangements, parking structures and parking lift systems, subject to review and approval of the City are encouraged.

 

2. COMMERCIAL

 

 

Adult Oriented Businesses

As specified by zoning permit

A

Ambulance Services

1 per 500 sq. ft., plus 1 space for each emergency vehicle based at the site

A

Animal Boarding

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

A

Animal Grooming

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

A

Animal Hospitals

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

A

Animals, Retail Sales

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Artists’ Studios

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Automobile Washing

1 space per 200 sq. ft. of sales, office, or waiting area, plus queue for 5 cars per washing station

 

Bars, Cafés, and Restaurants

Having less than 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area

1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area

(SA Only)

1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Having 4,000 sq. ft. or more

40 spaces, + one for each 50 sq. ft. of seating area over 4,000 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area

A

With Entertainment Activities

1 space per 35 sq. ft. seating area; plus 1 space per 35 sq. ft. dance floor

 

Bed and Breakfast Inns

1 space per guest room, plus 1

 

Building Materials and Services

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. for lot area

A

Business Services

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Cannabis Dispensary

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

 

 

Catering Services

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

A

Commercial Recreation

Bowling Alleys

4 spaces per alley, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of public assembly and retail areas

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Electronic Game Centers

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

 

Skating Rinks

1 space per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. seating area if there are no fixed seats; plus 1 space per 250 sq. ft. floor area not used for seating

A

Other Commercial Recreation

As specified by the Zoning Enforcement Official

 

Communications Facilities

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

B

Convenience Stores

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

A

Drive-up Facility

Queue space for 5 cars per window

 

Fast Food Establishments, Large Scale and Small Scale

1 space per 100 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Financial Institutions; Retail and Check Cashing/Personal Loan Services

1 space per 300 sq. ft., plus one space for each 200 sq. ft. of lobby and customer-waiting areas, and 3 spaces for each walk-up teller window and automatic teller machine

(SA Only)

1 space per 400 sq. ft., plus 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of lobby and customer-waiting areas, and 3 spaces for each walk-up teller window and automatic teller machine

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

B

Food Processing

1 space per 750 sq. ft.

 

Furniture and Appliance Stores

1 space per 600 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Hardware Stores

1 space per 600 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Health and Fitness Centers

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Horticulture, Limited

1 space per 2 acres

 

Hotels, Motels and Time Share Facilities

1.1 spaces per guest room; plus 1 space per 50 sq. ft. banquet seating area plus parking for other uses and facilities as required by this schedule.

A

Instruction and Improvement Services

1 space per 250 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Laboratories

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Maintenance and Repair Services

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Marine Sales and Services

1 space per 350 sq. ft.

 

Mortuaries

1 space per 50 sq. ft. seating area

A

Music Studio

1 space per 600 sq. ft.

 

Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Nurseries

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. lot area for first 10,000 sq. ft.; 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. thereafter, plus 1 space per 250 sq. ft. sales floor area

(SA Only)

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. lot area for first 10,000 sq. ft.; 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. thereafter, plus 1 space per 333 sq. ft. sales floor area

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Offices, Business and Professional

1 space per 300 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft. for ground floor; 1 space per 500 sq. ft. for upper stories

(DA Only)

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

B

Offices, Medical and Dental

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

B

Pawn Shops

1 space per 250 sq. ft.

A

Regional Malls

Parking requirements in the C-RM District are calculated on the basis of a regional mall being a single use and not on the individual uses or tenancies thereof, and shall be based on a ratio of 5 spaces for each thousand sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area (GLFA) for the first one million sq. ft. and 4 spaces for each thousand sq. ft. of GLFA over one million sq. ft. Parking requirements may be modified to accommodate construction or phased development if provision for such modification is incorporated in a development agreement for the regional mall that has been adopted and is in effect.

 

Research and Development Services

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

 

Residential Hotels

1.1 space per guest room

 

Retail Sales, General

1 space per 200 sq. ft. for the first 5,000 sq. ft.; 1 space per 250 sq. ft. for the area over 5,000 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft. for the first 5,000 sq. ft.; 1 space per 250 sq. ft. for the area over 5,000 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Retail Services

1 space per 300 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Service Stations

1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. of lot area, plus 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of service bay and storage area

 

Supermarkets

1 space per 200 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

< 5,000 sq. ft.: Exempt

 

≥ 5,000 sq. ft.: 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Theaters, and Theatres, Small Scale

1 space per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. seating area if there are no fixed seats

A

Travel Services

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

(DA Only)

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

 

Vehicle/Equipment Repair

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

A

Vehicle/Heavy Equipment, Rentals

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

A

Vehicle/Heavy Equipment Dealers, New and Used

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. lot area

A

Vehicle and Boat Storage

3 spaces or 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of building area, whichever is greater; plus a minimum of 2 spaces outside any perimeter fence or secure area

 

3. INDUSTRIAL

 

 

Industry, Custom and General

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.

C

Industry, Limited

1 space per 750 sq. ft.

C

Industry, Research and Development

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

C

Parcel Processing and Shipping Centers

1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. or as required by administrative approval

A

Public Storage

1 space for the exclusive use of a resident manager plus 4 spaces for up to 150 storage units; 6 spaces for 151 to 500 storage units; 10 spaces for 501 to 1,000 storage units, and one additional space for each 500 storage units (or portion thereof) in excess of 1,000

 

Trucking Terminals

As specified by use permit

 

Warehousing, Distributions and Storage Facilities

1 space per 1,500 sq. ft.

A

4. PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC

Assembly Uses

1 space per 50 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes

C

Convalescent Facilities

As specified by use permit

C

Cultural Institution

1 space per 300 sq. ft.

C

Day Care, General

1 space per 6 children or fraction thereof; maximum enrollment based on maximum occupancy load

 

Detention Facilities

As specified by use permit

 

Emergency Health Care

As specified by use permit

 

Government Offices

1 space per 300 sq. ft.

(SA Only)

1 space per 333 sq. ft. for ground floor space, and 1 space per 500 sq. ft. for upper story space

(DA Only)

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

B

Hospitals

1 space per 1.5 licensed beds

C

Maintenance and Service Facilities

1 space per 500 sq. ft.

A

Marinas

As specified by use permit

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

As specified by use permit (for private facilities)

 

Public Safety Facilities

As specified by use permit

C

Schools, Public or Private

As specified by use permit

A

Utilities, Major

As specified by use permit

A

 

 

TABLE A: OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED

 

Number of Spaces Required

Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.)

10′ x 20′ x 10′ VC*

12′ x 35′ x 14′ VC

12′ x 65′ x 14′ VC

Use Classification Group A

 

 

 

3,001 to 15,000

 

1

 

15,001 to 50,000

 

1

1

50,001 and over

 

2

1

Use Classification Group B

 

 

 

0 to 10,000

1

 

 

10,001 to 20,000

 

1

 

20,001 and over

1

1

 

Use Classification Group C

 

 

 

0 to 30,000

 

1

 

30,001 to 100,000

 

1

1

100,000 and over

 

2

1

*VC = Vertical Clearance

 

 

 

 

off-street-loading

OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE DIMENSIONS

(Diagram is illustrative)

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2014-003 § 3; Ord. 2013-006 § 3; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2007-005 § 4; Ord. 2007-001 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 6; Ord. 2004-004 § 6; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.112 Collective Provision of Parking
 

Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E: Joint Use of Section 4.08.104 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading, a use permit may be approved for collective provision of parking on a site that serves more than one use or site and is located in a district in which parking for the uses served is a permitted or conditional use. A use permit for collective off-street parking may reduce the total number of spaces required by this chapter if the following findings are made:

 

A.    The spaces to be provided will be available as long as the uses requiring the spaces are in operation; and

 

B.    The adequacy of the quantity and efficiency of parking provided will equal or exceed the level that can be expected if collective parking is not provided.

 

An applicant for a use permit for collective parking may be required to submit survey data substantiating a request for reduced parking requirements. A use permit for collective parking shall describe the limits of any area subject to reduced parking requirements and the reduction applicable to each use. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.116 Reduced Parking for Other Uses
 

A Parking Exception may be approved reducing the number of spaces to less than the number specified in the schedules in Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required, provided that the following findings are made:

 

A.    The parking demand will be less than the requirement in Section 4.08.108 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required; and

 

B.    The probable long-term occupancy of the building or structure, based on its design, will not generate additional parking demand; or

 

C.    Existing buildings are converted to new uses, leading to finding A or B above.

 

D.    Shared parking that serves more than one use or site shall be encouraged in Mixed-Use zoning districts.

 

In reaching a decision, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall consider survey data submitted by an applicant or collected at the applicant’s or Zoning Enforcement Official’s request and the applicant’s expense. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2015-11 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.120 Parking In-Lieu Payments
 

A.    Within designated parking districts established by the City and subject to prior approval by the City in each case, a parking requirement serving nonresidential uses on a site may be met by a cash in-lieu payment to the City prior to issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy if no permit is required. The fee shall be to provide public off-street parking in the vicinity of the use.

 

B.    In establishing such parking districts, the City may set limitations on the number of spaces or the maximum percentage of parking spaces required for which an in-lieu fee may be tendered. Determinations as to whether an in-lieu fee will be accepted and the factors used to calculate the amount of the fee, e.g., estimated values for land and improvement costs for parking spaces, shall be at the sole discretion of the City. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

4.08.124 Parking Spaces for the Handicapped
 

All parking facilities shall comply with the requirements of the California Code of Regulations and with the sign requirements of the California Vehicle Code, Sections 22511.7 and 22511.8. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.128 Bicycle Parking
 

A.    Where Required. Bicycle parking may be required as part of Site Development or Use Permit approval and may, if so specified by the Site Development Sub-Committee or Board of Zoning Adjustments, be used as a substitute to automobile parking spaces.

 

B.    Number Required.

 

1.     Public and Semipublic Use Classifications. As specified by use permit.

 

2.     Commercial Use Classifications. Five percent of the requirement for automobile parking spaces, except for the following classifications, which are exempt:

 

a.     Ambulance Services

 

b.     Animal Boarding

 

c.     Animal Grooming

 

d.     Catering Services

 

e.     Commercial Filming

 

f.      Horticulture, Limited

 

g.     Funeral and Interment Services

 

h.     Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services (all classifications)

 

C.    Design Requirements. All required bicycle parking spaces shall permit the locking of the bicycle frame and one wheel with a u-type lock and support the bicycle in a stable position without damage to wheels, frame or components. Bicycle parking facilities shall be securely anchored so that they cannot be easily removed and shall be of sufficient strength to resist vandalism and theft. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2008-003 § 12; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

4.08.132 Restrictions on Residential Parking Within Required Minimum Front or Side Yards
 

A.    Parking, Other Than on Driveway, Is Prohibited. Except as provided in Subsection B, no vehicles, whether motorized or non-motorized, shall be parked within the minimum required front yard or street-side side yard (i.e., within that portion of the front and street side yard required as a minimum building setback) in either a residential district or on a parcel in a nonresidential district with a single-family or two-family dwelling use unless on a paved driveway which provides access to a parking space, covered or uncovered, that is required by this chapter.

 

B.    Parking Adjacent to Driveway May Be Permitted. Additional paved area for parking is allowed provided such parking area is constructed and maintained with a paved surface in conformance with design and construction standards established by the City Engineer and located adjacent to such paved driveways, and provided further that such parking area when added to the paved driveway would not exceed 50 percent of the width of the subject property or 30 feet, whichever is less, as measured at the front setback line.

 

C.    Allowable Paving in the Required Front Yard. Paving or impervious surfaces for walkways, parking areas and vehicular access shall not collectively occupy more than 50 percent of the required front setback area. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2012-001 § 3; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.136 Minimum Requirements for Parking Spaces and Drive Aisle Dimensions
 

The minimum dimensions for drive aisles, all uncovered parking spaces, and required covered parking spaces shall conform to the standards established by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.140 Specific Parking Area Design
 

When an applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer the necessity for variations on the dimensions otherwise required by this chapter, a specific parking area design may be approved under the following limitations:

 

A.    The area affected by the specific design shall be for parking by persons employed on the site only. Visitor parking stalls shall meet the dimensions required.

 

B.    The surface area available for parking shall not be less than would be required to accommodate the minimum required number of stalls for large and small cars.

 

C.    That alternative parking technologies be considered, such as parking lift systems, subject to the approval of the City and related public safety agencies. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 6; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

4.08.144 Parking Access from Street
 

All spaces in a parking facility shall be accessible without re-entering a public right-of-way unless it is determined by the Traffic Engineer to be physically impossible to provide for such access. However, an alley may be used as maneuvering space for access to off-street parking. Off-street parking shall generally be located so as to be more convenient and accessible than on-street parking with respect to entrances of buildings and pedestrian circulation on the site served. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.148 Driveways—Visibility
 

Visibility of a driveway crossing a street property line shall not be obstructed between a height of three feet and seven feet. The obstruction restriction area includes all the land in a triangular area on either side of the driveway measured 10 feet from the street property line along the driveway and 10 feet from the driveway along the street property line.

 

4

 

DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY

(The diagram is illustrative)

(Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.152 Parking Area Screening: Walls and Fences
 

A.    A parking area for five or more cars serving a nonresidential use shall be screened from an adjoining R district or a ground-floor residential use by a solid concrete, solid wood, or masonry wall six feet in height, except that the height of a wall adjoining a required front yard in an R district shall be three feet. A carport or open parking area for five or more cars serving a residential use shall be screened from an adjoining lot in an R district or a ground-floor residential use by a solid wall or fence six feet in height, except that the height of a wall or fence adjoining a required front yard in an R district shall be not less than two feet or more than three feet.

 

B.    Where the parking area abuts a street separating the area from property classified for residential use, an architectural screen wall not less than three feet in height above the parking surface shall be installed and maintained not less than three feet from the property line that separates the parking area from the street.

 

C.    Allowable Modification. The Board of Zoning Adjustments may modify these requirements in accord with the procedures and findings established by Section 4.04.364 Fences, Walls, and Hedges. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.156 Lighting
 

Outdoor lighting in a landscaped parking area shall not employ a light source higher than 12 feet. Outdoor parking area lighting shall create no cone of direct illumination greater than 60 degrees from a light source higher than six feet and shall not directly shine onto an adjacent street. Maximum illumination at ground level shall be three foot candles and shall not exceed one-half foot candles in an R district. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.160 Additional Design Standards for Parking Lots and Structures
 

A.    Parking lots shall be paved and have drainage, wheel stops, lighting, space marking, and directional signs, which shall be subject to approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

B.    In reviewing the design of parking structures in connection with a zoning approval, the Zoning Enforcement Official, Site Development Sub-Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or Planning Commission shall consider the compatibility of the design with adjacent buildings or uses. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.164 Location and Design of Off-Street Loading Spaces
 

A.    Required spaces shall not be within a building, but shall be on the site of the use served or on an adjoining site. On a site adjoining an alley, a required loading space shall be accessible from the alley unless alternative access is approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official. A required loading space shall be accessible without backing a truck across a street property line unless the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that provision of turn-around space is infeasible and approves alternative access. An occupied loading space shall not prevent access to a required off-street parking space. A loading area shall not be located in a required yard.

 

B.    Except in an I district, a loading area visible from a street shall be screened on three sides by a fence, wall, or hedge at least six feet in height. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.08.168 Parking Area Plan Required
 

Prior to the construction of an off-street parking area for a nonresidential use or multi-family dwelling with more than four (4) units, a plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Official for the purpose of indicating compliance with the provisions of this section. This plan shall include:

 

A.    The location and placement of required landscaped areas, including a computation of the required area.

 

B.    A planting plan including a list of plants by name and size keyed to their location on the parking area.

 

C.    Location and description of fencing and architectural screen walls.

 

D.    Layout and method of irrigation of landscaped areas.

 

E.    Location and placement of parking stalls, including bumpers, striping and circulation, and directional signs, all dimensioned to permit comparison with approved parking standards.

 

F.     Location and placement of lights provided to illuminate the parking area.

 

G.    A drainage plan showing drainage to a public way in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 4.12 Signs
4.12.100 Specific Purposes
 

In addition to the general purposes listed in Section 1.04.108 Purposes the specific purposes of sign regulations are to:

 

A.    Provide each sign user an opportunity for effective identification by limiting the number and area of signs permitted on all sites.

 

B.    Limit off-premises signs in order to maintain the visibility of on-premises signs.

 

C.    Maintain and enhance the quality of the City’s appearance by avoiding clutter and by subjecting certain signs to design review.

 

D.    Enable users of goods and services to identify establishments offering services to meet their needs.

 

E.    Regulate the number and size of signs according to standards consistent with the types of establishments in each zoning district or in different portions of a zoning district.

 

F.     Protect residential districts adjoining nonresidential districts from adverse impacts of excessive numbers or sizes of nearby signs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.104 Administrative Review of Signs
 

All signs regulated by this chapter shall be subject to the review and approval of the Community Development Director or person so designated by the Director. The general purpose of this review is to ensure the objectives of the General Plan to maintain quality and attractive business areas. To approve signs, the Community Development Director must make all of the following findings:

 

A.    The sign’s copy and graphics are limited to the information essential to provide adequate business identification, so that the sign does not appear cluttered and does not distract from the identification of other signs in the area. Supplemental copy, such as the advertising of products, services, phone numbers, and web site addresses not part of the business name is not allowed.

 

B.    The sign provides an attractive graphic composition and is of a high quality material, which is compatible with the surrounding business area and the objectives of the General Plan.

 

C.    The sign uses compatible colors and avoids the use of garish colors or combinations of colors.

 

D.    The sign’s construction, size, colors, and method of illumination are aesthetically compatible with the site’s architecture and architectural context. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.108 Exempt Signs
 

A.    Exempt Signs. The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this Code. However, this exemption does not apply to the Building Division requirement of a sign permit for changes in the face or copy of a sign.

 

1.     Official notices of any court, public body, or officer.

 

2.     Notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agent in the performance of a public duty or by any person giving due legal notice.

 

3.     Street address numbers.

 

4.     Public transit seating signs and public information, directional, and warning signs erected by a public agency.

 

5.     District identification signs approved by the Site Development Sub-Commission and names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets, and the like made an integral part of the structure.

 

6.     One construction sign per frontage with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet located on a construction site during the course of construction.

 

7.     On-premises parking and other directional signs, not exceeding one double-faced sign per entrance, not exceeding four square feet in area and five feet in height or 10 square feet if more than 100 feet from a public way.

 

8.     Signs manufactured as a standard, integral part of a mass-produced product accessory to a commercial or public or semipublic use, including telephone booths, vending machines, automated teller machines, and gasoline pumps.

 

9.     Credit card, trading stamp, or trade association signs not exceeding one-half square foot each.

 

10.   One governmental flag of any governmental agency per occupancy.

 

11.   Signs within a building not visible from a public street and window signs not to exceed 25 percent of the visible area of a window.

 

12.   Holiday lights and displays not advertising a product or sale, erected no sooner than 45 days before the holiday and removed within 14 days following the holiday.

 

13.   Nameplates not over two square feet in area, displaying the name and profession of the occupant of the building and/or the address.

 

14.   Older signs that are viewed as having historical significance and that are valued by the community may be considered exempt from these regulations.

 

15.   Except as otherwise specifically set forth herein, the regulations of this chapter do not apply to official traffic or government signs; signs that are not visible from a public right-of-way or area readily accessible to the public; product dispensers and point-of-purchase displays; scoreboards on athletic fields; gravestones; barber poles; religious symbols; commemorative plaques; the display of street numbers; or any display or construction not defined as a sign in Section 1.12.108 Definitions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.112 Regulations for On-Premises Signs
 

The following regulations apply to all non-exempt on-site signs visible from a public right-of-way for each zoning district. All signs in the DA districts shall be consistent with the Downtown San Leandro Design Guidelines.

 

A.    Maximum Total Sign Area. The maximum total sign area per tenant occupancy, excluding temporary signs and exempt signs, shall be as follows:

 

 

Zoning District

Maximum Total Sign Area

RD, RO, and RS Districts

24 square feet for permitted nonresidential uses, subject to prior approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

RM District

• Residential use: 8 square feet per frontage.

• Exception for Residential sites over 2 acres: A greater area not to exceed 32 square feet may be approved as a condition of a use permit, as reasonable and necessary for identification of a development or use.

• Permitted Nonresidential Uses: 12 square feet subject to prior approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

CC, CN, CS, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, SA-3, IL, IG, IP, IT Districts

• Up to 55 feet of frontage: 2 square feet per lineal foot of frontage.

• Sites with more than 55 feet of frontage: 15 times square root of frontage.

CR, OS, PD, and PS Districts

As prescribed by use permit.

 

P District

40 square feet per frontage.

 

 

1.     Only the frontage that is developed or will be developed with an approved building permit shall be counted for purposes of determining the maximum allowable sign area; vacant land reserved for future development may not be used in determining the maximum allowable sign area.

 

2.     The sign area may be allocated between wall signs, freestanding signs, and projecting signs, provided that each sign conforms to the applicable regulations of this section.

 

3.     No sign or sign area permitted on one frontage shall be transferred to another frontage except in accord with a Master Sign Plan prepared pursuant to Section 4.12.120 Master Sign Programs and Sign Exceptions.

 

B.    Wall Signs.

 

1.     Wall signs shall not project above an eave or parapet of the wall on which the sign is mounted, including the eave of a mansard roof.

 

2.     A wall sign opposite an interior property line shall be five feet or one-tenth the lot width from the property line, whichever is greater.

 

3.     A wall sign shall not project more than two feet from the face of the building.

 

C.    Window Signs.

 

1.     For the purpose of this section, a window shall be defined as that portion of a first or second floor façade consisting of a glass-like material designed to provide viewing of the interior from an adjacent exterior walkway and which shall be no less than 75 percent transparent from the exterior during daylight hours. Window area is defined as contiguous window panels separated by dividers less than six inches in width.

 

2.     A window sign is considered a permanent sign painted on a store front window or door, or temporary signs attached thereto indicating the name of the business, advertising images, accessory services or products, or both.

 

3.     Window signs may not exceed a total of 25 percent of the window in which they are located.

 

4.     Window signs include any interior signs or advertising images within eight feet of the window excluding merchandise display.

 

5.     No more than two window signs are permitted per ground floor establishment with frontage on, visible from, and direct exterior pedestrian access to a public right-of-way, internal circulation route or common parking area. Second story establishments in a two-story building with frontage on and visible from a public right-of-way, internal circulation route or common parking area may be permitted one window sign per window.

 

D.    Freestanding Signs.

 

1.     For multi-family and nonresidential uses permitted in R districts, one freestanding sign not exceeding five feet in height is permitted on a lot.

 

2.     In the P district, one freestanding sign not exceeding 25 square feet in area or five feet in height.

 

3.     In C, NA, SA, DA, and I districts, one freestanding sign not exceeding 64 square feet is permitted on each frontage. For large lots, a freestanding sign, not exceeding 64 square feet, shall be allowed for each 250 feet of frontage. The maximum height of freestanding signs shall not exceed eight feet in the CC, CN, DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6, NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 districts and 12 feet in other C and I districts, except when reviewed and approved as part of a Master Sign Plan.

 

4.     In OS, PD, and PS districts, the number and size of freestanding signs shall be as prescribed by the use permit for the principal use.

 

5.     A freestanding sign shall not be closer to any property line than one-half its height.

 

6.     A freestanding sign shall not be closer than 15 feet to another freestanding sign or projecting sign on the same site. A freestanding sign shall not be closer than 30 feet to another freestanding sign on an adjacent site or closer than 30 feet to a projecting sign on an adjacent site.

 

7.     A freestanding sign shall not extend over a public right-of-way and shall not be located on the same frontage as a projecting sign extending over a public right-of-way.

 

8.     All freestanding signs shall be no closer than 10 feet to the curb and placed within a landscaped area of not less than 75 square feet in CC districts and 50 square feet in other districts.

 

Art

FREESTANDING SIGN: INTERIOR PROPERTY LINE MINIMUM SETBACK

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

9.     A freestanding sign in a required yard adjoining a street property line shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.08.148 Driveways—Visibility. At intersections, no freestanding sign shall create a visual obstruction within a vertical space between three feet and seven feet above the curb. Two vertical supports with no horizontal dimensions greater than 16 inches are permitted. The obstruction restriction area includes all the land in a triangular area measured 30 feet from the intersection along each street property line.

4

 

4

 

FREESTANDING SIGN: OBSTRUCTION RESTRICTION AREAS

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

E.    Projecting Signs.

 

1.     The maximum size shall be eight square feet in P districts, 25 square feet in C districts, 32 square feet in I districts and three square feet in other districts.

 

2.     No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet above the surface over which it projects, or less than 15 feet above a vehicular passageway, or project more than five feet into a public right-of-way.

 

3.     No sign shall project into an alley or truck service driveway more than one foot or be less than 14 feet above the roadway surface over which it projects. This will provide adequate clearance for trucks.

 



 

PROJECTING SIGNS: AT PUBLIC R.O.W. AND AT ALLEY WAY

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

4.     No sign shall project closer than two feet to a curb.

 

5.     A projecting sign shall be set back five feet from an interior property line.

 

6.     No portion of a projecting sign shall project above an apparent eave or parapet, including the eave of a simulated mansard roof.

 

7.     No portion of a projecting sign shall exceed 30 feet in height measured from finished grade.

 

8.     Signs on awnings, canopies or marquees shall not have letters exceeding eight inches in height or symbols exceeding four feet in any dimension, provided that theaters and cinemas shall be exempt from this requirement.

 

F.     Multistory Office Identification. Multistory office buildings may be identified under the following conditions:

 

1.     Only a single company name or logo of an organization or enterprise occupying office space within the office building shall be permitted.

 

2.     Subject to approval of the Site Development Sub-Commission, multistory office building signs shall be located below the parapet at a height and scale architecturally in harmony with the building.

 

3.     Only one multistory office identification sign shall be permitted per building.

 

4.     Individual channel-letters, internally illuminated letters, and/or logos are allowed. “Can-type” signs are prohibited.

 

G.    Construction Signs. The maximum size of temporary construction signs shall be 32 square feet per frontage, except in the RD, RO, and RS districts where the maximum size shall be eight square feet. Construction signs shall be removed within 30 days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

 

H.    Real Estate Signs.

 

1.     The maximum size of temporary real estate signs shall be six square feet, exclusive of riders, in the RD, RM, RO, and RS districts and one sign per listing broker shall be allowed per frontage. Riders shall be limited to no more than three square feet.

 

2.     The maximum size of temporary real estate signs in all C and I Districts shall be based on frontage as listed below:

 

Frontage

Sign Size

0 - 49 feet

12 square feet

50 - 199 feet

24 square feet

200+ feet

32 square feet

 

Two-sided signs shall be considered one sign. There shall be a maximum of one two-foot by three-foot window sign allowed for each vacancy. All signs shall be non-illuminated. One sign shall be allowed for each frontage. Any sign structure shall be painted a neutral or matching color. Signs exceeding these limitations may be administratively approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official. All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in good condition and free of graffiti.

 

I.      Temporary Political Signs. The maximum size of temporary political signs shall be 16 square feet unless the sign meets structural and design requirements prescribed by the Uniform Sign Code for signs other than temporary signs. This requirement is intended to prevent installation of structurally unsafe signs. Prior to the installation of any temporary political sign anywhere in the City, the person intending to install the sign or the person on whose behalf the signs are to be installed shall, at least two days prior to the installation, file a declaration of intent to install with the Zoning Enforcement Official or the Zoning Enforcement Official’s designee. The declaration shall contain an agreement to remove any sign that is installed in violation of any provisions of the Zoning Code or the Municipal Code, and to pay the City’s costs of removal. If a person installs temporary political signs without having filed a declaration of intent, that person or the person on whose behalf the signs are installed, shall be notified to remove the signs and shall immediately remove such signs or pay the cost of removal by the City.

 

J.     Illumination; Movement.

 

1.     Signs in an CR, OS, P, PD, PS, or R district shall, if lighted, have white or amber lighting and shall be indirectly illuminated.

 

2.     Signs shall not have exposed fluorescent tubes or incandescent bulbs exceeding 15 watts, unless such signs are approved as part of a Master Sign Plan or a use permit for a cinema or theater. Neon signs are allowed if in conformance with Section 4.12.104 Administrative Review of Signs.

 

3.     Signs both visible from and within 100 feet of an R district shall not be illuminated between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless they identify an establishment open for business during those hours.

 

4.     No movement or apparent movement of or in a sign or change in intensity of illumination of a sign shall be permitted, provided that a time or temperature sign or a theater canopy sign consistent with other regulations of this chapter and including no changeable text shall be permitted. Very rapidly flashing or stroboscopic lights or signs are prohibited. Flashing signs are not permitted in CR, OS, P, or R districts.

 

5.     Reader board signage is allowed for trade schools with instructional programming and community organizations. Text is limited to scheduling of events or classes only.

 

K.    Temporary and Miscellaneous Signs.

 

1.     Temporary signs, banners, flags, outdoor display of merchandise, and other advertising devices may be placed by individual tenants on a site for a maximum of two 15-day periods each calendar year, subject to the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official, provided the total temporary and permanent sign area shall not exceed 150 percent of permitted permanent sign area, and provided that temporary devices do not create safety hazards or block signs identifying adjoining establishments.

 

a.     Such signs are subject to prior approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official and number, type, duration, and other aspects may be restricted or conditioned by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

b.     Up to two additional 30-day periods may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official provided such extensions are determined to be reasonably necessary to achieve business identity and are consistent with the purposes of this Code.

 

2.     A use permit for a theater or cinema may authorize signs deviating from the standards of this chapter, subject to development plan review under the provisions of Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval. The Site Development Sub-Commission may approve marquee signs, animated signs, changeable copy signs, brighter lights, and other features for cinema or theater signs not otherwise authorized by this chapter if such modifications are consistent with the style and character of existing signs on the site and adjacent property, and will not be readily visible from an R district.

 

3.     Open house signs advertising real estate open for inspection for prospective sale may be installed on private property in all zoning districts from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. with the consent of the person in possession and control of the property. Such signs may state the name of the person or firm sponsoring the open house and may not exceed five square feet each in face area or five in number for any one sale.

 

L.     Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:

 

1.     Canvas signs, banners, pennants, streamers, balloons or other temporary or wind signs except as provided in Subsection K.1 or E.8.

 

2.     Mobile, A-frame, and portable signs except as provided in Subsection K.3.

 

3.     Roof or canopy signs extending to a height more than four feet above the roofline.

 

4.     Signs which resemble any official marker erected by the City, State, or any governmental agency, or which, by reason of position, shape, color or illumination would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal or would be a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

 

5.     Signs which produce odor, sound, smoke, fire, or other such emissions.

 

6.     Window or contiguous window panes covered by paper, painted or other signs which exceed 25 percent of the total area of that window at any time.

 

7.     A vehicle or equipment stored with mast arms in an elevated position with intent to advertise.

 

8.     Abandoned signs.

 

M.    Prohibited Locations.

 

1.     No sign shall be affixed to any vehicle or trailer on a public street or public or private property unless the vehicle or trailer is intended to be used in its normal business capacity and not for the sole purpose of attracting business.

 

2.     No sign shall be erected within an airport approach zone, airport turning zone, or airport transition zone designated by the Oakland Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC), such that it would project above the approach surface, conical surface, or the transitional surface designated by the ALUC; make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others; result in glare; impair visibility; or otherwise interfere with or endanger the landing, take off, or maneuvering of aircraft. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2008-003 § 13; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.116 Regulations for Off-Site Advertising Signs
 

Off-site advertising signs are not permitted within the City. Any nonconforming off-site advertising sign may only be reconstructed or relocated pursuant to a relocation agreement between the City and the sign owner, consistent with Section 5412 of the California Business and Professions Code. Real estate and development signs otherwise allowed in this chapter are not considered off-site advertising signs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.120 Master Sign Programs and Sign Exceptions
 

A.    Master Sign Programs Required. Any development that will have/has: (a) either three or more nonresidential occupants, or occupying two acres or more, and (b) requires Site Plan Approval as per the requirements of Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, shall submit a Master Sign Program application. Such plan must be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official prior to issuance of any permit for signs. Each new tenant would have to meet the requirements of the new Master Sign Program.

 

B.    Exceptions May be Proposed. Any sign application, including both individual sign applications and Master Sign Programs, may propose exceptions from the standards of this chapter (i.e., an individual sign or sign program that would exceed the size and height limitations of Section 4.12.112 Regulations for On-Premises Signs). Exceptions approved as part of a Master Sign Program will apply to the signage of subsequent tenants.

 

C.    Application Requirements. Applications for approval of either a Master Sign Program and/or Sign Exception shall be submitted to the Planning Division and shall include the following:

 

1.     A site plan, drawn to scale, delineating the site proposed to be included within the sign program and the general locations of all signs;

 

2.     Drawings and/or sketches indicating the exterior surface details of all buildings on the site on which wall signs, directory signs, or projecting signs are proposed;

 

3.     A scale drawing of the proposed sign(s), indicating dimensions of all structures, cabinets and/or letter height, and proposed color schemes; and

 

4.     If a Sign Exception is requested, a statement of the reasons for any requested modifications to the regulations or standards of this chapter.

 

D.    Review and Approval Authority. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall be the decision-maker, unless the Zoning Enforcement Official defers action to the Site Development Sub-Commission. The Zoning Enforcement Official or Site Development Sub-Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the requested Master Sign Program/Sign Exception. The decision-maker may require any reasonable conditions necessary to carry out the intent of this section.

 

E.    Appeals. A decision by either the Zoning Enforcement Official or by the Site Development Sub-Commission may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

F.     Standards for Approval. In addition to finding that the proposed Master Sign Program and/or Sign Exception meets the requirements for all signs as specified in Section 4.12.104 Administrative Review of Signs, the decision-maker shall find:

 

1.     That the proposed sign or sign program contributes to the design quality of the site and surrounding area, and that any proposed exception, will be superior to the quality that would result under the regulations and standards of Section 4.12.112 Regulations for On-Premises Signs;

 

2.     That the proposed signs are compatible with the style or character of existing improvements on the site and are well-related to each other; and

 

3.     That any deviations from the standards of this chapter are fully consistent with the purposes of this Chapter and this Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

4.12.124 Sign Permit or Temporary Sign Permit Required
 

No sign regulated by this chapter shall be erected or displayed unless a sign permit or temporary sign permit is obtained. All temporary signs shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection K.1 of Section 4.12.112 Regulations for On-Premises Signs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.128 Uniform Sign Code
 

Signs shall be subject to the Uniform Sign Code requiring building permits for certain signs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.132 Construction
 

Lateral and columnar sign supports shall be designed so as to be architecturally integrated with the building to which they are attached or so that required extra bracing, including, but not limited to, angle irons, guy wires and cables, shall not be exposed to view from streets or public passageways. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.136 Fire Safety
 

No sign shall be installed in such a manner that any portion of the sign or its support will unreasonably interfere with:

 

A.    The operations of the Fire Department in raising ladders to building roofs, windows, fire escapes, balconies or exits, or in taking hose lines or other fire-fighting or rescue equipment to any part of a building;

 

B.    The operations of the Fire Department in gaining access to any areas around buildings;

 

C.    The use of any standpipe or required door, ventilator or window. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.12.140 Maintenance
 

Signs and sign structures shall be maintained at all times in a state of good repair, with all braces, bolts and structural parts and supporting frames and fastenings reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him or her, any sign or sign structure which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated or other dilapidated, unsafe condition. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements
4.16.100 Specific Purpose
 

In recognition of the importance landscaping has in improving the quality of San Leandro’s environment, and that landscape design, installation, maintenance and management must be water efficient and sustainable, this chapter establishes procedures to ensure that landscaping is installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Code. This Chapter is intended to implement the new landscape design requirements of the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act of 2006 (AB 1881) and to establish standards for sustainable landscape practices in accord with the current version of the StopWaste.Org Bay Friendly Landscape protocols. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.104 General Requirements
 

Required site landscaping areas shall be installed and permanently maintained in accord with the standards and requirements of this chapter. This chapter shall apply to applicable large landscape projects and projects for which “Site Plan Approval” pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval is required. Applicable large landscape projects include new or rehabilitated commercial, industrial and developer-installed residential landscapes over 2,500 square feet and all new or rehabilitated residential landscapes over 5,000 square feet. For projects subject to Site Plan Review, landscape plans are subject to the review and approval process provided in Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, and additional planting requirement and/or exceptions to requirements for minimum landscape yards may be made by the Site Plan Review decision-maker. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.108 Landscaping Plans Required
 

A.    Requirements for Applications Subject to “Site Plan Approval.” Development applications for “Site Plan Approval” that include new or rehabilitated commercial, industrial or developer-installed residential landscapes that do not exceed 2,500 square feet and residential landscapes that do not exceed 5,000 square feet shall comply with the following requirements:

 

1.     Development applications for “Site Plan Approval” shall include a conceptual landscape plan that generally identifies a plant palette and lists the quantity, size, species, and locations of proposed plantings. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive the requirement for a conceptual landscape plan and a final landscape plan when little or no change to existing landscaping is proposed or for a project where the amount of new or renovated landscaping is small in relation to existing landscaping.

 

2.     Applicants shall submit additional landscape plan information if requested by the Zoning Enforcement Official and/or decision-making body. Either the Zoning Enforcement Official and/or decision-making body may request additional landscape plan information, if needed to address a site-specific area of concern, as part of its review of the application. Such areas of concern may include, but are not limited to, information regarding existing trees on the site, in accordance with Section 4.16.112 Existing Trees on Development Sites.

 

3.     Final landscape plans, identifying the species, sizes, and quantities of the specific plant materials to be used, shall be submitted concurrently with all applicable structural plans that are required for building permit review. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall review such final landscape plans. No building permit shall be issued, unless and until it has been determined that the submitted final landscape plan is consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

 

4.     Conceptual and final landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, architect, landscape designer, or other qualified person. Conceptual and final landscape plans shall be drawn “to scale” and have base information that is consistent with the architectural and civil site plans.

 

B.    Requirements for Large Landscape Projects. Development applications that include new or rehabilitated commercial, industrial or developer-installed residential landscapes that exceed 2,500 square feet or residential landscapes that exceed 5,000 square feet shall submit a “Landscape Documentation Package” that shall include (1) project information, (2) landscape design plan, (3) irrigation design plan, (4) water management plan, (5) soil management report, and (6) grading design plan. This requirement shall not apply to historic landscapes.

 

1.     Project information submitted in an applicant’s Landscape Documentation Package shall include:

 

a.     Name of applicant;

 

b.     Street address of site or Assessor’s Parcel Number;

 

c.     Total area to be landscaped (square feet);

 

d.     Project type (e.g. new, rehabilitated, public, private, home-owner installed);

 

e.     Water supply type (e.g. potable, recycled, non-potable) and name of water provider;

 

f.      Checklist of all documents in the Landscape Documentation Package;

 

g.     Contact information for the project applicant and property owner;

 

h.     Applicant signature and date.

 

2.     Landscape Design Plan submitted in an applicant’s Landscape Documentation Package shall:

 

a.     Identify a plant pallet and list quantity, size and locations of proposed plantings;

 

b.     Delineate and label each hydrozone and identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

 

c.     Identify recreational areas;

 

d.     Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

 

e.     Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

 

f.      Identify type of mulch and application depth (application depth must comply with design standards in this chapter);

 

g.     Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

 

h.     Identify type and surface area of water features;

 

i.      Identify storm water retention and infiltration areas;

 

j.      Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

 

k.     Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns, etc.);

 

l.      Demonstrate compliance with all design standards specified in this chapter;

 

m.    Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements of the Zoning Code, including all design standards of Section 4.16.116 Design Standards, and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

 

n.     Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape.

 

3.     Irrigation Design Plan submitted in an applicant’s Landscape Documentation Package shall include:

 

a.     Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

 

b.     Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

 

c.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

 

d.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

 

e.     Recycled water irrigation systems (if applicable);

 

f.      Demonstration of compliance with all design standards specified in the article;

 

g.     The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of Chapter 4.16 Landscape Requirements of the Zoning Code, including all design standards and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

 

h.     The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system.

 

4.     Water Management Plan submitted in an applicant’s Landscape Documentation Package shall include:

 

a.     An introduction and statement of existing site conditions, including annual precipitation rates;

 

b.     The anticipated water requirements in inches per year for each hydrozone;

 

c.     Seasonal irrigation water schedules or procedures for programming proposed controllers; and

 

d.     A maintenance plan for the ongoing operation and maintenance of the irrigation system.

 

e.     The Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet which contains two (2) sections:

 

i.      A hydrozone information table for the landscape project,

 

ii.     A water budget calculation for the landscape project. For the calculation of the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Use, a project applicant shall use the reference evapotranspiration (ETo) value 41.8.

 

5.     A Soil Management Report that addresses the soil attributes of the project site and shall include Identification of areas of quality topsoil to be protected during construction and/or critical soil limitations (such as compaction; water logged soils or wetlands; thin, eroded or erosion prone soils) and a laboratory soil analysis of the soil(s) into which plantings are to be made. Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. The soil analysis shall include:

 

a.     Analysis of soil texture;

 

b.     Analysis of infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

 

c.     pH;

 

d.     Total soluble salts;

 

e.     Sodium;

 

f.      Essential nutrients;

 

g.     Percent organic matter; and

 

h.     Recommendations for soil amendments or nutrient applications to ameliorate the soil limitations identified by the analysis and the amount of compost as required in Subsection D: Design Standards for Projects Requiring a Landscape Documentation Package and/or Irrigation Design Plan of Section 4.16.116 Design Standards.

 

It is highly recommended that:

 

i.      The lab report recommendations be based on an ‘organic’ approach to soil and landscape management that specifies natural and non-synthetic fertilizers to rectify any soil deficiencies;

 

j.      If the soils are to be irrigated with recycled water the lab report recommendations be tailored to recycled water;

 

k.     The types of plantings intended such as turf, perennial bed, annual bed, swale etc. be provided to the soil laboratory; and

 

l.      Management actions be identified to remediate limiting soil characteristics such as ripping the soil to alleviate soil compaction.

 

6.     Grading Design Plan submitted in an applicant’s Landscape Documentation Package shall include:

 

a.     Height of graded slopes;

 

b.     Drainage patterns;

 

c.     Pad elevations;

 

d.     Finish grade; and,

 

e.     Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

 

This requirement may be fulfilled by providing the aforementioned information on the Landscape Design Plan.

 

C.    Irrigation is Required. A permanent and automatic irrigation system that complies with all design standards specified in this chapter shall be provided for all new and renovated landscaped areas exceeding 500 square feet except residential landscapes that are less than 5,000 square feet. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive this requirement due to significant physical constraints. A statement regarding the provision of an irrigation system shall be made on the final landscape plans.

 

An Irrigation Design Plan shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package (when required) or when made a condition of approval or required by the Zoning Enforcement Official. When required, the Irrigation Design Plan shall include the following information:

 

1.     Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

 

2.     Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

 

3.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

 

4.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

 

5.     Recycled water irrigation systems (if applicable);

 

6.     Demonstration of compliance with all design standards specified in the chapter;

 

7.     The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of Chapter 4.16 of the Zoning Code, including all design standards and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

 

8.     The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system.

 

D.    Certificate of Completion. Upon approval of the Landscape Documentation Package, the applicant shall receive a Certificate of Completion, which shall include the following:

 

1.     Project Information Sheet;

 

2.     Certification that project has been installed in conformance with the approved Landscape Documentation Plan;

 

3.     Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller(s);

 

4.     An audit report (if required); and

 

5.     A landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.

 

E.    Changes to Approved Plans. No significant or substantive changes to approved landscaping or irrigation plans or any plans in the Landscape Documentation Package shall be made without prior written approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer substantial changes to the Site Development Sub-Commission and may require the approval of the project’s decision-making body, such as Board of Zoning Adjustment or Planning Commission, if the requested changes would have a major effect on the character of the project, would effect a landscape requirement that was discussed in the public hearing, or were part of a condition of approval.

 

F.     Irrigation Audits. The City of San Leandro shall administer programs that may include, but are not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2010 the project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the Certificate of Completion to the City of San Leandro that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2012-005 § 3; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.112 Existing Trees on Development Sites
 

A.    Identification of Trees on Development Applications.

 

1.     Plans submitted for “Site Plan Approval” shall identify all existing trees with a trunk diameter equal or greater than six inches in diameter as measured 4.5 feet above existing grade. The plans shall indicate the trees’ species and drip-lines. The plans shall indicate which trees are proposed for removal, and a “limit of grading” line, where applicable.

 

2.     To supplement the above requirements, an applicant may be required to provide a tree report, to be prepared by a certified arborist, that provides additional information to aid the decision-maker in the evaluation of the site plan. The report should indicate such information as the tree’s health, appearance, suitability for preservation, and/or potential for failure.

 

B.    Preservation or Replacement of Trees.

 

1.     Ability to Require Preservation or Replacement. The “Site Plan Approval” decision-maker may require that significant trees be preserved, and/or that replacement trees be provided within the final landscape plan for the project. A tree may be found to be significant due to its size, age, prominence in the neighborhood’s landscape, and/or habitat value.

 

2.     Applicant Must Identify Protection Measures. Final grading and landscape plans for the project (as submitted at the building/grading permit stage) shall specify tree protection measures for those trees that were either identified on the applicant’s plan to be preserved, or were required to be preserved as a condition of Site Plan, Use Permit or Planned Development approval. In addition, the Zoning Enforcement Official or project decision-maker may require the applicant to pro- vide additional security, such as a bond or certificate of deposit, to cover possible replacement if the subject trees are damaged or destroyed.

 

3.     Grading Prohibited Within Drip-lines. No grading shall occur within the drip-line of a tree designated and/or required to be preserved unless approval of such grading was given at the time the project was approved or unless the Zoning Enforcement Official has subsequently reviewed and approved plans for such additional grading.

 

4.     Preserved and Replacement Trees to Be Permanently Maintained. Trees designated and/or required for preservation or required as replacement trees shall be permanently maintained as required by Subsection D: Landscaping Shall be Permanently Maintained of Section 4.16.124 Completion, Maintenance and Subsequent Changes. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.116 Design Standards
 

A.    General Design Standards.

 

All landscapes shall adhere to the following design standards:

 

1.     Landscape materials shall demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme for the overall development by choice and location of materials and shall be located such that at maturity:

 

a.     They do not interfere with site distance standards for vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic, as determined by the City Engineer;

 

b.     They do not conflict with overhead utility lines, overhead lights, or walkway lights; and

 

c.     They do not block pedestrian or bicycle ways or emergency access or exits.

 

2.     Plant selection and irrigation design shall incorporate appropriate water conservation measures, as required by applicable State or local regulations and adhere to the most recent version of the “Bay Friendly Landscape Guidelines” developed by StopWaste.Org for use in the professional design, construction and maintenance of landscapes. City staff shall maintain the most recent version of the “Bay-Friendly Landscape Guidelines” at all times.

 

3.     The minimum portion of a site that is to be a landscaped area shall be as prescribed under the applicable R, C or I Zoning District’s development regulations.

 

B.    Street Trees.

 

1.     Street Trees Required. Street trees with spacing not to exceed 30 feet and of minimum 15 gallon size shall be provided along any public street frontage. Such trees shall be a deciduous species that will provide canopy shade cover at maturity or alternate species type as approved with the conceptual or final landscape plan. Credit may be given for existing city street trees, where applicable. New trees may be placed in the City right-of-way in conjunction with new sidewalk improvements and subject to the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official and City Engineer.

 

C.    Design Standards for Parking Lots.

 

1.     Requirements for Perimeter Planting.

 

a.     Perimeter Landscaping Required for All Parking Lots. In addition to the requirements for minimum landscaped front and corner side yards prescribed for in the applicable R, C, and I Zoning Districts, and notwithstanding the zero foot setback requirement for side or rear yards in the C and I Districts, a landscaped area of not less than five feet wide, measured from inside of curb, shall be provided adjacent to any interior property line.

 

b.     Required Screening of Parking Lot from Street. Along street frontages, screening to a height of 30 inches shall be provided by use of continuous shrub plantings, berms, and/or architectural walls.

 

2.     Requirements for Interior Landscaped Areas.

 

a.     Minimum Width of Interior Landscaped Areas. Interior landscaped areas, or tree wells, shall be a minimum of four feet in width, measured from inside of curb to inside of curb, or as required by Subsection C.4, below.

 

b.     Separation of Parking Rows from Driveways. The end of each row of parking stalls shall be separated from driveways by a landscaped area, sidewalk, or other means approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

3.     Requirements for Parking Lot Trees.

 

a.     Minimum Number of Trees. A minimum of one tree for every six parking spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking lot.

 

b.     Trees to Provide Shade at Maturity. Trees with a canopy or spreading branch structure shall be specified, and trees shall generally have consistent spacing to substantially shade the parking area at maturity.

 

4.     Increased Landscaped Area In-lieu of Wheel Stops. Where parking stalls face into landscaped areas, the depth of the parking stall shall be decreased by two feet, and the landscaped area shall be increased two feet, with wheel stops or with the curb functioning as the wheel stop and allowing autos to overhang the increased landscaped area. Where autos will overhang into opposite sides of a landscaped area, such landscaped areas shall have a minimum width of six feet, as measured from inside of curb to inside of curb.

 

5.     Required Landscaped Areas for Parking Structure. A parking structure in a C, P, or I Zoning District having at-grade parking adjoining a street shall have a 10 foot landscaped area adjoining the street property line. Planter boxes shall be provided on the upper levels of parking structures where these structures are visible from public streets, pedestrian pathways, or adjacent buildings.

 

D.    Design Standards for Projects Requiring a Landscape Documentation Package and/or Irrigation Design Plan. All new or rehabilitated commercial, industrial or developer-installed residential landscapes that exceed 2,500 square feet or residential landscapes that exceed 5,000 square feet shall adhere to the following design standards. These standards shall not apply to city-recognized historic landscapes.

 

1.     Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site.

 

2.     Plants shall be grouped in hydozones according to water need.

 

3.     At least 75 percent of the total number of plants in non-turf areas shall require occasional, little or no summer water once established. All species should be adapted to the climate in which they will be planted, as documented by a published plant reference. If plants are given a range of water needs from “occasional to moderate” for example, the landscape designer must determine if the plant will require either occasional or moderate watering based on site, soil, and climate conditions and categorize the plant appropriately. Sources used to determine climate adaptation and watering requirements may include:

 

a.     Bornstein, Carol, David Fross and Bart O’Brien, California Native Plants for the Garden.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “occasional,” “infrequent,” or “drought tolerant.”

 

b.     East Bay Municipal Utility District’s publication Plants and Landscapes for Summer Dry Climates.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “occasional”, “infrequent,” or “no summer water.”

 

c.     Sunset Publishing Corporation Sunset Western Garden Book.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “little or no water.”

 

d.     University of California Cooperative Extension’s Guide to Estimating Irrigation Water Needs of Landscape Plantings in CA.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “Low” or “Very Low.”

 

4.     Total irrigated areas specified as turf shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent; sports or multiple uses fields or recreational areas are exempted. Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25 percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25 percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length.

 

5.     Those species identified by California Invasive Plan Council (CAL-IPC) as invasive in the San Francisco Bay Area shall not be specified.

 

6.     The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, Planned Developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

 

7.     Recirculating water shall be used for water features and, where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

 

8.     Recycled water shall be used for all irrigation (if available).

 

9.     The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

 

10.   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

 

11.   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

 

12.   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system.

 

13.   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. Weather-based irrigation controllers, soil moisture-based controllers or other self-adjusting irrigation controllers shall be required for all irrigation systems.

 

14.   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

 

15.   Sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve to achieve a uniform precipitation rate with no overspray onto hardscapes.

 

16.   Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.

 

17.   Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems.

 

18.   Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or low volume irrigation system. Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology.

 

19.   For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

 

20.   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes. It is highly recommended that bio based products are used and petroleum based products are avoided.

 

21.   Compost shall be specified as the soil amendment according to the outcome of the soil analysis, to bring the soil organic matter content to a minimum of 3.5 percent by dry weight or one inch of compost. Adding compost is waived if the plant palette primarily includes plants that are adapted to soils with little or no organic matter as documented by a published plant reference. If imported or site soil meets the organic content of 3.5 percent, the compost requirement is waived.

 

22.   All plans shall specify that 50 percent of landscape construction and demolition waste by weight must be diverted from the landfill.

 

E.    Recommended Design Standards. It is recommended that all landscape projects:

 

1.     Protect and preserve existing native vegetation and use local natural plant communities as models;

 

2.     Select water-conserving plant and turf species that are suitable for the climate and soil conditions in San Leandro;

 

3.     Select plants based on disease and pest resistance;

 

4.     Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System to select plants, which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

 

5.     Avoid turf on slopes greater than 10 percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and avoid turf in street medians, traffic islands or bulbouts of any size unless irrigated with subsurface or low volume irrigation;

 

6.     Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes;

 

7.     Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil;

 

8.     Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas;

 

9.     Place trees on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf;

 

10.   Use automatic irrigation controllers that allow for multiple start times;

 

11.   Set irrigation controls to water before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.;

 

12.   Space sprinkler heads to achieve a uniform precipitation rate with no overspray onto hardscapes;

 

13.   Use dedicated landscape water meters on landscape areas smaller than 5,000 square feet to facilitate water management;

 

14.   Install high-flow sensors (flow meters) that detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction;

 

15.   Install manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair;

 

16.   Use low volume irrigation to maximize water infiltration into the root zone in mulched planting areas;

 

17.   Incorporate rain harvesting or catchment technologies such as cisterns for storage and use of rainwater to satisfy a percentage of the landscape irrigation requirements; and

 

18.   Incorporate stormwater best management practices to minimize runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration. Examples include:

 

a.     Rain gardens, infiltration beds, swales and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground,

 

b.     Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow and filter pollutants, and

 

c.     Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff.

 

F.     Exceptions to Design Standards. As part of the “Site Plan Approval” pursuant to Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval, exceptions to the requirements of this section may be permitted if such requirements are found not to be practical due to pre-existing site constraints. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2012-005 § 3; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.120 Acceptable Materials and Performance Standards
 

A.    Minimum Required Landscape Areas Shall be Planted. The sole use of crushed rock or gravel for large landscaped areas is prohibited (except for walks and drainage swales).

 

B.    Minimum Plant Sizes and Species Type. Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect. Select species and space plants to allow them to grow to their natural size and shape. Plants located in a row or adjacent to buildings, sidewalks, or roads will be spaced between their minimum and maximum mature plant spread, according to a published reference plant book. Plant materials shall not be normally less than a 15 gallon container for trees, five gallon container for shrubs, and a one gallon container for accent plantings. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve smaller or require larger initial planting size to achieve specific effects.

 

C.    Mulching is Required. All soil on-site shall be top dressed with medium decorative bark chip mulch to a depth of three inches, or an approved alternative. Ongoing maintenance includes regular reapplication of mulch to a minimum of three inches. It is highly recommended that compost and mulch is recycled from local organic materials such as plant or wood waste and compost is purchased from processors who participate in the US Composting Council’s Standard Testing Assurance Program.

 

D.    Performance Standards for Plant Material.

 

1.     Groundcover plantings shall substantially fill the intended landscape area within two years of planting.

 

2.     Shrub plantings, where used to screen parking lots, shall reach a minimum height of 30 inches within two years of planting.

 

E.    Staking Requirements. All trees shall be double staked.

 

F.     Hydro-Seeding. Plans indicating location and type of hydro-seeding shall be submitted with the final landscape plan when such planting is to be utilized for permanent landscape treatment or for natural area restoration. Hydro-seeding plans shall contain installation specifications including, but not limited to:

 

1.     Seed Mix and Application Rate. A native seed mix containing a minimum of 10 percent shrub and perennial seeds shall be utilized in areas where permanent landscape restoration is required. Species selected shall include plant materials native to the area.

 

2.     Fertilizer, mulch materials, soil preparation, and watering specifications. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2012-005 § 3; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.124 Completion, Maintenance and Subsequent Changes
 

A.    Completion of Landscape Installation. Prior to the issuance of either a Certificate of Occupancy or Approval of the Final Inspection, all required landscaping and irrigation shall be installed per the approved plans, with respect to size, number, and species of plants, and provision of adequate irrigation coverage. In cases of substantial documented hardship and subject to the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official, a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued prior to the complete installation of the landscaping subject to the applicant/owner’s posting of a certificate of deposit, performance bond, or other acceptable security.

 

B.    Ability to Assure Establishment of Landscaping. For projects with significant new landscaping, or where the installation of such landscaping was a project specific condition intended to mitigate a project’s impact, the Zoning Enforcement Official may require either or both of the following to assure plant establishment:

 

1.     Posting of a performance bond or certificate of deposit, to cover a two year period. Such bonds shall typically cover the cost of replacing all applicable plant material, but may exclude material and labor costs relating to irrigation; or

 

2.     Providing evidence of a minimum two year maintenance contract with a licensed landscape contractor.

 

C.    Irrigation Scheduling. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

 

1.     Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

 

2.     Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

 

3.     For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the Estimated Total Water Use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

 

4.     Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

 

a.     The plant establishment period;

 

b.     The established landscape; and

 

c.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

 

5.     Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

 

a.     Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

 

b.     Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

 

c.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

 

d.     Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

 

e.     Application rate setting;

 

f.      Root depth setting;

 

g.     Plant type setting;

 

h.     Soil type and mulch depth;

 

i.      Slope factor setting;

 

j.      Shade factor setting; and

 

k.     Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.

 

D.    Landscaping Shall be Permanently Maintained. Required landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained to preserve plant heath, water use efficiency and consistency with the design at time of completion and City’s final inspection. As used in this section, “maintained” includes: watering, weeding, pruning, insect and disease control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials.

 

1.     Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the Certificate of Completion.

 

a.     A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

 

b.     Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents.

 

c.     Use of the “Bay-Friendly Landscape Model Maintenance Specifications” and the “Bay-Friendly Landscape Guidelines” as official reference documents in the landscape maintenance contract and/or with on-site landscape staff is highly recommended. It is highly recommended that at least one landscaping staff member or contractor to be trained in the use of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) or is a “Bay-Friendly Qualified Landscape Professional.”

 

2.     Failure to Maintain Landscaping is a Violation of this Code. The failure to maintain a landscape installation that is governed by this chapter may be cited as a violation of this Code, pursuant to Section 5.24.112 Violations as Misdemeanors or Infractions. Examples of failed maintenance include, but are not limited to:

 

a.     Allowing a significant amount of trees, shrubs, ground covers, and/or turf areas to die, or become so diseased, and/or stressed as to make the property appear unsightly.

 

b.     Improperly pruning trees, so that their natural form is negated. Examples include the severe topping or pollarding of trees that were planted or retained to provide a shade canopy, or “pruning up,” or excessively “thinning” trees that were required for screening.

 

c.     Allowing weeds to grow and infiltrate to such an extent that the intended ground cover plantings are obscured, and/or the landscaped area appears unsightly.

 

3.     Changes to Previously Approved Plans Require City Approval. The removal and/or replacement of trees that were a part of an earlier approval by a Site Plan Review, Use Permit, and/or Planned Development may require an amendment to that earlier approval as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official. Removal of such trees without prior City approval of an amendment is prohibited and may be subject to enforcement pursuant to Section 5.24.112 Violations as Misdemeanors or Infractions. Minor changes do not require approval of an amendment and are subject to the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2010-001 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.16.128 Existing Landscapes
 

A.    Water Waste Prevention. To prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation, applied water shall not leave the target landscape (runoff) due to overspray, or any other similar conditions that causes water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures.

 

B.    Irrigation Audit Required for Existing Landscapes that Exceed One Acre. All existing landscapes that were installed before January 1, 2010 and are over one acre in size shall conduct irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, or irrigation audits to evaluate water use. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2010-001 § 1)

 

4.16.132 Penalties
 

Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation is prohibited. Water waste resulting from runoff leaving new or existing landscapes due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures shall be subject to penalties as established in the City of San Leandro Municipal Code. Overspray and runoff may be allowed if: (1) the landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or (2) the adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2010-001 § 1)

Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures
4.20.100 Specific Purposes
 

This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement, their re-establishment after abandonment, and the alteration or restoration after destruction of the structures they occupy. While permitting the use and maintenance of nonconforming structures, this chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming structures and nonconforming signs by prohibiting their being moved, altered, or enlarged in a manner that would increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this chapter and by prohibiting their restoration after destruction. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.20.104 Continuation and Maintenance
 

A.    A use, lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code or of amendments thereto, that does not conform with the use regulations or the site area per dwelling unit regulations for the district in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

 

B.    A structure, lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code or of amendments thereto, that does not conform with the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height, or floor area of structures, driveways, courts, or open space for the district in which the structure is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and may be used and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

 

C.    A use that does not conform with the parking, loading, planting area, landscaping, screening, or sign regulations of the zoning district in which it is located shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely because of one or more of these nonconformities.

 

D.    Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure, the use of which is nonconforming, and on a nonconforming structure or nonconforming sign. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.20.108 Alterations and Expansions
 

A.    Nonconforming Uses May Not Be Expanded. A nonconforming use may not be expanded, except as an exception pursuant to this subsection.

 

1.     Any enlargement, alteration, or relocation of a structure or site that would increase the area to be occupied by the nonconforming use is not allowed.

 

2.     The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve a minor alteration, such as tenant improvements, to a structure containing a nonconforming use, providing that the alterations do not increase the existing area or degree of nonconformity.

 

3.     A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended or expanded, including an expansion to the hours of operation beyond those established at the time the use became nonconforming.

 

4.     Exception for Nonconforming Single-Family and Two-Family Uses. A nonconforming single-family or two-family residential use may be enlarged, subject to a use permit issued by the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The Board of Zoning Adjustments, in addition to the findings required for a use permit, shall make the following findings:

 

a.     That the expansion of the nonconforming single-family or two-family dwelling and, thus, the perpetuation of the nonconforming residential use will not be detrimental to the economic vitality of the area and surrounding conforming uses; and

 

b.     That the enlarged single-family or two-family dwelling is visually compatible with the nearby conforming and nonconforming uses and upgrades the overall condition of the structure and the neighborhood.

 

5.     Exception for Nonconforming Clubs, Lodges and Religious Assembly Uses in Commercial Zoning Districts. A nonconforming club, lodge, or religious assembly use that lawfully existed in a commercial zoning district prior to May 7, 2003, may be enlarged, subject to a use permit issued by the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The Board of Zoning Adjustments, in addition to the findings required for a use permit, shall make the following findings:

 

a.     That the expansion of the existing nonconforming club, lodge or religious assembly use and, thus, the perpetuation of the nonconforming club, lodge, or religious assembly use will not be detrimental to the economic vitality of the area and surrounding conforming uses; and

 

b.     That the enlarged club, lodge, or religious assembly use is visually compatible with the nearby conforming and nonconforming uses and upgrades the overall condition of the structure and the neighborhood.

 

B.    Nonconforming Structures and Buildings.

 

1.     Alterations and Reconstruction Shall Not Increase Nonconformity. No nonconforming structure shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height of structures, distances between structures, parking, driveways, or open space prescribed in the regulations for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

 

2.     Enlargements and Relocations Shall Conform. No nonconforming structure shall be moved or enlarged unless the new location or enlargement shall conform to the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height of structures, maximum allowable floor area, distances between structures, parking, driveways, or open space prescribed in the regulations for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

 

3.     Additions Exceeding 50 Percent of the Nonconforming Structure’s Value Not Permitted. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged or altered if the total estimated construction cost of the proposed enlargement or alteration, plus the total estimated construction costs of all other enlargements or alterations for which building permits were issued within the preceding 36-month period, exceeds 50 percent of the total estimated cost of reconstructing the entire nonconforming building, unless the proposed enlargement or alteration would render the building conforming. For the purposes of this section, estimated construction and reconstruction costs shall be determined by the Building Official in the same manner as the valuation for building permit fees is determined.

 

4.     Additions that Increase Nonconformity Requires Variance Approval. Any enlargements or alterations shall conform to requirements in effect at the time of issuance of the building permit. Nonconforming structures that would be enlarged or altered in any manner that serves to increase the degree of nonconformity, or exceed the 50 percent limitation prescribed above, shall not be permitted unless a variance is obtained, as appropriate.

 

Exceptions.

 

a.     Where a building is nonconforming only by reason of one substandard front or interior yard, provided that all nonconforming interior side yards are not less than three feet in width, the building may be enlarged or altered without regard to the estimated construction cost.

 

b.     Where a building is nonconforming only by reason of a substandard side yard and/or rear yard adjacent to a public street, the building may be enlarged or altered without regard to the estimated construction cost.

 

C.    Nonconformance with Performance Standards. No use which fails to meet the performance standards of Section 4.04.340 Performance Standards shall be enlarged or extended or shall replace equipment that results in the use’s failure to meet the performance standards, unless the enlargement, extension, or replacement equipment will result in elimination of nonconformity with required performance standards.

 

D.    Nonconforming Signs. No nonconforming sign shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the nonconformity, nor shall such a sign be moved except in accord with Section 4.12.116        Regulations for Off-Site Advertising Signs unless the new location and/or reconstruction makes the sign conform to the regulations of Chapter 4.12 Signs. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2003-006 § 7; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.20.112 Abandonment or Substitution of a Nonconforming Use
 

A.    Abandoned Uses Shall Not Be Re-Established. A nonconforming use that is substantially discontinued or changed to a conforming use for a continuous period of 180 calendar days or more shall not be re-established, and the use of the structure or site thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located, provided that this section shall not apply to nonconforming dwelling units. Abandonment or discontinuance shall constitute cessation of a use regardless of intent to resume the use. The burden of proof in establishing whether a nonconforming use has been discontinued for less than 180 consecutive days shall be upon the operator of the use or person requesting re-establishment.

 

B.    Substitution of Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use may be substituted for another nonconforming use, provided that: (1) the previous use has not been discontinued for a continuous period of 180 calendar days, or more; and (2) the new substituting use is of lesser nonconformity than the previous use, based on the consistency of the new use with the stated purpose of the applicable zoning district and its relative compatibility with surrounding permitted uses, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.20.116 Restoration of a Damaged Structure and Its Nonconforming Use
 

A.    Structures Damaged by 50 Percent or Less May Be Restored. Whenever a structure that does not comply with the standards for yards, height of structures, distances between structures or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located, or the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity or by an act beyond the control of the property owner to the extent of 50 percent or less, the structure may be restored, and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that a building permit for restoration or other work satisfactory to the Zoning Enforcement Official is obtained within six months and construction diligently pursued to completion. An extension of the six month period may be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director if the applicant can prove extenuating circumstances beyond the applicant’s control exist.

 

B.    Structures Damaged by Greater than 50 Percent May Not Be Restored. Whenever a structure that does not comply with the standards for yards, height of structures, distances between structures or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which it is located or the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity, or by an act beyond the control of the property owner to an extent greater than 50 percent or is voluntarily razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is obtained, and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.

 

1.     Exceptions for the Restoration of Residential Structures.

 

a.     Residential structures in R districts that do not conform to standards for yards, height of structures, open space, or lot area per unit may be reconstructed with the same floor area, whatever the extent of the damage, subject to Administrative Review and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official, and provided there is no increase in any nonconformity.

 

b.     Residential structures in Commercial or Industrial districts that do not conform to standards for yards, height of structures, open space, lot area per unit, or use, may be reconstructed with the same floor area, whatever the extent of the damage, subject to a use permit issued by the Board of Zoning Adjustments. To approve the reconstruction where there is not to be an increase in any nonconformity, the Board of Zoning Adjustments, in addition to the findings required for a use permit, shall make the following findings:

 

i.      That the reconstruction of the nonconforming structure and/or use will not be detrimental to the economic vitality of the neighborhood and surrounding conforming uses; and

 

ii.     That the reconstruction of the nonconforming structure and/or use will not pose a new risk to the occupants of the structure.

 

c.     Single-Family Residential uses in Commercial or Industrial Districts may be reconstructed to a size larger than the damaged structure, subject to a use permit issued by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. The Board of Zoning Adjustments, in addition to the finding required for a use permit and to those required in paragraph 1.b, shall also make the findings required in Subsection A.4 of Section 4.20.108 Alterations and Expansions.

 

d.     Nonconforming residential uses other than Single-Family may not be expanded when reconstructed.

 

2.     Exceptions for the Restoration of Commercial Structures.

 

a.     Commercial structures in Commercial districts that do not conform to standards for yards, height of structures, open space, or parking may be reconstructed with the same floor area, whatever the extent of the damage, subject to Administrative Review and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official, provided there is no increase in any nonconformity.

 

b.     Commercial structures in Residential districts that do not conform to standards for yards, height of structures, open space, parking, or use may be reconstructed with the same floor area, whatever the extent of the damage, subject to a use permit issued by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, provided there is no increase in any nonconformity. The Board of Zoning Adjustments, in addition to the findings required for a use permit, shall make the following findings:

 

i.      That the reconstruction of the nonconforming structure and/or use will not be detrimental to the surrounding residential neighborhood; and

 

ii.     That the past operation of the commercial establishment in this residential district has not resulted in a significant negative effect on the surrounding neighborhood.

 

C.    Determining the Extent of Damage. The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of a comparable building. For the purposes of this section, estimated construction and reconstruction costs shall be determined by the Building Official in the same manner as the valuation for building permit fees is determined. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.20.120 Requirements for Building Permits on a Site Having Certain Nonconforming Site Features
 

An applicant for a building permit pertaining to a site or structure, located in a C, P, or I District that is nonconforming due to lack of screening of mechanical equipment, required walls or fences to screen parking, or outdoor storage or activity, required paving for driveways, or required planting areas, shall submit for approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official a schedule for elimination or substantial reduction of these nonconformities over a period not exceeding five years. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require that priority be given to elimination of nonconformities that have significant adverse impacts on surrounding properties and shall not require a commitment to remove nonconformities that have minor impact and would be costly to eliminate due to the configuration of the site and the location of existing structures. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

4.20.124 Elimination of Nonconforming Uses (Abatement)
 

Nothing in this section shall preclude the maintenance of legal nonconforming residential and accessory structures, residential and accessory uses, and fences in R districts. These legal nonconforming residential and accessory structures, residential and accessory uses, and fences in R districts must be maintained in conformance with all applicable local ordinances, including, but not limited to, the Uniform Housing and Building Codes.

 

A.    Nonconforming Use When No Structure Involved. In any district the nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued within one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or one year from the date such use becomes nonconforming, whichever date is later.

 

1.     Exceptions. Preexisting parking lots in R districts that serve adjacent commercial uses shall not be considered nonconforming.

 

B.    Nonconforming Use in a Structure. All nonconforming uses shall be discontinued within the time periods specified below, unless an exception is granted pursuant to Subsection C.

 

1.     C, P, NA, SA, and I Districts. Seven years from the date of notification of nonconformity.

 

C.    Notification and Exception Procedures. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall determine those properties for which there was a lawfully existing use, permitted, or conditionally permitted, in the district in which they were located prior to the date of adoption of this Code and which uses and buildings were rendered nonconforming by reason of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the zoning map. Written notice of such nonconformance, the termination procedures, and requirements of this section shall be mailed to the owner of record and to the occupant of each such property. Within two years of the date of mailing of such notice, any property owner, lessee with the consent of the owner, or purchaser of such property acting with the consent of the owner may apply to have such property excepted from the provisions of this section.

 

1.     Application Requirements. An application for an exception from the requirements of this section shall be initiated by submitting the following material and any other information deemed necessary for the determination of the Zoning Enforcement Official:

 

a.     A completed application form, signed by the property owner or authorized agent, stating the location and size of the property, the use on the date of adoption of this Code, and the reasons indicating that the use or structure is compatible with and will not be detrimental to uses designated in the General Plan for the surrounding area.

 

2.     Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing within a reasonable time, following the procedures established in Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions, on each application for an exception from the termination requirements of this section. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall determine whether the use of the property on the date of adoption of this Code is compatible with and not detrimental to the land uses designated in the General Plan for the surrounding area and properties. If it so finds, it shall recommend to the City Council that the use shall be excepted from the termination provisions of this section. The Commission may recommend such conditions as it may find necessary to ensure compatibility, including, but not limited to: required improvement of or modifications to existing improvements on the property, limitations on hours of operations, limitations on the nature of operations, and a specified term of years for which the exception shall be granted.

 

3.     Council Action. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider the application within a reasonable time. The Council may, at its option, conduct a public hearing on the application. If the City Council finds that the use of the property is compatible with and not detrimental to those land uses designated in the General Plan for the surrounding area and properties, it shall, by motion, except said use from the termination provisions of this section. In granting such exception, the City Council may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure such compatibility, including, but not limited to, the conditions set out in Subsection C.2. The action of the City Council shall be mailed to the owner of the nonconforming property within 10 working days and filed for record in the office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 7; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Title 5—Administration
Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits
Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions
Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval
Chapter 5.16 Amendments
Chapter 5.20 Appeals
Chapter 5.24 Enforcement
Chapter 5.28 Mobile Home Park Conversions
Chapter 5.32 Residential Condominium Conversions
Chapter 5.36 Nonresidential Condominium Conversions
Chapter 5.40 Alcoholic Beverage Sale Regulations

Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits
5.04.100 Purpose and Applicability
 

To ensure that each new or expanded use of a site and each new or expanded structure complies with this ordinance, a zoning permit shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit, grading permit, sign permit, certificate of occupancy, business license, or utility service connection or commencement of a use or activity regulated by this Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.104 General Application for Zoning Permit
 

Application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Official on a form provided and shall include a statement that the applicant is the property owner or authorized agent. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require such information as is reasonably necessary to describe the proposed use, building, or activity, including grading, or other alteration of property. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall adopt administrative procedures for the reasonable processing of zoning permits and other zoning actions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.108 Authority of Zoning Enforcement Official
 

The Zoning Enforcement Official shall approve or conditionally approve a zoning permit upon determining that the use, structure, or activity complies with this Code and that environmental review and documentation, if any, required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is complete.

 

A.    Supplemental Notice. For zoning permits under uses listed as requiring Administrative Review that the Zoning Enforcement Official determines may have a significant impact on adjacent uses or may generate significant public concerns, notices may be mailed to all owners of real property adjacent to the subject site a minimum of 10 days prior to the administrative decision.

 

B.    Conditions of Approval. In approving an Administrative Review, the Zoning Enforcement Official may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:

 

1.     Achieve the general purposes of this Chapter and the specific purposes of the zoning district in which the use will be located, or to be consistent with the General Plan;

 

2.     Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or

 

3.     Ensure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner compatible with existing uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area.

 

C.    Referral to Board of Zoning Adjustments. For any use requiring Administrative Review under the base R, C, or I District’s use regulations, the Zoning Enforcement Official may defer action on the issuance of a zoning permit to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.112 Uses Not Listed
 

A.    Uses Defined in Section 1.12.108 Definitions. Definitions describe one or more uses having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall determine whether a specific use shall be deemed to be within one or more use classifications or not within any classification in this Code. The Zoning Enforcement Official may determine that a specific use shall not be deemed to be within a classification if its characteristics are substantially incompatible with those typical of uses named within the classification. The Zoning Enforcement Official’s decision may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments, pursuant to Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

B.    Any new use, or any use that cannot be clearly determined to be in an existing use classification, may be incorporated into the zoning regulations by a Zoning Code text amendment, as provided in Chapter 5.16 Amendments. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.116 Effective Date; Lapse of Permit; Appeals
 

A zoning permit shall become effective on issuance and shall continue in effect unless and until the activity for which the permit is granted is conducted or maintained in violation of this Code or of conditions placed on the permit or this Code is amended so as to render the zoning permit ineffective. An applicant or interested party may appeal the Zoning Enforcement Official’s denial of a Zoning Permit to the Board of Zoning Adjustments, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.120 Development Plans
 

Any changes to development plans following issuance of a zoning permit, but prior to issuance of a building permit, shall require a new zoning permit if the changes substantially affect compliance with this ordinance. The Zoning Enforcement Official may waive the requirement for a new zoning permit if the changes to approved plans are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or additions to the plans, and are consistent with the intent of the original approval and the purposes of the Zoning Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.124 Environmental Review
 

A.    A project regulated by this Code that is not ministerial or categorically exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and is the subject of an application for a discretionary approval, including, but not limited to, a Zoning Map Amendment, use permit, variance, Planned Development, Neighborhood Conservation Plan, or Landmark Conservation District Plan, shall be subject to environmental review.

 

B.    Duties of Responsible Agencies. Individuals and bodies other than the lead agency shall have the powers and responsibilities assigned to responsible agencies by CEQA and CEQA Guidelines. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.04.128 Fees and Deposits
 

All persons submitting applications for zoning permits of any type or zoning map amendments, as required by this Code, or filing appeals shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by City Council resolution or resolutions establishing applicable fees and charges. Said resolution or resolutions are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions
5.08.100 Purposes
 

A.    This chapter provides the flexibility in application of land use and development regulations necessary to achieve the purposes of this Code by establishing procedures for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of applications for use permits and variances.

 

B.    Use permits are required for use classifications typically resulting in unusual site development features or operating characteristics requiring special consideration, so that they may be designed, located, and operated compatibly with uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area, provided the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not impair the integrity and character of the zoned district.

 

C.    Variances are intended to resolve practical difficulties or unnecessary physical hardships that may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon; from geographic, topographic, or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity; or from street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the site.

 

D.    Variances may be granted only with respect to landscaping, screening, lot area, lot dimensions, yards, height of structures, distances between structures, open space, off-street parking and off-street loading, and performance standards.

 

E.    Authorization to grant variances does not extend to use regulations, because sufficient flexibility is provided by the use permit process for specified uses and by the authority of the Board of Zoning Adjustments to determine whether a specific use belongs within one or more of the use classifications listed in Section 1.12.108 Definitions. Further, Chapter 5.16 Amendments provides procedures for amendments to the zoning map or zoning regulations. These will ensure that any changes are consistent with the General Plan and the land use objectives of this Code.

 

F.     Parking exceptions are intended for the review of parking requirements in which particular difficulties or undue hardship would occur without the granting of such exception. It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth findings that relate to specific parking circumstances. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.104 Authority of Board of Zoning Adjustments
 

A.    The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for use permits, variances, or parking exceptions upon finding that the proposed use permit, variance, or parking exception is consistent with the General Plan, the general purposes of this chapter, the specific purposes of the base or overlay zoning district in which a development site is located, and all applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.

 

B.    Projects on City-Owned Land in the CR and OS Districts. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall submit all applications for use permits, variances, or parking exceptions to the City Council for approval, and no action by the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall be required. After a duly noticed public hearing, the City Council may approve or conditionally approve such application if it meets the findings required by Section 5.08.124 Required Findings. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.108 Applicability to Existing and New Uses
 

Use permits shall be required for any new or expanded use located in a district where the land use regulations require such a permit for that use classification. In addition, preexisting uses shall be presumed to be subject to a use permit, even though a use permit was not required at the time the use was originally established, if a requirement for a use permit for the use is subsequently enacted in the Zoning Code. Therefore, any subsequent modifications or expansions to the “presumed conditional use,” shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.112 Initiation
 

Applications for use permits, variances, and parking exceptions shall be initiated by submitting the following materials to the Zoning Enforcement Official:

 

A.    A completed application form, signed by the property owner or authorized agent, accompanied by the required fee, copies of deeds, any required powers of attorney, plans and mapping documentation, or other information required on the application or deemed necessary by the Zoning Enforcement Official to assume the completion of the application, in the form prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement Official;

B.    A vicinity map showing the location and street address of the development site. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing
 

A.    Public Hearing Required. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall hold a public hearing on an application for a use permit, variance, or parking exception.

 

B.    Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the following manner:

 

1.     Mailed or Delivered Notice. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be: (1) mailed to the owner of the subject real property or the owner’s duly authorized agent, and the project applicant; (2) all owners of property within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site, as shown on the last equalized property tax assessment roll or the records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector; and (3) any agency as required by Government Code Section 65091.

 

2.     Notice to Adjacent Property Owners. Notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site that is the subject of the hearing. In lieu of utilizing the assessment roll, applicants may submit and the City may use records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector, which contain more recent information than the assessment roll.

 

3.     Posted Notice. For hearings directly relating to an identifiable property, notice shall also be given by posting at least three public notices, thereof, at least 10 days prior to such hearing, including at least one such notice on or within 500 feet of the subject property.

 

4.     Published Notice. Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in San Leandro at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

 

5.     No proceeding in connection with the hearing shall be invalidated by failure to send notice where the address of the owner is not a matter of public record or by failure to post public notices or by failure to receive any notice.

 

6.     Supplemental On-Site Notice. For projects that the Community Development Director determines may have a significant impact on adjacent uses or may generate significant public concerns, the Director may require that the applicant and/or property owner erect an on-site public notice sign, minimum three feet by five feet in size and six feet in height that provides a description of the proposed project, the date, time, and place of scheduled public hearing(s), the name of the project proponent, and other information as required to clarify the project proposal. Such sign shall be subject to review and approval of the Community Development Director and shall be installed at a prominent location on the site a minimum of 10 days prior to the scheduled public hearing.

 

C.    Contents of Notice. The notice of public hearing shall contain:

 

1.     A description of the location of the development site and the purpose of the application;

 

2.     A statement of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing;

 

3.     A reference to application materials on file for detailed information; and

 

4.     A statement that any interested person or an authorized agent may appear and be heard.

 

D.    Multiple Applications. When applications for multiple use permits, variances, or parking exceptions on a single site are filed at the same time, the Zoning Enforcement Official may schedule a combined public hearing. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.120 Duties of Board of Zoning Adjustments
 

A.    Public Hearing. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall conduct the public hearing and hear testimony for and against the application. A public hearing may be continued to a definite date and time without additional public notice.

 

B.    Decision and Notice. After the close of the public hearing, the Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and any other party requesting such notice within seven days of the date of the action ratifying the decision.

 

C.    Limits on Conditions of Approval. No conditions of approval of a use permit shall include use, height, bulk, open space, loading, or sign requirements that are less restrictive than those prescribed by applicable district regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.124 Required Findings
 

An application for a use permit or variance as it was applied for or in modified form as required by the Board, shall be approved if, on the basis of the application, plans, materials, and testimony submitted, the Board finds:

 

A.    For All Use Permits.

 

1.     That the proposed location of the use is in accord with the objectives of this Code and the purposes of the district in which the site is located;

 

2.     That the proposed location of the use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with the General Plan; will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of persons residing, or working in, or adjacent to, the neighborhood of such use; and will not be detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity, or to the general welfare of the City;

 

3.     That the proposed use will comply with the provisions of this Code, including any specific condition required for the proposed use in the district in which it would be located; and

 

4.     That the proposed use will not create adverse impacts on traffic or create demands exceeding the capacity of public services and facilities, which cannot be mitigated.

 

B.    For Variances.

 

1.     That because of special circumstances or conditions applicable to the subject property, including narrowness and shallowness or shape, exceptional topography, or the extraordinary or exceptional situations or conditions, strict application of the requirements of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional difficulties to, or exceptional and/or undue hardships upon, the owner of the property;

 

2.     That the relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good, without substantial impairment of affected natural resources, and without significant detriment or injury to property or improvements in the vicinity of the development site or to the public health, safety or general welfare; and

 

3.     That granting the application is consistent with the purposes of this Code and will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations on other properties in the vicinity and in the same zoning district.

 

4.     OS District Only. That granting the application is consistent with the requirements of Section 65911 of the Government Code and will not conflict with General Plan policy governing orderly growth and development and the preservation and conservation of open-space land.

 

C.    For Parking Exceptions.

 

1.     The strict application of the provisions of this Code would cause particular difficulty or undue hardship in connection with the use and enjoyment of said property.

 

2.     That the establishment, maintenance and/or conducting of the off-street parking facilities as proposed are as nearly in compliance with the requirements set forth in this Code as are reasonably possible.

 

3.     That the provision of additional parking measures for projects shall be allowed to include car share features, transit passes for tenants in residential, commercial, or mixed-use developments, and within one-quarter mile proximity to a transit corridor or other transit facility including a bus stop or BART station.

 

4.     Parking exceptions may be granted to affordable housing and senior housing facilities, or mixed-use developments with shared parking.

 

D.    Mandatory Denial. Failure to make all the required findings under Subsections A, B, or C shall require denial of the application for a use permit, variance, or parking exception. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-007 § 8; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.128 Conditions of Approval
 

In approving a use permit, variance, or parking exception, reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to:

 

A.    Achieve the general purposes of this Code or the specific purposes of the zoning district in which the site is located or to make it consistent with the General Plan;

 

B.    Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare;

 

C.    Ensure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner compatible with existing and potential uses on adjoining properties or in the surrounding area; or

 

D.    Prevent or mitigate potential adverse effects on the environment. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.132 Effective Date; Appeals
 

A use permit, variance, or parking exception shall become effective 15 days after action by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, unless appealed to the City Council in accord with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.136 Lapse of Approval; Transferability; Discontinuance; Revocation
 

A.    Lapse of Approval. A use permit, variance, or parking exception shall lapse after one year, or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval, after its date of approval unless:

 

1.     A building permit has been issued, coupled with diligent progress evidencing a good faith intent to commence the intended use; or

 

2.     A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or

 

3.     The use is established; or

 

4.     The use permit or variance is renewed.

 

A use permit also shall lapse upon discontinuance of work on a project or expiration of a building permit.

 

B.    Transferability. The validity of a use permit, variance, or a parking exception shall not be affected by changes in ownership or proprietorship provided that the new owner or proprietor applies to the City for a business license and zoning approval.

 

C.    Discontinuance. A use permit, variance, or parking exception shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for 180 consecutive days.

 

D.    Revocation. A use permit, variance, or parking exception that is exercised in violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this Code may be revoked, as provided in Section 5.24.108 Revocation of Discretionary Permits.

 

E.    Renewal. Upon written request, a use permit, variance, height exception, or parking exception may be renewed by the Zoning Enforcement Official for one year, with one additional one-year renewal allowed for a total period not to exceed two years without notice or public hearing if the findings required by Section 5.08.124 Required Findings remain valid. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.140 Changed Plans; New Applications
 

A.    Changed Plans. A request for changes in conditions of approval of a use permit, variance, or parking exception, or a change to development plans that would have a substantial effect on conditions of approval shall be treated as a new application. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve changes that are minor in nature.

 

B.    New Application. If an application for a use permit, variance, or parking exception is disapproved, no new application for the same or substantially the same, use permit or variance shall be filed within one year of the date of denial of the initial application, unless the denial is made without prejudice. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.08.144 Temporary Use Permits
 

A temporary use permit authorizing certain temporary use classifications as listed in various residential, commercial, and industrial districts under the heading “Temporary Uses Subject to Administrative Review...” shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Temporary uses shall include: Christmas Tree and Pumpkin Sales; Commercial Filming; Assembly Uses, Temporary; Street or Neighborhood Fairs; Temporary Real Estate Offices; Outdoor Retail Sales; Temporary Storage Containers; Circuses and Carnivals; Trade Fairs; Non-Recurring Swap Meets; and Animal Shows. The definitions for these temporary uses are found in Section 1.12.108 Definitions. In the event that a temporary use other than those listed above is proposed, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall review the proposed use and shall determine if it should be treated as a temporary use.

 

A.    Application and Fee. A completed application form and the required fee shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Official. The Zoning Enforcement Official may request any other plans and materials necessary to assess the potential impacts of the proposed temporary use.

 

B.    Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Official. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a complete application within a reasonable time. No notice or public hearing shall be required.

 

C.    Required Findings. The application shall be approved as submitted, or in modified form, if the Zoning Enforcement Official finds:

 

1.     That the proposed temporary use will be located, operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the provisions of this Chapter; and

 

2.     That approval of the application will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare.

 

D.    Conditions of Approval. In approving a temporary use permit, the Zoning Enforcement Official may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:

 

1.     Achieve the general purposes of this chapter and the specific purposes of the zoning district in which the temporary use will be located, or to be consistent with the General Plan;

 

2.     Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or

 

3.     Ensure operation and maintenance of the temporary use in a manner compatible with existing uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area.

 

E.    Effective Date; Duration; Appeals. An approved temporary use permit shall be effective on the date of its approval; a disapproved permit may be appealed by the applicant, as provided in Chapter 5.20 Appeals. The permit shall be valid for a specified time period not to exceed 90 days as specified by the Zoning Enforcement Official’s approval action. The temporary use permit shall specify the time within which the temporary use shall be commenced, which shall be not more than 90 days from approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official, and the use shall be continued only for the duration set forth in the zoning approval. A temporary use permit shall lapse if not used within the dates approved and may be revoked by the Zoning Enforcement Official effective immediately upon verbal or written notice for violation of the terms of the permit. Verbal notice shall be confirmed by written notice mailed to the permit holder within a reasonable time. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve changes in a temporary use permit. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.12 Site Plan Approval
5.12.100 Intent
 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for Site Plan Review, assuring that new development complies with the applicable site development standards of this Code and that older nonconforming sites are upgraded at the time the uses or structures on such sites are expanded or intensified. The Site Plan Review process is integral to the City’s other discretionary and non-discretionary development review procedures in order to facilitate the permitting process. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4)

 

5.12.104 Applicability
 

Site Plan Review is required for certain nonresidential development, two- and multi-family development, and single-family development in C, I, NA, RD, RM, SA, and Districts. Review of single-family construction projects in RO, RS, RS-40, and RS-VP Districts is regulated by the requirements of Chapter 2.04 R Residential Districts.

 

Site Plan Approval is required prior to issuance of a building permit for any of the following improvements:

 

A.    Development Requiring Discretionary Zoning Permit. Any commercial, industrial, institutional, or two- and multi-family residential development that requires a conditional use permit or Planned Development approval.

 

B.    Other New or Expanded Development, as listed below:

 

1.     Single-, Two-, and Multi-Family Residential: C, DA, I, NA, P, RD, RM, and SA Districts. All proposals for new development, and proposed additions to existing development (where permitted or conditionally permitted per base district regulations), which would either:

 

a.     Result in an additional dwelling unit, excluding an accessory dwelling unit meeting all requirements of Section 2.04.388 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs), or

 

b.     Result in an addition or partial demolition with reconstruction, resulting in a net enlargement to the existing structure that will be greater in size than both: 2,500 square feet and 50 percent of the gross floor area of the existing development, or

 

c.     Result in a new freestanding structure, such as a carport or garage, greater in size than 2,500 square feet, or

 

d.     Create or enlarge a second- or third story.

 

2.     Two-Family Residential: DA, RS, RS-40, RO, and SA-2 Districts—Special Review Requirements for Additions. Additions to existing two-family dwellings that would require Site Plan Review per Subsection 1 above, are instead subject to the noticing, hearing, and findings requirements of Section 2.04.408 RO, RS and RS-40 Districts—Residential Site Plan Review.

 

3.     Non-Residential Projects: C, DA, OS, PS, NA, P, R, and SA Districts. The following development proposals require Site Plan Review:

 

a.     Development of new structures greater in size than 2,500 square feet.

 

b.     Additions, or partial demolitions with reconstruction, resulting in a net enlargement to the existing structure that will be greater in size than both: 2,500 square feet and 10 percent of the gross floor area of the existing development.

 

c.     Major structural upgrades that can extend the economic viability of existing structures and sites that are nonconforming to the development standards of this Code, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official. Such structural upgrades include, but are not limited to, the extensive demolition and reconstruction of exterior walls or the relocation of a significant portion of the building’s structural interior walls.

 

Upgrades That Are Excluded. Mandatory safety upgrades, such as compliance with disabled access; building and fire code requirements; minor cosmetic façade upgrades, such as awnings and window replacement; maintenance upgrades, such as roof repair and replacement; relocation of demising walls; and general repair of damaged structures as allowed by Subsection A of Section 4.20.116 Restoration of a Damaged Structure and Its Nonconforming Use are not subject to Site Plan Review.

 

4.     Industrial and Commercial Projects: I Districts. The following development proposals require Site Plan Review:

 

a.     Development of new structures greater in size than 5,000 square feet.

 

b.     Additions, or partial demolitions with reconstruction, resulting in a net enlargement to the existing structure that will be greater in size than both: 5,000 square feet and 10 percent of the gross floor area of the existing development.

 

c.     Major structural upgrades that can extend the economic viability of existing structures and sites that are nonconforming to the development standards of this Code, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official. Such structural upgrades include, but are not limited to, the extensive demolition and reconstruction of exterior walls or the relocation of a significant portion of the building’s structural interior walls.

 

d.     The creation of, or addition to, any substantial outdoor storage area or truck loading bays that would be visible from off-site.

 

e.     Any site modification involving the addition of a newly paved area, in excess of 5,000 square feet. This requirement for Site Plan Review does not apply to the repair and replacement of pre-existing paved areas.

 

Upgrades That Are Excluded. Mandatory safety upgrades, such as compliance with disabled access; building and fire code requirements; minor cosmetic façade upgrades, such as awnings and window replacement; maintenance upgrades, such as roof repair and replacement; relocation of demising walls; and general repair of damaged structures as allowed by Subsection A of Section 4.20.116 Restoration of a Damaged Structure and Its Nonconforming Use are not subject to Site Plan Review. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 9; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.108 Exemptions
 

Non-structural alterations that do not require building permits are exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.112 Review and Approval Authority
 

A.    Site Plan Review for Projects that Require Discretionary Zoning Permits.

 

1.     Projects Requiring Conditional Use Permit or Variance Approval. The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall review and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Site Plan in conjunction with its review of the Use Permit or Variance.

 

2.     Projects Requiring Planned Development Approval. The Planning Commission shall review and either recommend approval or conditional approval to the City Council, conditionally approve, or shall deny a Site Plan in conjunction with its review of the Planned Development.

 

B.    Site Plan Review for Projects that Do Not Require Discretionary Zoning Permits. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall be the decision maker, unless the Zoning Enforcement Official defers action to the Site Development Sub-Commission. The Zoning Enforcement Official or Site Development Sub-Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Site Plan. Action on the Site Plan may occur prior to or concurrently with a request for building permit approval. The Zoning Enforcement Official may, at his or her sole discretion, refer any development proposal to the Board of Zoning Adjustments for action.

 

C.    Site Plan Review for Projects that Require Planning Commission Review. When Planning Commission review is required for a development application, the Planning Commission shall review and either recommend approval or conditional approval to the City Council, conditionally approve, or deny the discretionary approvals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2008-015 § 1; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.116 Hearing and Noticing Requirements
 

A.    Notice of Public Hearing for Site Plan Review of Projects that Require Discretionary Zoning Permits. Notice of hearing shall be concurrent with that required for the zoning permit, as specified by Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing.

 

B.    Notice of Public Hearing for Site Review of Projects that Do Not Require Discretionary Zoning Permits.

 

1.     When Required.

 

a.     For non-discretionary projects, notice of hearing is generally not required, but such notice may be required for projects that the Zoning Enforcement Official determines may have a significant impact on adjacent uses or may generate significant public concerns.

 

b.     For projects referred to the Site Development Sub-Commission by the Zoning Enforcement Official pursuant to Subsection B of Section 5.12.112 Review and Approval Authority, notice of hearing is required.

 

2.     Content and Procedure for Notice of Hearing for Site Plan Review. Written notification of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing by either the Zoning Enforcement Official or Site Development Sub-Commission shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner, and property owners adjoining and across the street from the subject site, not less than 10 days prior to the hearing.

 

C.    Administrative Review for Projects Where Hearing is Not Required. For project where noticing is not required, the Zoning Enforcement Official may take action on the application without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.120 Appeals
 

A.    A Decision by Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

B.    A Decision by Site Development Sub-Commission may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

C.    A Decision by Board of Zoning Adjustments may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.124 Site Plan Review Standards
 

To approve or conditionally approve a Site Plan, the decision maker or the decision making body shall find that the proposal is in substantial compliance with the following standards:

 

A.    Site plan elements (such as, but not limited to, building placement, yard setbacks, size and location of landscape areas, parking facilities, and placement of service areas) are in compliance with the minimum requirements of this Code and are arranged as to achieve the intent of such requirements by providing a harmonious and orderly development that is compatible with its surroundings. Parking, loading, storage, and service areas are appropriately screened by building placement, orientation walls, and/or landscaping.

 

B.    The building(s) has(have) adequate articulation, with appropriate window placement, use of detailing, and/or changes in building planes to provide visual interest. The exterior materials, finishes, detailing, and colors are compatible with those of surrounding structures. Visually incompatible elements, such as roof-mounted utilities, are fully screened from public view. If the proposal is for an addition to an existing building, such additions shall appear as an integral element of the building. Additions shall not have a “tacked on” appearance, and either the addition should be consistent with the existing building’s design element, or the existing building should be remodeled concurrently with construction of the addition.

 

C.    The landscaping complements the architectural design, with an appropriate balance of trees, shrubs, and living ground covers, and provides adequate screening and shading of parking lots and/or driveways.

 

D.    Detail features, such as signs, fences, and lighting for buildings, parking lots, and/or driveways are visually consistent with the architectural and landscape design and minimize off-site glare.

 

E.    Exceptions to Above Regarding Expansions and/or Alterations to Existing Nonconforming Structures and Sites. The decision maker or the decision making body may vary from the standards outlined in Subsections A through D above and approve a Site Plan that cannot achieve compliance with these standards due to the limitations created by pre-existing nonconforming structures and site features. In such cases, the priority of Site Plan Review is to reduce, to the degree feasible given the scale and scope of the proposal, the nonconforming features. The nonconforming features to be addressed shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

 

1.     Deficiencies in landscaping shall be corrected, with selective additional plantings, primarily where such landscaping can have the greatest visual benefit to the overall area. The scale and scope of such landscaping requirements will be relative to both the degree of non-compliance with current Code requirements and the changes/improvements being proposed by the applicant.

 

2.     Obsolete and unused equipment, such as roof-mounted utilities, exterior manufacturing equipment, and unused pole sign and wall sign cabinets shall be removed, as required.

 

3.     The effects of past “deferred maintenance,” where such has been identified, shall be corrected by such effort as repainting, replanting of existing landscape areas, and removal of unused equipment, vehicles, and debris.

 

F.     All site plan elements in the SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 Districts shall be reviewed for general consistency with the Design Guidelines contained in the East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy.

 

G.    All site plan elements in the DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, and DA-6 Districts shall be reviewed for general consistency with the Design Guidelines contained in the Downtown San Leandro Transit-Oriented Development Strategy. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2016-012 § 4; Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2004-007 § 9; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.128 Conditions of Approval
 

In approving a Site Plan, reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to achieve consistency with the intent of the applicable District’s development standards and the standards of this chapter. When approving a Site Plan for projects that expand and/or alter existing nonconforming sites, complete consistency may not be obtainable, and conditions may be imposed to reduce, if not eliminate, the nonconforming site features. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.12.132 Effective Date; Lapse and Renewal; Alterations
 

A.    Effective Date. Site Plan approval shall become effective on the 15th day after the date the decision maker or the decision making body approves the site plan, unless appealed, as provided in Chapter 5.20 Appeals.

 

B.    Lapse of Approvals and Renewals. Site Plan approval shall lapse after one year after its date of approval, or at an alternate time specified as a condition of approval, unless:

 

1.     A grading permit or building permit has been issued, coupled with diligent progress evidencing good faith intention to commence the intended use; or

 

2.     An occupancy permit has been issued; or

 

3.     The approval is renewed, as provided for in Subsection E of Section 5.08.136 Lapse of Approval; Transferability; Discontinuance; Revocation.

 

C.    Changed Plans. The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve changes to approved plans or in conditions of approval without a public hearing upon determining that the changes in conditions are minor and consistent with the intent of the original approval. Revisions involving substantial changes in project design or conditions of approval shall be treated as new applications, to be reviewed as a new project by the decision making body as required by Section 5.12.112 Review and Approval Authority of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.16 Amendments
5.16.100 Applicability
 

This Code may be amended by changing the zoning map or the zoning regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.104 Initiation of Amendments
 

A.    Zoning Regulations. Amendments to the zoning regulations shall be initiated by resolution of intent of the City Council or the Planning Commission, or by the Community Development Director, or may be initiated upon request by the owner or authorized agent of property within the City.

 

B.    Zoning Map. Amendments to the zoning map shall be initiated by resolution of intent of the City Council or Planning Commission, or by the Community Development Director, or by application of the owner or authorized agent of property for which the change is sought. If property that is the subject of an application is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.108 Required Application Materials for Amendments Initiated by Property Owners
 

A property owner shall initiate a request for a zoning map amendment or code amendment by filing the following with the Zoning Enforcement Official:

 

A.    A completed application form;

 

B.    A completed Initial Study form (San Leandro Administrative Code Chapter 5-1, Community Development: Implementation of California Quality Act CEQA Guidelines);

 

C.    The Zoning Enforcement Official may require:

 

1.     A map showing the location and street address of the property that is the subject of the amendment and of all lots of record within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property;

 

2.     A list, drawn from the last equalized property tax assessment roll or the records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector, showing the names and addresses of the owner(s) of record of each lot within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property. This list shall be keyed to the map required by Subsection C.1 above and shall be accompanied by mailing labels.

 

D.    The required fee. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.112 Public Hearing Scope and Notice
 

A.    Scope. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall set a date, time, and place for the public hearing and prepare a report to the Planning Commission on an application of a property owner for a zoning map or code amendment or a resolution for a zoning regulation amendment, describing the area to be considered for change and, if warranted, proposing alternative amendments.

 

B.    Notice of Hearing.

 

1.     Procedure. Notice shall be given in accord with Subsection C.1 of Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing.

 

2.     Zoning Map Amendments: One Thousand or More Lots. If a proposed zoning map amendment includes 1,000 or more lots, notice may be given in accord with Government Code Section 65091(a)(4).

 

C.    Contents of Notice. Notices required by this section shall contain:

 

1.     A description of the amendment;

 

2.     A statement of the date, time, and place of the hearing;

 

3.     Reference to the City Council or Planning Commission resolution or the application and other materials on file with the Zoning Enforcement Officials for detailed information; and

 

4.     A statement that any interested party or agent may appear and be heard. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.116 Duties of Planning Commission
 

A.    Public Hearing. At the time and place set for the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider a report of the Zoning Enforcement Official and shall hear evidence for and against the proposed amendment. The Planning Commission may continue a public hearing to a definite date and time without additional notice.

 

B.    Recommendation to City Council. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission will make specific findings as to whether the proposed zoning regulation or zoning map amendment is consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the purposes of this Code, and shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the proposal as submitted or in modified form to the City Council. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.120 Result of Planning Commission Recommendation of Denial
 

A Planning Commission recommendation of denial of an application for a zoning map amendment or zoning regulation amendment submitted by property owner request shall terminate proceedings, unless appealed. Notice of such action shall be mailed to the applicant within seven days of the Planning Commission’s decision. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.124 Duties of City Council
 

A.    Hearing Date and Notice. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission recommendation for approval or conditional approval of an amendment to the zoning regulations or map, or receipt of an appeal of a Planning Commission recommendation of denial, the City Clerk shall set a date and time for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The hearing shall be held within 60 days of the date of filing of the Planning Commission recommendation. The City Clerk shall give notice of such hearing in the manner prescribed as required by Section 5.16.112 Public Hearing Scope and Notice.

 

B.    Public Hearing. At the time and place set for the public hearing, the City Council shall hear evidence for and against the proposed amendment. The City Council may continue a public hearing to a definite date and time without additional notice.

 

C.    City Council Decision. Within 21 days after the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, modify, or reject the Planning Commission recommendation, provided that a substantial modification not previously considered by the Planning Commission shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a report prior to adoption of an ordinance amending the zoning regulations or map. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within 40 days after referral or such longer period as may be designated by the City Council shall be deemed approval of the proposed modification. Prior to adoption of an ordinance, the City Council shall make findings that the proposed change to the zoning regulation or zoning map is consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the notice and hearing provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.128 Revisions of Proposed Amendments
 

A.    Revisions. At or after a public hearing, the Planning Commission or the City Council may determine that the public interest would be served by:

 

1.     Revising the boundaries of an area proposed for a zoning map amendment;

 

2.     Considering zoning map designations not originally presented in a motion, application, or Planning Commission recommendation; or

 

3.     Considering zoning regulation amendments not originally presented in a motion, petition, or Planning Commission recommendation.

 

B.    Supplemental Notice. Notice shall be given prior to a hearing on a revised amendment, unless the Planning Commission or City Council finds that the revised amendment will not have impacts greater than those that would result from the amendment in its original form. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.16.132 Resubmittal of Application
 

Following denial of an application or property owner request for an amendment to the zoning regulations or the zoning map by the City Council, no new application or petition for the same, or substantially the same, amendment shall be accepted within one year of the date of denial, unless denial is made without prejudice. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.20 Appeals
5.20.100 Purpose and Authorization for Appeals
 

To avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this Code, decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments or the Planning Commission, whichever is most appropriate, and decisions of the Site Development Sub-Commission, the Planning Commission, and Board of Zoning Adjustments may be appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.20.104 Rights of Appeal
 

Rights of appeal are prescribed in the individual chapters of this Code authorizing each decision that is subject to appeal. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.20.108 Time Limits for Appeals
 

A.    Appeals by Applicants and Interested Parties. Appeals shall be initiated within 15 days of the date of the decision.

 

B.    Time Limits. When the appeal period ends on a weekend or holiday, the time limits shall be extended to the next working day. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.20.112 Initiation of Appeals
 

A.    Filing of Appeals. An appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk on a form provided and shall state specifically the reason for the appeal.

 

B.    Effect on Decisions. Decisions that are appealed shall not become effective until the appeal is resolved. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

5.20.116 Procedures for Appeals
 

A.    Appeal Hearing Date. An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the appellate body within 60 days of the City’s receipt of an appeal, unless both applicant and appellant consent to a later date.

 

B.    Notice and Public Hearing. An appeal hearing shall be a public hearing. Notice of public hearings shall be given in the manner required for the decision being appealed.

 

C.    Plans and Materials. At an appeal or review hearing, the appellate body shall consider only the same application, plans, and related project materials that were the subject of the original decision and only the issue(s) raised by the appeal or the call for review. However, applicants may modify plans to respond to issues raised, and such modification shall be considered at the hearing. Compliance with this provision shall be verified prior to, or during, the hearing by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

D.    Hearing. During the public hearing, the appellate body shall review the record of the decision and hear testimony of the appellant, the applicant, and any other interested party.

 

E.    Decision and Notice. After the close of the public hearing, the appellate body shall affirm, modify, or reverse the original decision. When a decision is modified or reversed, the appellate body shall state the specific reasons for modification or reversal. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall mail notice of a Board of Zoning Adjustments or Planning Commission decision and the City Clerk shall mail notice of a City Council decision. Such notice shall be mailed within five working days after the date of the decision to the applicant, the appellant, and any other party upon requesting such notice.

 

F.     Failure to Act. Failure of the body receiving the appeal to act within the time limits prescribed in Subsection A above shall be deemed affirmation of the original decision. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2014-011 § 2; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.20.120 Effective Date
 

A decision by the City Council regarding an appeal shall become final on the date of the decision. A decision by the Planning Commission regarding an appeal shall become final on the date of the decision, unless appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.20.124 New Appeal
 

Following denial of an appeal, any matter that is the same, or substantially the same, shall not be considered by the same body within two years, unless the denial is made without prejudice. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.24 Enforcement
5.24.100 Permits, Licenses, Certificates, and Approvals
 

All persons empowered by the Municipal Code to grant permits, licenses, certificates, or other approvals shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and grant no permit, license, certificate, nor approval in conflict with this Code. Any permit, license, certificate, or approval granted in conflict with any provision of this Code shall be void. The cost of issuing permits and of enforcing compliance with the requirements and conditions of zoning permits, use permits, and other discretionary approvals may be recovered through charges or fees in connection with issuance of such permits, as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.24.104 Enforcement Responsibilities
 

The Zoning Enforcement Official shall enforce all provisions of this chapter related to discretionary permits and zoning permits and shall have responsibility for revocation of discretionary permits, as provided in Section 5.24.108 Revocation of Discretionary Permits. All other officers of the City shall enforce provisions related to their areas of responsibility. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.24.108 Revocation of Discretionary Permits
 

A.    Duties of Zoning Enforcement Official. Upon determination by the Zoning Enforcement Official that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of a use permit, variance, development plan approval, or other discretionary approval authorized by this Code, a revocation hearing shall be set by the Zoning Enforcement Official before the Board of Zoning Adjustment, the Site Development Sub-Commission, the Planning Commission, or the City Council, whichever took final previous action on the permit, except for appeals.

 

B.    Notice and Public Hearing. Notice shall be given in the same manner required for a public hearing to consider approval. If no notice is required for the permit, none shall be required for the revocation hearing, provided that notice shall be mailed to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Contents of any notice shall be as prescribed by Subsection C of Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing.

 

C.    Hearing. The person or body conducting the hearing shall hear testimony of City staff and the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted, if present. At a public hearing, the testimony of any other interested person shall also be heard. A public hearing may be continued to a specific date, time, and place without additional public notice.

 

D.    Required Findings. The person or body conducting the hearing may revoke the permit upon making one or more of the following findings:

 

1.     That the permit was issued on the basis of erroneous or misleading information or misrepresentation;

 

2.     That the terms or conditions of approval of the permit have been violated or that other laws or regulations have been violated;

 

3.     That there has been a discontinuance of the exercise of the entitlement granted by the permit for 180 days.

 

4.     That the approval has been so exercised to constitute a public nuisance or be detrimental to public health and safety.

 

E.    Decision and Notice. The person or body that conducted the hearing shall render a decision within a reasonable time period and shall mail notice of the decision to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was issued and to any other person who has filed a written request for such notice.

 

F.     Effective Date: Appeals. A decision to revoke a discretionary permit shall become final 15 days after the date of the decision, unless appealed.

 

G.    Right Cumulative. The City’s right to revoke a discretionary permit, as provided in this section, shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by law. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.24.112 Violations as Misdemeanors or Infractions
 

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code.

 

1.     Failure to Comply With Land Use and Development Regulations.

 

a.     A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code pertaining to land use and development regulations, including requirements made as conditions of approval for any discretionary permit, including but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances, Planned Developments, site plan approvals, sign approvals, fence modifications and exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor.

 

b.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, which may require prosecution of any such violation as a misdemeanor, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this Code may, in the discretion of the Zoning Enforcement Official, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

 

2.     Failure to Comply With Other Provisions. A violation of any other provision or failure to comply with any other mandatory requirements of this Code shall constitute an infraction, except that the fourth and any additional violations within one year shall constitute a misdemeanor.

 

B.    Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than one year or by both fine and imprisonment.

 

C.    Any person convicted of an infraction under the provision of this Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable as provided by the Government Code of the State of California.

 

D.    Each such person shall be charged with a separate violation for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction be punishable accordingly.

 

E.    Payment of any fine, or penalty, shall not relieve a person, firm, or corporation from the responsibility of correcting the condition consisting of the violation.

 

F.     In addition, the City Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of any violation in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.24.116 Abatement Procedure
 

A.    Notification of Violations. Whenever the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that any property within the City is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this Code, he or she shall give written notice (“Notice to Abate”) to the owner, sent by certified mail to his or her last known address, stating the section(s) or standards being violated. Such notice shall set forth a reasonable time limit, in no event less than seven days, for correcting the violation(s).

 

B.    Administrative Hearing to Correct Violations. In the event said owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the “Notice to Abate,” the Zoning Enforcement Official shall conduct an administrative hearing to ascertain whether abatement should be required.

 

C.    Notice of Hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be mailed to the owner not less than seven days before the time fixed for hearing. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of the abatement proceedings hereunder. Notice shall be substantially in the following format:

 

NOTICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING ON ABATEMENT
OF ZONING VIOLATION

 

This is a notice of hearing before the Zoning Enforcement Official to ascertain whether certain land area(s) or structures on property situated in the City of San Leandro, State of California, known and designated as (street address), _________________________ in said City, and more particularly described as (assessor’s parcel number) ____________ constitutes a zoning violation subject to abatement by a change in occupancy or restriction of use or rehabilitation or demolition of buildings situated thereon. If the zoning violation is not promptly abated by the owner, such violation may be abated by municipal authorities, in which case the cost of any eviction or relocation of an illegal use, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition of an illegal structure will be assessed upon such property and such costs, together with interest thereon, will constitute a lien upon such property until paid. In addition, you may be cited for violation of the provisions of the Zoning Code and subject to a fine.

 

Said alleged violation of the Zoning Code consists of the following:

____________________________________________________________________

 

The method(s) of abatement are:

____________________________________________________________________

 

All persons having an interest in said matters may attend the hearing and their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration.

 

Dated this _______ day of __________________, 20______.

 

Time and Date of Hearing: ___________________________.

 

Location of Hearing: ________________________________.

 

D.    Administrative Hearing. At the time stated in the notice, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests and shall receive testimony, under oath, relative to such alleged zoning violation and to the proposed eviction or relocation of an illegal use or the rehabilitation, repair, removal, or demolition of an illegal structure. Said hearing may be continued from time to time. If the Zoning Enforcement Official finds that a zoning violation does exist and there is sufficient cause to evict or relocate an illegal use or rehabilitate, demolish, remove, or repair an illegal structure, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall prepare findings and an order specifying the nature of the violation, the method(s) of abatement and the time within which the work shall be commenced and completed. The order shall include reference to the right of appeal set forth in Subsection F, below. A copy of the findings and order shall be mailed to the property owner by certified mail. In addition, a copy of the findings and order shall be forthwith conspicuously posted on the property.

 

E.    Procedure, No Appeal. In the absence of any appeal, the illegal use shall be discontinued or property shall be rehabilitated, repaired, removed, or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the order of abatement. In the event the owner fails to abate the violation as ordered, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall cause the same to be abated by City employees or private contract. The costs shall be billed to the owner. (See Section 5.24.120 Lien Procedure.) The Zoning Enforcement Official is expressly authorized to enter upon said property for such procedure.

 

F.     Appeal Procedure, Hearing by City Council. The owner may appeal the Zoning Enforcement Official’s findings and order to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within seven days of the date of the Zoning Enforcement Official’s decision. The appeal shall contain:

 

1.     A specific identification of the subject property;

 

2.     The names and addresses of the appellants;

 

3.     A statement of appellant’s legal interest in the subject property;

 

4.     A statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested and the grounds for appeal, together with all material facts in support thereof;

 

5.     The date and signature of all appellants; and

 

6.     The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

 

As soon as practicable after receiving the appeal, the City Clerk shall set a date for the City Council to hear the appeal, which date shall be not less than seven days nor more than 30 days from the date the appeal was filed. The City Clerk shall mail each appellant written notice of the time and the place of the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. Continuances of the hearing may be granted by the City Council on request of the owner for good cause shown, or on the City Council’s own motion.

 

G.    Decision by City Council. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall determine whether any use or structure on the property or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a zoning violation. If the City Council so finds, the City Council shall adopt a resolution declaring such a violation, setting forth its findings and ordering the abatement of the same by having the illegal use evicted or relocated or the illegal structure rehabilitated, repaired, removed, or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the resolution. The resolution shall set forth the time within which such work shall be completed by the owner, in no event less than 30 days. The decision and order of the Council shall be final.

 

H.    Notice of Order to Abate. A copy of the resolution of the City Council ordering the abatement of such violation shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner(s). Upon abatement in full by the owner, the proceedings hereunder shall terminate.

 

I.      Abatement by City. If such nuisance is not abated as ordered within the prescribed abatement period, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall cause the same to be abated by City employees or private contract. The Zoning Enforcement Official is expressly authorized to enter upon said property for such purposes. The cost, including incidental expenses, of abating the violation shall be billed to the owner and shall become due and payable 30 days thereafter (see Section 5.24.120 Lien Procedure). The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect; costs incurred in documenting the violation; the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work; and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder.

 

J.     Limitation of Filing Judicial Action. Any action appealing the City Council’s decision and order shall be commenced within 30 days of the date of mailing the decision.

 

K.    Demolition. No illegal structure shall be found to be a zoning violation and ordered demolished, unless the order is based on competent sworn testimony and it is found that in fairness and in justice there is no way other than demolition to reasonably correct such violation.

 

L.     Recorded Notice of Intent to Demolish Required. A copy of any order or resolution requiring abatement by demolition shall be recorded with the Alameda County Recorder. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.24.120 Lien Procedure
 

A.    Record of Cost of Abatement. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall keep an account of the cost, including incidental expenses, of abating zoning violation(s) on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by the City and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the cost of abatement, including the cost of eviction or relocation of illegal uses or rehabilitation, demolition, or repair of illegal structures, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided that before said report is submitted to the City Council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five days upon the lot or parcel where the violation occurs, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the City Council for confirmation. A copy of said report and notice shall be served upon the property owner(s) at least five days prior to submitting it to the City Council. Proof of posting and service shall be made by affidavit filed with the City Clerk.

 

B.    Assessment Lien. The total cost for abating a zoning violation, as so confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the Office of the County Recorder of a Notice of Lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.

 

After such confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of the City Council’s decision shall be filed with the Alameda County Auditor Controller on or before August 1 of each year, whereupon it shall be the duty of said Auditor-Controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and, thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. In the alternative, after recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.

 

Such Notice of Lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

(Claim of City of San Leandro)

 

Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section ________________ of the San Leandro Zoning Code, the Zoning Enforcement Official of the City of San Leandro did on or about the _______________ day of _______________________, 20_____, cause an illegal use on the property hereinafter described to be evicted or an illegal structure on the property hereinafter described, to be rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished in order to abate a zoning violation; and the City Council of the City of San Leandro did on the _________ day of ____________________, 20____, assess the cost of such eviction, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition upon the owner of this property; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of San Leandro does hereby claim a lien on such eviction, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition costs in the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $__________: and the same, shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.

 

The real property herein above mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of San Leandro, County of Alameda, State of California, and particularly described as follows:

____________________________________________________________________

 

Dated this ______ day of _________________, 20_____.

 

 

_____________________________________________

Zoning Enforcement Official,

City of San Leandro

 

C.    Accrual of Interest on City Liens and Assessment Findings. The City Council finds and declares that the establishment of an interest accrual requirement as to unpaid City liens and assessments upon real property, which are of record with the County Recorder for Alameda County is a necessary and appropriate exercise of the City Council’s police power.

 

D.    Accrual of Interest on Liens and Assessments. Unless otherwise prohibited by law or regulation, all liens and assessments which are imposed by the City against any real property located in the City of San Leandro which are recorded on and after the effective date of this regulation shall accrue interest at the rate of eight percent annually until the lien or assessment, including interest thereon, is paid in full. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.28 Mobile Home Park Conversions
5.28.100 Specific Purpose
 

The specific purpose of the Mobile Home Park Conversion procedure is to ensure that any conversion of these parks to other uses is preceded by adequate notice and that relocation and other assistance is provided park residents, consistent with the provisions of the California Government Code, Section 65863.7. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.28.104 Definitions
 

See Section 1.12.108 Definitions for definitions of: Mobile Home; Mobile Home Park; Mobile Home Park Conversion. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.28.108 Permit Required
 

The conversion of an existing mobile home park to another use shall require a use permit reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council pursuant to Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions. An application for such permit shall include the following and such other information as may be required by the Zoning Enforcement Official:

 

A.    A general description of the proposed use to which the mobile home park is to be converted.

 

B.    The proposed timetable for implementation of the conversion.

 

C.    A description of the mobile home spaces within the mobile home park.

 

1.     Number of mobile home spaces occupied.

 

2.     Length of time each space has been occupied by the present resident(s) thereof.

 

3.     Age, size, and type of mobile home occupying each space.

 

4.     Monthly rent currently charged for each space.

 

5.     Name and mailing address of the residents of each mobile home within the mobile home park.

 

D.    A report of impact and a disposition/relocation plan addressing the availability of replacement housing for existing tenants of the mobile home park consistent with Government Code Section 65863.7. Upon filing an application for conversion, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall inform the applicant of the requirements of Civil Code Section 798.56 and Government Code 65863.8 regarding notification of the mobile home park residents concerning the conversion proposal. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.28.112 Relocation Plan
 

A.    The relocation plan for tenants of a mobile home park shall be submitted to the City Council for approval as part of the application for conversion of a mobile home park to another use. The plan shall provide specifically for relocation assistance to full-time, low- and moderate-income residents of the park for a minimum period of 12 months following approval of a use permit for the conversion. Information on sites available in mobile home parks in the City and adjacent communities shall be provided to all tenants.

 

B.    A relocation plan shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the availability of medical and dental services and shopping facilities, the age of the mobile home park and the mobile homes, and the economic impact on the relocated tenants.

 

1.     Special Cases. The relocation plan shall specifically provide guarantees that all tenants 62 years old or older and all tenants who are medically proven to be permanently disabled shall not have to pay an increase in rent over the amount currently paid for a period of two years following relocation.

 

2.     Moving Expenses. The relocation plan shall provide for moving expenses equal to the actual cost of moving, but not exceeding the cost of moving to a location no more than 10 miles from the park to any tenant who relocates from the park after City approval of the use permit authorizing conversion of the park. When the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to City approval of the use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited.

 

3.     No Increase in Rent. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased within two months prior to filing an application for conversion of a mobile home park, nor shall the rent be increased for two years from the date of filing of the conversion application or until relocation takes place. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

 

5.28.116 Findings for Conversion
 

The City Council may approve a permit for a mobile home park conversion if it finds that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements in addition to the requirements of Section 5.08.124 Required Findings:

 

A.    That the proposed use of the property is consistent with the General Plan or any specific plan, and all applicable provisions of this ordinance are met;

 

B.    That the residents of the mobile home park have been adequately notified of the proposed conversion;

 

C.    That there exists land zoned for replacement housing or adequate space in other mobile home parks for the residents who will be displaced;

 

D.    That the conversion will not result in the displacement of low-income mobile home residents who cannot afford rents charged in other mobile home parks within the City of San Leandro or its general vicinity;

 

E.    That the age, type, size, and style of mobile homes to be displaced as a result of the conversion will be able to be relocated into other mobile home parks within the City of San Leandro or its general vicinity;

 

F.     That if the mobile home park is to be converted to another residential use, the mobile home residents to be displaced shall be provided the right of first refusal to purchase, lease, rent, or otherwise obtain residency in the replacement dwelling units, and the construction schedule for such replacement dwelling units shall not result in a displacement of unreasonable length for those mobile home residents electing to relocate in these replacement units;

 

G.    That any mobile home residents displaced as a result of the conversion shall be compensated by the applicant for all reasonable costs incurred as a result of their relocation; and

 

H.    That the relocation plan mitigates the impacts of the displacement of individuals or households for a reasonable transition period and mitigates the impacts of any long-term displacement. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.28.120 Conditions of Approval
 

Consistent with Section 5.08.128 Conditions of Approval, the City Council shall impose the following conditions of approval of a permit for a mobile home park conversion. In addition to any other conditions:

 

A.    The applicant shall submit a relocation plan that shall make adequate provisions for the relocation of all mobile homes and mobile home residents to be displaced as a result of the conversion. Such plan shall include provisions to relocate such mobile homes and mobile home residents in comparable mobile home parks within the City of San Leandro or its general vicinity. A replacement mobile home park shall be deemed comparable if it provides substantially equivalent park facilities and amenities, space rental and fees, and location, i.e., proximity to public transportation, medical and dental centers, shopping facilities, recreation facilities, religious and social facilities, etc.

 

B.    The applicant shall bear all reasonable costs of relocating mobile homes and mobile home residents displaced by the conversion. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of moving the mobile home to its new location; the cost of necessary permits, installations, landscaping, site preparation at the mobile home’s new location; the cost of moving personal property; and the cost of temporary housing, if any. Such costs may also include the cost of purchasing replacement mobile homes for those residents owning mobile homes that are not acceptable in other mobile home parks as a result of its size, age or style, or establishing a new mobile home park for the relocation of displaced mobile homes.

 

C.    The City Council may establish the date on which the permit for conversion will become effective. Such date shall not be less than two years from the decision of the City Council, provided that conversion at an earlier date may be approved if the City Council receives a written petition requesting an earlier date signed by a majority of those persons residing in the subject mobile home park at the time of the City Council public hearing to consider the conversion application. The effective date of the approval in such a case shall be the date set forth in the petition. Conversion at the earlier date may be approved only if the applicant has complied with all the provisions of an approved relocation plan and submitted evidence of such compliance to the Zoning Enforcement Official. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.28.124 Waiver
 

A.    The City Council may find that there is substantial evidence to support a finding by the Council that the imposition of conditions as provided in Section 5.28.120 Conditions of Approval would result in an extreme economic hardship for the applicant. An extreme economic hardship does not exist where the cost of implementing the relocation conditions would merely deny the applicant the maximum profits that could be realized from the conversion of the mobile home park.

 

B.    If the City Council determines that the conditions would result in extreme economic hardship for the applicant, the City Council may waive or modify any conditions that would otherwise be necessary to enable the Council to make the findings required by Section 5.28.116 Findings for Conversion. Such conditions may be waived or modified only to the extent minimally necessary to alleviate such extreme economic hardship. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.32 Residential Condominium Conversions
5.32.100 Specific Purposes
 

The conversion of residential structures from individual ownership to condominiums or any other form of multiple ownership interests creates special community problems, both social and economic. Conversions may significantly affect the balance between rental and ownership housing within the City, and, thereby, reduce the variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing; increase overall rents; decrease the supply of rental housing for all income groups; displace individuals and families; and disregard the needs of the prevailing consumer market. The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines to evaluate those problems, including the impact any conversion application may have on the community and to establish requirements, which shall be included in any conversion approval. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.104 Objectives
 

This chapter is enacted for the following reasons:

 

A.    To establish procedures and standards for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums;

 

B.    To protect the rights and reduce the impact of such conversions on tenants, who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums, by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for relocation to comparable rental housing and rates;

C.    To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure that is offered for purchase;

 

D.    To ensure that converted housing achieves a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety, and is in good condition without hidden needs for maintenance and repair;

 

E.    To provide the opportunity for low- and moderate-income persons to participate in the ownership process, as well as to maintain a supply of rental housing for low- and moderate-income persons; and

 

F.     To assure that adequate rental housing is available in the community. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.108 Definitions
 

As used in this chapter, terms and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:

 

A.    Apartment Building. A multi-family rental housing complex in which individual residential units are rented or leased rather than owned separately.

 

B.    Condominium. A dwelling unit as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code of the State of California or successor section.

 

C.    Community Apartment. A dwelling unit as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 or successor section.

 

D.    Stock Cooperative. A dwelling unit as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California or successor section.

 

E.    Townhouse. A dwelling unit characterized by a separate interest in a building and the land directly beneath it, which may be combined with either an undivided interest in the remainder or easements across common areas.

 

F.     Tenant or Existing Tenant. A person or persons renting or leasing a dwelling unit in a project as of the date of the mailing by certified mail to the tenant the notice of intention to convert. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.112 Requirements
 

In addition to the applicable requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 7-1 Subdivision Ordinance of the San Leandro Municipal Code, conversions of existing rental housing to condominiums, townhouses, community apartments, stock cooperatives, and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing shall be subject to the additional requirements of this Code. Such conversions also must obtain a use permit pursuant to Chapter 5.08 Use Permits, Variances, and Parking Exceptions. No person shall cause a conversion of the type herein referred to except in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.116 Application Procedures
 

The following procedures and regulations shall apply to condominium conversion applications:

 

A.    Preliminary Applications. Applicants may submit to the Community Development Department preliminary applications for condominium conversions of residential structures to condominiums. Such applications shall identify the owner or authorized agent, the location and number of units in the building to be converted, and contain information on the vacancy rate of multi-family dwellings of three or more units within the City and the number of tenants who support such a conversion.

 

Data for determining the City’s annual multi-family vacancy rate shall be compiled from a variety of sources including, but not limited to, United States Postal Service Surveys, idle utility meter reports, reports from financial institutions, and real estate organizations.

 

B.    Department Review. The Community Development Department shall review preliminary applications for condominium conversions. Preliminary applications may be accepted for further discretionary review if any one of the following factors exists:

 

1.     The vacancy rate of multiple-family developments of three or more rental units within the City, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official, is equal to or more than five percent, unless the conversion will result in a decrease of the vacancy rate to less than five percent.

 

2.     Tenants lawfully in possession of 75 percent of the units indicate in writing to the City their desire (one vote per unit) to convert such units to condominium ownership. To qualify under this provision, the applicant shall submit evidence that tenants have been provided with information on all estimated costs, including, but not limited to, the unit cost, down-payment requirements, financing, estimated property management costs, and homeowner association fees. If the conversion is approved, the developer shall provide information to the City on the number of tenants who actually purchased their unit. If at any time during the conversion approval process, a sufficient number of tenants decide not to purchase, or if misrepresentation is discovered, the Planning Commission shall have sufficient grounds for recommending denial of the use permit application.

 

3.     The applicant agrees to sell or rent at affordable prices 25 percent of the units to low- and moderate-income households, with a minimum of 20 percent of the units affordable to low-income households. If the units are to be made available for purchase, the maximum sales price of units intended for low- or moderate-income households shall not exceed two and one-half times the annual median income for such households as defined by the California Health and Safety Code, Section 50093. Resale controls shall be included as a deed restriction. If the units are to be for rent, the maximum rent allowed shall preserve the units within the low- or moderate-income housing stock.

 

C.    Application for Conversion Required. No person shall convert or cause the conversion of an apartment building to a condominium without approval of a condominium conversion application by the Planning Commission, or, upon referral, the City Council. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.120 Required Reports and Information
 

After preliminary applications are accepted for further discretionary review, the applicant shall submit all the information required for a use permit application, and a tentative map pursuant to this Code. In addition, the applicant shall submit information documenting that the project as a whole will be in good repair on the interior and the exterior when offered for sale. As part of the material necessary for the City to determine this to be the case, the reports and/or information required by this section shall be submitted. The cost of all reports shall be paid by the applicant, and the persons preparing the reports shall be approved by the City. The reports shall include information on what improvements, if any, shall be accomplished by the developer and at what point in the conversion proceedings such improvements shall be completed. All improvements cited in the reports, whether required or voluntary, shall be considered conditions of approval to the extent specified in the condominium conversion approval.

 

The applicant shall be responsible for the remedy of physical conditions within individual units or common areas noted by a prospective purchaser and/or tenant, which have been missed by inspections or which occur subsequent to the inspections but prior to the close of escrow. In case of disagreement between the applicant and the prospective purchaser as to the actual condition, remedy, or cause of deterioration, the burden of proof shall be that of the applicant.

 

A.    Physical Elements Report. A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted, containing the following:

 

1.     A report by a California-licensed structural or civil engineer detailing the structural condition, useful life, and any apparent deferred maintenance of all elements of the property, including, but not limited to, foundations, electricity, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, frames, recreational facilities, sound transmissions of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities, fire protection, drainage facilities, and parking conditions and potential problems. Such report also shall describe the condition of refuse disposal facilities; swimming pools, saunas, and fountains; stone and brickwork; fireplaces; and exterior lighting.

2.     A report by a California-licensed appliance repair contractor detailing the age, condition, expected size, and the cost of replacement for each appliance and mechanical equipment for heating and cooling. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe appliances and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

 

3.     A report by a California-licensed structural termite and pest control specialist certifying whether or not all attached or detached structures are free of infestation and structural damage caused by pests and dry rot. The report shall describe what procedures would be necessary to eliminate infestation or damage, if present. Such report shall be updated within six months after the close of escrow, and any infestation shall be remedied prior to sale.

 

4.     Existing soils reports shall be submitted for review with a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures.

 

5.     A report by a California-licensed painting contractor verifying the condition of the painting throughout the project, including building interior and exterior surfaces, and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the paint. A statement that new paint will be applied on all building interior and exterior surfaces may take the place of such report. Such statement shall include the brand name of the paint and the exterior colors to be used.

 

6.     A report by a California-licensed roofing contractor verifying the condition of the roofs of all structures and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the roofs and the cost of replacement. A statement that new roof material will be applied may take the place of such report. Such statement shall include the type, grade, and color of the proposed roofing material.

 

7.     A declaration of the covenants, conditions, restrictions, and rules and regulations, which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to: the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking and storage areas; a description of all land or building area to be owned in common; and an agreement for common area maintenance, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for the maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit.

 

8.     Specific information concerning the demographic and financial characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the following:

 

a.     Property boundaries, building floor plans, and proposed uses of space;

 

b.     The square footage and number of rooms in each unit;

 

c.     The rental history for each unit for the three-year period preceding the date of the application;

 

d.     The monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding three years;

 

e.     A complete list of the number and names of tenants and tenant households in the project, including the following information:

 

i.      Households with persons 62 years or older;

 

ii.     The family size of households, including a breakdown of households with children five years and younger and six through 18 years;

 

iii.    Households with handicapped persons;

 

iv.    The length of residence;

 

v.     The age of tenants; and

 

vi.    The designation of low- and moderate-income households and whether any are receiving federal or state rent subsidies.

 

When the subdivider can demonstrate that demographic information is not available, the Zoning Enforcement Official may modify this requirement.

 

vii.   The proposed price of each of the units;

 

viii.  The proposed homeowners’ association budget, detailed to included fixed costs, operating costs, reserves, administration, and contingencies; and

 

ix.    A statement of intent as to the types of financing programs to be made available, including any incentive programs for existing residents;

 

x.     A list of tenants who express interest in purchasing on these terms;

 

xi.    A copy of the notice of intention to sell or lease as filed with the California Department of Real Estate under the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 11010, et seq., or successor section.

 

9.      a.    Signed copies from each tenant of the notice of intent to convert, as specified in this chapter. The applicant shall submit evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of such notice is not submitted.

 

b.     A statement that all tenants have been notified of the following:

 

i.      Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of any person designated by the applicant as the person to be contacted for further information;

 

ii.     The address and telephone number of the City of San Leandro Community Development Department;

 

iii.    A statement that an application is proposed to be filed for a condominium permit authorizing the conversion of such building, and a brief description of the conversion process, including City and state approval required;

 

iv.    Notification to tenants that, upon filing an application, the building and selected units will be inspected by City representatives;

 

v.     A description of all rights, benefits, and privileges accruing to tenants pursuant to this Code, Chapter 7-1 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, the State Subdivision Map Act, and any other state law.

 

c.     The application shall be supplemented with the following information:

 

i.      Any correspondence between tenants and the applicant regarding the proposed conversion;

 

ii.     Any additional information deemed necessary by the City to clarify any issues arising during the review of the application regarding the economic feasibility of the project.

 

B.    Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the Community Development Department for review by any interested person.

 

C.    City Inspection. The City retains the right to inspect the structures and facilities for verification of any physical elements reports. In addition, the City may, if it deems necessary, prepare a report recommending appropriate actions, including, but not limited to:

 

1.     Correction of City code violations;

 

2.     Achievement of conformance with current provisions of City codes;

 

3.     Rehabilitation of the structures, common areas, and other related facilities to substantially new condition;

 

4.     An increase in the energy and noise insulating qualities of the structures to that substantially required by current provision of the City codes.

 

D.    Referral to School District. All applications for conversions of more than thirty (30) units may be referred to the appropriate school district for comment at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.124 Condominium Conversion Standards
 

A.    Compliance with Zoning, Building, Housing, Mechanical, and Fire Codes. All units, as well as the common ownership facilities, shall be brought into compliance with applicable state and local zoning, building, housing, mechanical, and fire codes upon approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official and prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map, and funds shall be adequately escrowed to assure completion of such corrective work prior to the closing of escrow of any unit in the project.

 

B.    Parking Requirements. The project shall conform to all applicable parking requirements of Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

 

C.    Sound Transmission Characteristics and Energy Conservation. The following methods shall be used to regulate noise transmission:

 

1.     Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors, which are determined by the Zoning Enforcement Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock-mounted in inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

2.     Noise Mitigation and Energy Conservation. Energy conservation insulation shall be installed in all heated or cooled buildings, including common ownership structures used for assembly purposes, in accordance with Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, as amended, and in effect on the date building permits are issued for condominium conversion rework. Common walls and common floor ceiling between units shall be constructed to meet a sound transmission coefficient (STC) rating of 55 or higher.

 

D.    Fire Protection.

 

1.     Smoke Detectors. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an AC-powered smoke detector approved by the State Fire Marshal. Installations shall comply with Uniform Building Code Section 1210(a).

 

2.     Sprinkler and Other Systems. A sprinkler system, fire alarm, and other fire protection devices shall be installed as required by the Municipal Code.

 

E.    Utilities: Location, Metering, and Alternative Energy.

 

1.     Location. Each dwelling unit shall be served by gas and electric services completely within the lot lines or ownership space of each separate unit. No common gas or electrical connection or service shall be allowed. Easements for gas and electric lines shall be provided in the common ownership area where lateral service connections shall take place.

 

2.     Undergrounding. All new utilities, both on-site and off-site, across property frontage shall be underground.

 

3.     Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. Individual panel boards for electrical current shall be provided for each unit. A plan for the equitable sharing of communal water metering and other shared utilities shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

 

4.     Alternative Energy. The applicant shall consider the use and implementation of alternative energy sources including, but not limited to, the conversion of a common water system to solar hot water heating and the installation of passive solar design features.

 

F.     Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit, or, if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof.

 

G.    Condition of Equipment and Appliances. At such time as the homeowners’ association takes over the management of the condominium project, the applicant shall provide a one-year warranty to the association that any pool and/or spa and pool and/or spa equipment (filter, pumps, and chlorinator), and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition. The plumbing and electrical systems in both the dwellings and the common ownership areas shall also be covered by a one-year warranty for proper and safe operation and installation in a safe and workmanlike manner. Such warranty shall be offered by an independent homeowner’s warranty service licensed by the California Insurance Commission.

 

H.    Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements as required by the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety.

 

I.      Contingency Fees. The intent of the City in requiring the creation of a contingency or reserve fund for condominium conversions is to provide a surety for unexpected or emergency repairs to common areas in the interest of the economic, aesthetic, and environmental maintenance of the community, as well as to protect the general welfare, public health, and safety of the community. Upon the close of escrow for each unit, the applicant shall convey to the homeowners’ association’s contingency fund a minimum fee of $200.00 per dwelling unit. When 50 percent or more of the total units in the project have been sold, the applicant shall convey, within 30 days, such fee for each of the unsold units. Such funds shall be used solely and exclusively as a contingency fund for emergencies, which may arise relating to open space areas, exterior portions of dwelling units, and such other restoration or repairs as may be assumed by the homeowners’ association. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.128 Tenant Rights, Benefits, and Notification
 

Applications for condominium conversions shall include the following procedures as they relate to tenant notification:

 

A.    Notices of Intent. A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant at least 60 days prior to filing the application for a use permit and a tentative map. Evidence of the receipt of such notice shall be submitted with the application for conversion. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined by Section 66452.9 of the California Government Code, and shall contain not less than the following:

 

1.     The name and address of the current owner;

 

2.     The name and address of the proposed subdivider;

 

3.     The approximate date on which the application and tentative map are proposed to be filed;

 

4.     The approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be filed;

 

5.     The approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by non-purchasing tenants;

 

6.     The tenant’s rights of:

 

a.     Purchase;

 

b.     Notification to vacate; and

 

c.     Termination of the lease.

 

7.     A statement of no rent increase;

 

8.     Provisions for special cases;

 

9.     The provision of moving expenses and the tenant’s right to claim any penalty imposed if timely payment is not made;

 

10.   The anticipated price range and terms of sale for each type of unit;

 

11.   The proposed homeowners’ association fees;

 

12.   A statement of the types of financing programs to be made available, including any proposed specific incentive programs for existing residents; and

 

13.   A copy of the applicable condominium conversion regulations.

 

B.    Notification to Tenants.

 

1.     Mailing. Two separate stamped, pre-addressed envelopes for each resident of each unit shall be furnished to the Community Development Department by the applicant at the time the subdivider submits an application for a use permit for a conversion. The Community Development Department shall use one envelope to notify the residents by mailing a copy of the public hearing notice to tenants not less than 10 days prior to the proposed hearing date on the application. The notice shall include notification of the tenant’s right to appear and be heard. The second envelope shall be used by the Community Development Department to notify the residents of the results of the public hearing by mailing notification of the decision of the Planning Commission not more than seven days following the Planning Commission’s action. Failure of the Community Development Department to mail such notice shall not invalidate any proceeding or action taken by the City in considering a conversion. The list of names and addresses of the residents of each unit in the conversion project shall be current as of the day of submittal and shall be certified as such by the applicant.

 

2.     Notices to Prospective Tenants. Commencing with the date of the notice provided for in Subsection A, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing by the subdivider or his or her agent of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit pursuant to Section 66452.8 of the California Government Code.

 

3.     Posting Notices. The notice of intent shall be posted on-site in at least one location readily visible to tenants.

 

C.    Tenant’s Purchase Rights. The irrevocable right and option to purchase the unit, which such tenant is renting or leasing prior to offering said unit to any other person or the public in general upon the same or more favorable terms and conditions, as said unit shall be offered to any other person or to the public in general. Said rights and option shall be effective, irrevocable, and exclusive for not less than 90 days after commencement of sales of units in the project to the public in general or issuance of the final report of the California Department of Real Estate relating to such project, whichever occurs later, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right.

 

The above described right and option afforded to tenants shall also be afforded to the City, to purchase any or all of the units not rented or leased to existing tenants.

 

D.    Tenants’ Discounts. Any present tenant of any unit at the time of an application for conversion shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a discount of the price offered to the general public. The amount of the discount shall be based on the longevity of each tenant and shall be ratified by the applicant at the time of conversion.

 

E.    Vacation of Units. Each non-purchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which the subject unit is occupied, shall have not less than 180 days after the date of the tentative map approval by the City or until the expiration of the tenant’s lease to find substitute housing and to relocate. Tenants shall be permitted to terminate leases or tenancy with one month’s written notice at any time after a conversion application.

 

F.     No Increase in Rent. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased within two months prior to a project application, nor shall the rent be increased for two years from the time of the filing of the project application or until relocation takes place.

 

G.    Remodeling. Tenants retain the right not to allow the unit such tenant is occupying to undergo remodeling or refurbishing, without the consent of such tenant, after notice of intention to apply for a condominium permit has been given.

 

H.    Special Cases.

 

1.     All non-purchasing tenants 62 years old or older and all non-purchasing, medically proven, permanently disabled tenants shall receive a lifetime lease. Rents for such tenants shall not be increased for two years after the filing of the project application.

 

2.     The following non-purchasing tenants shall receive a minimum of 12 months’ relocation time, measured from the tentative map approval, to find replacement housing:

 

a.     Tenants with low or moderate incomes; and

 

b.     Tenants with minor children in school.

 

I.      Moving Expenses. The subdivider shall provide moving expenses equal to three times the monthly rent to any tenant, in compliance with all the terms of the subject lease and/or financing, who relocates from the building to be converted after City approval of the use permit authorizing conversion of the units. When the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to City approval of the use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited.

 

J.     Relocation Assistance. Relocation assistance shall be provided by the subdivider to non-purchasing tenants for a minimum period of four (4) months following the tentative map approval. Information on available rental units in the same general area with costs comparable to the pre-converted apartments shall be provided by the subdivider on a calendar quarterly basis. Copies of the list shall be posted on-site, dated, and provided to the Community Development Department.

 

K.    Discrimination. No discrimination in the sale of any unit shall be based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex, or age, and a statement to this effect shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.132 Effect of Proposed Conversions on the City’s Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Supply
 

In reviewing requests for the conversion of existing apartments to condominiums, the Planning Commission shall consider the following:

 

A.    Whether or not the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants, if the conversion were approved, would be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;

 

B.    The role the apartment structure plays in the existing housing rental market. Particular emphasis will be placed on the evaluation of rental structures to determine if the existing apartment complex is serving low- and moderate-income households;

 

C.    The need and demand for lower-cost home ownership opportunities, which are increased by the conversion of apartments to condominiums. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4)

 

5.32.136 Density Bonus for Including Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
 

Consistent with the requirements of Section 65915.5 of the California Government Code, the City shall offer a density bonus to condominium conversions including low- or moderate-income housing units or lower-income household units. When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project agrees to provide at least 33 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons of low- or moderate-income as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code or 15 percent of the total units to lower-income households as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, the City shall either: (1) grant a 25 percent density bonus; or (2) provide other incentives of equivalent financial value. Any density bonus provided under this section shall be governed by the requirements of Chapter 6.08 Residential Density Bonus.

 

A.    For purposes of this section, “density bonus” means an increase in units of 25 percent over the number of apartments to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. “Other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the City to make any cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the subdivider, but may include the reduction or waiver of any required fees or the condominium conversion standards prescribed in Section 5.32.124 Condominium Conversion Standards.

 

B.    An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or equivalent financial incentive was provided under the provisions of Chapter 6.08 Residential Density Bonus. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-017 § 1; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.140 Required Findings
 

The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a use permit for a condominium conversion. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner specified in Section 5.08.116 Notice and Public Hearing. Additionally, such notice shall be mailed to each tenant of the proposed project including a statement therein of the tenants right to appear and be heard. The Planning Commission shall approve, or conditionally approve, the use permit if it determines that in addition to the findings required by Section 5.08.124 Required Findings the following requirements are met:

 

A.    That all the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code, and other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code are met;

 

B.    That the proposed conversion is consistent with the General Plan goal of maintaining a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing, and meets the requirements of the adopted Housing Element and any applicable specific plan;

 

C.    That the proposed conversion will conform to the provisions of this Code in effect at the time of approval, except as otherwise provided in this section;

 

D.    That the overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high standard of appearance, quality, useful life, and safety;

 

E.    That the proposed conversion will not displace a significant percentage of low- or moderate-income, permanently or totally disabled, or senior citizen tenants, or delete a significant number of low- and moderate-income rental units from the City’s housing stock at the time when no equivalent housing is readily available in the San Leandro area;

 

F.     That the relocation program will reduce the adverse effect of the project on tenants by providing actual or reasonable costs of relocation or by alternative assistance to assure that undue hardship is not imposed on such tenants;

 

G.    That the project will provide offsetting benefits that constitute reasonable compensation for the replacement of rental housing lost as a result of the project; and

 

H.    That the dwelling units to be converted have been constructed and used as rental units for at least three years prior to the application for conversion. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.144 Referral to City Council
 

A.    If, upon conclusion of a public hearing, the Planning Commission determines that a particular application raises significant City policy issues, it may refer the application to the City Council along with its recommendations and report and an identification of the impacts or issues, which it believes would be considered by the City Council.

 

B.    Upon referral from the Planning Commission, the City Council may either accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission or hear and decide the matter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.148 Exceptions
 

Condominium conversions involving four residential units or less shall be subject to a use permit and shall be subject to the findings required for use permits in Section 5.08.124 Required Findings. No portion of this chapter shall pertain to the conversion to condominiums of four residential units or less. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.152 Appeals
 

Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council in accord with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.32.156 Retaliation and Unlawful Detainer Defense
 

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to evict or cause to be evicted any tenant where the dominant purpose of such eviction is retaliation against the tenant for the exercise or attempted exercise of any right granted under this chapter or for the peaceful and lawful opposition by such tenant to the proposed conversion of the multiple-unit rental project within which such tenant resides.

 

B.    Each of the following acts or omissions shall constitute a separate defense to any unlawful detainer action:

 

1.     Failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of Section 5.32.120 Required Reports and Information and/or Section 5.32.128 Tenant Rights, Benefits, and Notification.

 

2.     Failure of the applicant to provide the notice required by Government Code Section 66427.1(a). (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Chapter 5.36 Nonresidential Condominium Conversions
5.36.100 Specific Purposes
 

The City of San Leandro finds that the conversion of larger multi-tenanted industrial or commercial properties into smaller ownership units is beneficial to encourage property improvements and to allow ownership opportunities for smaller businesses. In adopting this chapter, the City seeks to protect the welfare of existing tenants of such property and ensure that the overall property is maintained in optimum conditions in both appearance and in structural integrity. In this chapter, the City addresses the special attributes of nonresidential condominium conversions and adopts condominium conversion standards that will protect the community, existing tenants, and the purchasers of condominium units. Specifically, the purpose of this chapter is to ensure that any conversion of a nonresidential building or complex is preceded by adequate notice to existing tenants and surrounding property owners and businesses, and to provide a review process to address such items as parking, building appearance, property maintenance, lighting, security and signage. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.104 Objectives
 

This chapter is enacted for the following reasons:

 

A.    To establish procedures and standards for the conversion of existing nonresidential establishments to condominium ownership;

 

B.    To reduce the impact of such conversions on tenants by providing for procedures for notification;

 

C.    To assure that purchasers of converted nonresidential units have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure that is offered for purchase; and

 

D.    To ensure that converted nonresidential units have a high standard of appearance, building quality, and safety. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.108 Definitions
 

As used in this chapter, terms and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:

 

A.    Nonresidential Building(s). A nonresidential (commercial, industrial or other) building(s) or complex in which individual units are rented or leased rather than owned separately.

 

B.    Condominium. An individual interest in common in a portion of real property, coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit.

 

C.    Tenant or Existing Tenant. A person or persons renting or leasing a nonresidential unit as of the date of the mailing by certified mail to the tenant the notice of intention to convert. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.112 Application Requirements and Procedures
 

In addition to the applicable subdivision requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 7-1 of the San Leandro Municipal Code, a nonresidential condominium conversion shall be subject to the additional requirements of this Code. Such conversions must obtain a Zoning Permit pursuant to Chapter 5.04 Zoning Permits Required; Environmental Review; Fees and Deposits. Any tentative map or parcel map that proposes to convert a Nonresidential Building or Buildings to Condominiums shall be accompanied by an application for a Zoning Permit pursuant to this chapter.

 

The following procedures and regulations shall apply to Zoning Permit applications for nonresidential condominium conversion:

 

A.    Department Review. The Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) shall review applications for nonresidential condominium conversions as an administrative approval for a Zoning Permit. A publicly noticed administrative hearing may be conducted, at the discretion of the ZEO, should the ZEO determine that a particular application raises significant City policy issues.

 

B.    Application for Conversion Required. No person shall convert or cause the conversion of a nonresidential building to a condominium without submittal of an application and approval of a Zoning Permit for the condominium conversion application by the Zoning Enforcement Official, or, upon referral, by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

 

5.36.116 Required Reports and Information
 

The applicant shall submit all the information required for a Zoning Permit application, and a parcel map pursuant to this Code and San Leandro Municipal Code Chapter 7-1 Subdivision Ordinance. An application for approval of a parcel map for the nonresidential condominium subdivision shall be accompanied by the following items:

 

A.    Plans. A full plot plan, floor plans, and elevations of the project showing proposed building alterations and site improvements, including the location and sizes of existing and proposed structures, parking layout and access areas. Plans shall also include information on sewer, water and storm drains, areas and improvements to be commonly owned and maintained, and any other related information required by the City. Digital photographs may be substituted for elevations at staff’s discretion.

 

B.    Allocation of Parking and Signage. A proposal to include:

 

1.     Square footage of each unit, and the type of business for each existing tenant;

 

2.     A proposal for allocation of parking, based on the parking requirements of the Zoning Code; and

 

3.     A proposal for allocation of signage, based on the sign requirements of the Zoning Code and any existing master sign program.

 

C.    Property Evaluation Reports. Property evaluation reports detailing the structural conditions, useful life and any apparent deferred maintenance on the property which may include, but is not limited to, foundations, electricity, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, frames, fire protection, and drainage facilities. Such report shall also describe the condition of refuse disposal facilities, fountains, stone and brickwork, and exterior lighting.

 

The reports may recommend appropriate actions, including, but not limited to:

 

1.     Correction of City code violations;

 

2.     Achievement of conformance with current provisions of City codes;

 

3.     Rehabilitation of the structures, common areas, and other related facilities to substantially new condition;

 

4.     An increase in the energy and noise insulating qualities of the structures to that substantially required by current provision of the City codes.

 

The City may, as a condition of approval to be completed prior to approval of a Final Map or Building Permit, require additional reports to determine the existing conditions on the property related to termite infestation, exterior paint, HVAC equipment, soils, roofing, landscaping and irrigation.

 

The cost of all reports shall be paid by the applicant, and the persons preparing the reports shall be approved by the City. The reports shall include information on what improvements, if any, shall be accomplished by the developer and at what point in the conversion proceedings such improvements shall be completed. All improvements cited in the reports, whether required or voluntary, may be considered conditions of approval to the extent specified in the condominium conversion approval.

 

Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the property evaluation reports and other documents required under this chapter shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

Copy to Buyers. The reports and other documents required under this chapter in their accepted form shall remain on file with the department for review by the public. The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of the reports in their final, accepted form.

 

City Inspection and Fees. The City retains the right to inspect the structures and facilities for verification of the property evaluation reports. Costs of such inspections shall be borne by the developer through a deposit with the City.

 

D.    Tenant Notification. The applicant shall submit evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant 60 days prior to the filing of an application for a Zoning Permit and tentative or parcel map pursuant to this chapter, with a statement that all tenants have been notified of the following:

 

1.     Name, address, and telephone number of the current owner and/or applicant and of any person designated by the applicant as the person to be contacted for further information;

 

2.     The approximate dates on which the application for a Zoning Permit and tentative or parcel map are proposed to be filed;

 

3.     The approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by non-purchasing tenants;

 

4.     The anticipated price range and terms of sale for each type of unit;

 

5.     The proposed property owners’ association fees;

 

6.     A copy of the applicable condominium conversion regulations;

 

7.     The address and telephone number of the City of San Leandro Community Development Department;

 

8.     That an application is proposed to be filed for a Zoning Permit authorizing the conversion of such building, and a brief description of the conversion process, including City and state approval required; and

 

9.     Notification to tenants that, upon filing an application, the building and selected units may be inspected by City representatives. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.120 Condominium Conversion Standards
 

The following standards apply to commercial/industrial condominium conversions. These standards must be satisfied before the final map or parcel map is approved.

 

A.    Compliance with Zoning, Building, Mechanical, and Fire Codes. The existing buildings and other improvements shall conform to the applicable standards of the City Zoning, Building, and Fire Code in effect at the time the original building permit was issued. All proposed improvements related to the condominium conversion shall comply with current code requirements.

 

B.    Parking Requirements. The project shall conform to all applicable parking requirements of Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, unless a parking exception is approved pursuant to Chapter 4.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations of the Zoning Code.

 

C.    Energy Conservation. The structures in public and common areas shall conform to all energy conservation standards of the City of San Leandro Building Code. Where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the City may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the energy conservation deficiencies currently within the public and common areas.

 

D.    Fire Protection. Each unit shall be provided with a fire-warning system conforming to the City of San Leandro Building Code standards in type and locations.

 

E.    Utilities: Location, Metering, and Alternative Energy.

 

1.     Location. No common gas or electrical connection or service shall be allowed. Easements for gas and electric lines shall be provided in the common ownership area where lateral service connections shall take place. Gas, electric, and water services to each unit shall be located completely within the lot lines or ownership space of each unit or within common tenant areas.

 

2.     Undergrounding. All new or existing utilities across property frontage shall be installed or connected underground, if the project is located on a street which is on the City’s Utility Underground Master Plan.

 

3.     Metering. Each unit shall be separately metered for gas, electricity, and water, unless the applicant proposes that the Property Owners’ Association will be responsible for these.

 

F.     Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements as required by the Zoning Enforcement Official shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety. The refurbishing and restoration is subject to the review and approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

G.    Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping and irrigation shall be restored or new landscaping shall be installed to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality. Provisions shall be made in the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for continuing maintenance of all landscaped areas. Existing landscaping and irrigation systems are subject to review and approval by the Community Development Department. If new landscaping is proposed, the design of all landscaping and irrigation is subject to review and approval of the Zoning Enforcement Official.

 

H.    Trash Enclosures and Solid Waste Disposal. All trash enclosures, trash bins, recycling bins and disposal schedules for solid waste shall be subject to the review and approval of the Environmental Services Division.

 

I.      Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs). Prior to issuance of a Final Map, applicant shall prepare and submit for review and approval of the City all rules and regulations which would be applied on behalf of the owners of condominium units within the project. The CC&Rs shall include, but not be limited to: a description of the authority of the Property Owners’ Association; the resale of units; the assignment of parking and storage areas; a description of all land or building area to be owned in common; and an agreement for common area maintenance, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for the maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit.

 

J.     Contingency or Reserve Fund. The intent of the City in requiring the creation of a contingency or reserve fund for condominium conversions is to provide a surety for unexpected or emergency repairs to common areas in the interest of the economic, aesthetic, and environmental maintenance of the community, as well as to protect the general welfare, public health, and safety of the community. The applicant shall ensure that each unit is obligated to pay an assessment to allow for the proper maintenance of the common areas, along with a contingency to address extraordinary repairs, replacements, and maintenance. Formation of a Property Owners’ Association and levying of regular and special assessments shall conform to Civil Code Section 1366. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.124 Application Notification
 

Applications for condominium conversions shall include the following procedures as they relate to notification of current tenants and adjacent property owners.

 

Notice of an application for a Zoning Permit shall be mailed by the City to property owners and business establishments within a 300-foot radius of the subject site, not less than 10 days prior to action on the application by the Zoning Enforcement Official. Additionally, such notice shall be mailed by the City to each tenant of the proposed project.

 

If an administrative hearing, or a public hearing if the case is referred to the Planning Commission, is proposed, the time, date and location shall be included in the notice.

 

Upon review of the application and any correspondence received from those sent notice of the application, the Zoning Enforcement Official may take action on the application without holding an administrative hearing. The Zoning Enforcement Official has the discretion to hold an administrative hearing or refer the case to the Planning Commission, should a determination be made that a particular application raises significant City policy issues. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.128 Required Findings
 

The Zoning Enforcement Official may approve, or conditionally approve, the Zoning Permit if it determines that the following requirements are met:

 

A.    That all the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code, and other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code are met;

 

B.    That the proposed conversion is consistent with the General Plan Land Use Map and any applicable policies;

 

C.    That the proposed conversion will conform to the provisions of this Code in effect at the time of approval, except as otherwise provided in this section; and

 

D.    That the overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion will achieve a high standard of appearance, quality, useful life, and safety. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.132 Referral to Planning Commission
 

A.    If, upon conclusion of an administrative review or hearing on the Zoning Permit, the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO) determines that a particular application raises significant City policy issues, the ZEO may refer the application to the Planning Commission along with his/her recommendations, including an identification of the impacts or issues which the ZEO believes should be considered by the Planning Commission.

 

B.    Upon referral from the Zoning Enforcement Official, the Planning Commission may either accept the recommendation of the Zoning Enforcement Official or hear and decide the matter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.136 Appeals
 

Decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accord with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. Decisions of the Planning Commission may be further appealed to the City Council, in accord with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

 

5.36.140 Retaliation Defense
 

It shall be unlawful for any person to evict or cause to be evicted any tenant where the dominant purpose of such eviction is retaliation against the tenant for the exercise or attempted exercise of any right granted under this chapter or for the peaceful and lawful opposition by such tenant to the proposed conversion of the multiple-unit rental project within which such tenant occupies a tenant space. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2005-025 § 2)

Chapter 5.40 Alcoholic Beverage Sale Regulations
5.40.100 Title and Purpose
 

The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.104 Purpose of Alcoholic Beverage Sale Regulations
 

The general purposes of the Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulation are to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience prosperity, and general welfare by requiring that Alcoholic Beverage Sale Commercial Activities that are not subject to a conditional use permit comply with the Deemed Approved performance standards of Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status of this chapter and to achieve the following objectives:

 

A.    To protect residential, commercial, industrial, and civic areas and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses;

 

B.    To provide opportunities for Alcoholic Beverage Sale Commercial Activities to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other commercial and civic services;

 

C.    To provide mechanisms to address problems often associated with the public consumption of alcoholic beverages, such as litter, loitering, graffiti, unruly behavior, and escalated noise levels;

 

D.    To provide that Alcoholic Beverage Sale Commercial Activities are not the source of undue public nuisances in the community;

 

E.    To provide for properly maintained Alcoholic Beverage Sale establishments, so that negative impacts generated by these activities are not harmful to the surrounding environment in any way;

 

F.     To monitor that Deemed Approved Activities do not substantially change in mode or character of operation. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.108 Applicability of Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale Regulations
 

A.    The Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations shall apply to the extent permissible under other laws to all Cafés; Full-Service Restaurants; Fast Food Establishments; Convenience Stores; Dance Halls; Liquor Stores; Beer and Wine Stores; Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets; Retail Sales establishments; and Service Stations within the City that sell Alcoholic Beverages for on or off sale consumption.

 

B.    Whenever any provision of the Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations and any other provision of law, whether set forth in this Code, or in any other law, ordinance, or regulation of any kind, imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided in the Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.112 Definitions
 

Alcoholic Beverage. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances, and sales of which require a State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license.

 

Alcoholic Beverage Sales Commercial Activity. The retail sale, for on- or off-premises consumption, of liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages.

 

Condition of Approval. A requirement which must be carried out by the activity in order to retain its Deemed Approved Status.

 

Deemed Approved Activity. The sale of alcoholic beverages at any Café; Full-Service Restaurant; Fast Food Establishment; Convenience Store; Dance Hall; Liquor Store; Beer and Wine Store; Neighborhood/Specialty Food Market; Retail Sales establishments, or Service Station that is not subject to a conditional use permit shall be considered a Deemed Approved Activity, as long as it complies with the Deemed Approved performance standards as set forth in Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status. Any such activity that is a legal nonconforming activity as defined by Chapter 4.20 Nonconforming Uses and Structures shall continue to hold legal nonconforming status.

 

Illegal Activity. An activity, which has been finally determined to be in noncompliance with the Deemed Approved performance standards in 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status of this chapter. Such an activity shall lose its Deemed Approved Status and shall no longer be considered a Deemed Approved Activity.

 

Performance Standards. Regulations prescribed in the Deemed Approved Performance Standards in Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status of this chapter.

 

Premises. The actual space within a building devoted to alcoholic beverage sales. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.116 Automatic Deemed Approved Status
 

All Cafés; Full-Service Restaurants; Fast Food Establishments; Convenience Stores; Dance Halls; Liquor Stores; Beer and Wine Stores; Neighborhood/Specialty Food Markets; Retail Sales Establishments, and Service Stations selling alcoholic beverages and that were not subject to conditional use permits immediately prior to the effective date of the Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations shall automatically become Deemed Approved Activities as of the effective date of the Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations. Each such Deemed Approved Activity shall retain its Deemed Approved Status, as long as it complies with the Deemed Approved performance standards set forth in Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status
 

A.    The purpose of the Performance Standards is to control dangerous or objectionable environmental effects of Alcoholic Beverage Sales Commercial Activities. These standards shall apply to all Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sales Commercial Activities that hold Deemed Approved Status pursuant to Section 5.40.116 Automatic Deemed Approved Status.

 

B.    An activity shall retain its Deemed Approved Status only if it conforms with all of the following Deemed Approved performance standards:

 

1.     That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace, or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;

 

2.     That it does not result in jeopardizing or endangering the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;

 

3.     That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passers by, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests;

 

4.     That it does not result in violations to any applicable provision of any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance or statute;

 

5.     That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.124 Notification to Owners of Deemed Approved Activities
 

A.    The Zoning Enforcement Official shall notify the owner of each Deemed Approved Activity, and, also, the property owner if not the same, of the activity’s Deemed Approved Status.

 

B.    Such notice shall be sent via certified return receipt mail; shall include a copy of the performance standards of Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status of this chapter; notification that the activity is required to comply with all these same performance standards; that the activity is required to comply with all other aspects of the Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale regulations; and that penalties and costs of enforcement may be assessed in the event of a violation. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.128 Procedure for Consideration of Violations to Performance Standards
 

A.    Upon receiving a complaint from the public, Police Department, or any other interested party that a Deemed Approved Activity is in violation of the performance standards in Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall review the violation. Owners or operators of Deemed Approved Activities are encouraged to contact police to handle violations of the law. In order to avoid discouraging such calls, a violation of the performance standards may not be based solely upon the number of police calls for service that a Deemed Approved Activity generates. The Zoning Enforcement Official has the authority to work with the owner or operator of the Deemed Approved Activity (also referred to herein as “Respondent”) to resolve minor violations. If the Zoning Enforcement Official determines that the operating methods of the Deemed Approved Activity may be causing undue negative impacts on the surrounding area, then the Deemed Approved Status of the Deemed Approved Activity in question shall be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Adjustments in accordance with Section 5.40.132 Violations to Conditions of Approval. This section is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other city officer or bodies, in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony of Alcoholic Beverage Sale Commercial Activities in the City.

 

B.    The Zoning Enforcement Official’s referral shall be scheduled for a hearing before the Board of Zoning Adjustments within 45 days of the referral, unless both the ZEO and the Respondent consent to a later date. The purpose of the public hearing is to receive testimony on whether the operating methods of the Deemed Approved Activity are causing undue negative impacts in the surrounding area. The public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.24 Enforcement. Notification of hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be provided to both the property owner and the operator of the Deemed Approved Activity. At the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall determine whether the Deemed Approved Activity conforms to the Deemed Approved Performance Standards set forth in Section 5.40.120 Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Status and to any other applicable criteria, and may continue the Deemed Approved Status for the activity in question or require such changes or impose such reasonable Conditions of Approval as are in the judgment of the Board of Zoning Adjustments necessary to ensure conformity to said criteria and such conditions shall be based on the evidence before the Board. The decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall be based upon information compiled by staff and testimony from the business owner and all other interested parties.

 

C.    Any new conditions of approval shall be made a part of the Deemed Approved Status and the Deemed Approved Activity shall be required to comply with these conditions. The determination of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall become final 10 calendar days after the date of decision unless appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.132 Violations to Conditions of Approval
 

A.    In the event of a violation of any of the provisions set forth in these regulations, or upon evidence that there has been a failure to comply with any prescribed condition of approval, the Board of Zoning Adjustments may hold a public hearing. Notification of the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 5.24.108 Revocation of Discretionary Permits.

 

B.    The purpose of this public hearing is to receive testimony and determine whether violations to any conditions of approval attached to the site have occurred. The Board of Zoning Adjustments may add to or amend the existing conditions of approval based upon the evidence presented; or, alternatively, may revoke the Deemed Approved Activity’s Deemed Approved Status and discontinue the Alcoholic Beverage Sales. The determination of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall become final 15 calendar days after the date of decision unless appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 5.20 Appeals. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.136 Fee Schedule
 

If the City Council determines to charge any fees for review, notification, appeal, and re-inspection of Deemed Approved Activities, such fees shall be in accordance with the City master fee schedule. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.140 Violations and Penalties
 

A.    Violations. Violations of this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 5.24 Enforcement.

 

B.    Liability for Expenses. In addition to the punishment provided by law, a violator is liable for such costs, expenses, and disbursements paid or incurred by the city or any of its contractors in correction, abatement, and prosecution of the violation. Such costs shall be recovered pursuant to Section 5.24.120 Lien Procedure. Re-inspection fees to ascertain compliance with previously noticed or cited violations shall be charged against the owner of the Deemed Approved Activity. Fees shall be in the amount described in Section 5.40.136 Fee Schedule for charged re-inspections. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

 

5.40.144 Inspection and Right of Entry
 

The Zoning Enforcement Official, or his or her duly authorized representatives, may enter on any site or into any structure for the purpose of investigation, provided they shall do so in a reasonable manner, whenever they have cause to suspect a violation of any provision of these regulations or whenever necessary to the investigation of violations to the Deemed Approved performance standards or conditions of approval prescribed in these regulations. An owner or occupant or agent thereof who refuses to permit such entry and investigation shall be guilty of infringing upon the violations and penalties as outlined in Section 5.40.140 Violations and Penalties and subject to related penalties thereof. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2001-015 § 1)

Title 6—Affordable Housing
Chapter 6.04 Inclusionary Housing
Chapter 6.08 Residential Density Bonus

Chapter 6.04 Inclusionary Housing
6.04.100 Purpose
 

The purpose of this chapter is to:

 

A.    Encourage the development and availability of housing affordable to a broad range of Households with varying income levels within the City as mandated by State Law, California Government Code Sections 65580 et seq.;

 

B.    Promote the City’s goal to add affordable housing units to the City’s housing stock in proportion to the overall increase in new jobs and housing units;

 

C.    Offset the demand on housing that is created by new development and mitigate environmental and other impacts that accompany new residential and commercial development by protecting the economic diversity of the City’s housing stock, reducing traffic, transit and related air quality impacts, promoting jobs/housing balance and reducing the demands placed on transportation infrastructure in the region; and

 

D.    Increase the supply of affordable ownership and rental housing in San Leandro as identified in the established Housing Element Goal 53, Affordable Housing Development. Policy 53.04 of Goal 53 requires the inclusion of affordable housing in new housing developments. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.104 Findings
 

The City Council finds and determines:

 

A.    Both California and the City face a serious housing problem that threatens their economic security. Lack of access to affordable housing has a direct impact upon the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. The City will not be able to contribute to the attainment of State housing goals or to retain a healthy environment without additional affordable housing. The housing problem has an impact upon a broad range of income groups including many who are not impoverished by standards other than those applicable to California’s and the City’s housing markets, and no single housing program will be sufficient to meet the housing need.

 

B.    Rising land prices along with limited available land have been key factors in preventing development of new affordable housing. New housing construction in the City which does not include affordable units aggravates the existing shortage of affordable housing by absorbing the supply of available residential land. This reduces the supply of land for affordable housing and increases the price of remaining residential land. At the same time new housing contributes to the demand for goods and services in the City, increasing local service employment at wage levels which do not permit employees to afford housing in the City. Providing the affordable units required by this ordinance will help to insure that part of the City’s remaining developable land is used to provide affordable housing.

 

C.    The City’s adopted Housing Element has determined that 35 percent to 40 percent of the Households in the city have very low or low incomes. There is an affordability gap for low and very low income Households in San Leandro for both rental and for sale units. Among City groups identified in the Housing Element with especially significant housing needs are large and extended families. Also, currently there are limited housing choices for young adults or singles within San Leandro.

 

D.    Development of new commercial projects and Market-Rate housing encourages new residents to move to the City. These new residents will place demands on services provided by both public and private sectors. Some of these employees earn incomes only adequate to pay for affordable housing, not market rate housing. Because affordable housing is in short supply within the City, these employees may be forced to live in less than adequate housing within the City, pay a disproportionate share of their incomes to live in adequate housing within the City, or commute ever-increasing distances to their jobs from housing located outside the City. These circumstances harm the City’s ability to attain goals articulated in the City’s General Plan.

 

E.    A lack of new inclusionary units will have a substantial negative impact on the environment and economic climate because: (1) housing will have to be built elsewhere, far from employment centers and, therefore, commutes will increase, causing increased traffic and transit demand and consequent noise and air pollution; and (2) City businesses will find it more difficult to attract and retain the workers they need. Inclusionary housing policies contribute to a healthy job and housing balance by providing more affordable housing close to employment centers.

 

F.     The California Legislature has required each local government agency to develop a comprehensive, long-term general plan establishing policies for future development. As specified in the Government Code (at Sections 65300, 65302(c), and 65583(c)), the plan must: (1) “encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for all income levels, including multifamily rental housing”; (2) “assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income Households”; and (3) “conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock, which may include addressing ways to mitigate the loss of dwelling units demolished by public or private action.”

 

G.    The citizens of the City seek a well-planned, aesthetically pleasing and balanced community, with housing affordable to very low-, low- and moderate-income Households. Affordable housing should be available throughout the City, and not restricted to a few neighborhoods and areas. Therefore, our primary goal with this policy is to have diverse housing. However, there may also be trade-offs where constructing affordable units at a different site than the site of the principal project may produce a greater number of affordable units without additional costs to the project applicant. Thus, the City finds that in certain limited circumstances, the purposes of this chapter may be better served by allowing the developer to comply with the inclusionary requirement through alternative means, such as development of off-site housing or dedication of land. For example, if a project applicant can produce a significantly greater number of affordable units off-site, it may (but not always) be in the best interest of the City to permit the development of affordable units at a different location than that of the principal project.

 

H.    Federal and state funds for the construction of new affordable housing are insufficient to fully address the problem of affordable housing within the City. Nor has the private housing market provided adequate housing opportunities affordable to moderate-, low- and very low-income Households. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-001 § 2; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.108 Definitions
 

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

 

A.      Affordable Rent means monthly rent that does not exceed the following calculation for a household of the applicable income level (moderate-, low- or very low-income):

 

1.     For low-income households: 1/12 of 30% of 60% area median income (AMI).

 

2.     For very low-income rental households: 1/12 of 30% of 50% AMI.

 

B.    Affordable Ownership Cost means a sales price that results in a monthly housing cost (including mortgage payment, interest, property taxes, insurance, utilities, maintenance and home association costs, if any) that does not exceed the following calculation for a Household of the applicable income (moderate or low income).

 

1.     For moderate-income households, 1/12 of 35% of 110% AMI.

 

2.     For low-income owner households, 1/12 of 35% of 70% of AMI.

 

C.    Approval Authority means a person or body that is authorized to approve the Housing Development as specified in the San Leandro Zoning Code.

 

D.    Area Median Income means the median household income of a geographic area of the state, as annually estimated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937.

 

E.    City means the City of San Leandro.

 

F.     Community Development Director means the Community Development Director of the City or his or her designee.

 

G.      Construction Cost Index means the Engineering News-Record San Francisco Building Cost Index. If that index ceases to exist, the Community Development Director will substitute another Construction Cost Index, which, in his or her judgment, is as nearly equivalent to the original index as possible.

 

H.    Developer means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities, which seeks City approvals for all or part of a residential or commercial development.

 

I.      Eligible Household means a Household whose gross Household income does not exceed the maximum specified in Section 6.04.108 Definitions and Section 6.04.112 Residential Development for a given affordable unit.

 

J.     Eligible Household List means the list of eligible households compiled by the City ranked by preference. All San Leandro residents, City or school district employees, and persons employed in San Leandro shall be given a preference and ranked higher on the list than other persons.

 

K.    For Sale Project means a new residential project, or existing rental project or portion thereof, which is intended to be sold to owner-occupants upon completion or conversion.

 

L.     Household means one person living alone or two or more persons sharing residency.

 

M.    Household Income means the combined adjusted gross income for all adult persons living in a living unit as calculated for the purpose of this chapter.

 

N.    Inclusionary Housing Plan means a plan for a residential development submitted by a developer as provided by Subsection B of Section 6.04.128 Compliance Procedures.

 

O.    Inclusionary Housing Agreement means a written agreement between Developer and the City as provided by Subsection C of Section 6.04.128 Compliance Procedures.

 

P.    Inclusionary Unit means a dwelling unit that must be offered at Affordable Rent or available at an Affordable Housing Cost to moderate-, low- and very low-income Households.

 

Q.    Income: Low-Income Rental Household means a Household whose gross annual income does not exceed 60 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size and revised annually.

 

R.    Income: Low-Income Household means a Household whose gross annual income does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size and revised annually.

 

S.    Income: Moderate-Income Household means a Household whose gross annual income does not exceed 120 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size and revised annually.

 

T.       Income: Very Low-Income Household means a Household whose gross annual income does not exceed 50 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size and revised annually.

 

U.    Living Unit means one or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities.

 

V.    Market-Rate Unit means a dwelling unit in a Residential Development that is not an Inclusionary Unit.

 

W.   Median Sales Price means sales price in San Leandro as reported by Data Quick, California Resources, or similar service on February and August of each year.

 

X.      Off-Site Unit means an Inclusionary Unit that will be built separately or at a different location than the main development.

 

Y.    On-Site Unit means an Inclusionary Unit that will be built as part of the main development.

 

Z.       Residential Development means the construction of a new residential project or the conversion of an existing rental project to a for sale project that consists of two new dwelling units or more as defined in the Zoning Code.

 

AA.  Rental Project means a residential project, or portion thereof, which is intended to be rented to tenants upon completion. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-001 § 2; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.112 Residential Development
 

For all Residential Developments, at least 15 percent of the total units must be Inclusionary Units restricted for occupancy by moderate-, low- or very low-income Households at either the Affordable Rent or Affordable Ownership cost appropriate for the income of the Household. The number of Inclusionary Units required for a particular project will be determined only once, at the time of tentative or parcel map approval, or, for developments not processing a map, prior to issuance of a building permit. If a change in the subdivision design results in a change in the total number of units, the number of Inclusionary Units required will be recalculated to coincide with the final approved project.

 

A.    Calculation. For purposes of calculating the number of inclusionary units required by this chapter, any additional units authorized as a density bonus under California Government Code Section 65915(b)(1) or (b)(2) will not be counted in determining the required number of Inclusionary Units. In determining the number of whole Inclusionary Units required, any decimal fraction of 0.5 or more shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

 

B.    Rental Project. The Inclusionary Units must be restricted to occupancy as follows:

 

 

Required Inclusionary Units

Total Units in Project

Total (A + B)

Low Income Renter Household (A)

Very Low Income Household (B)

4 to 9

1

1

0

10 to 16

2

1

1

17 to 23

3

1

2

24 to 29

4

2

2

30 to 36

5

2

3

37 to 43

6

2

4

44 to 49

7

3

4

50+

15% of Total Units

40% of Total Inclusionary Units

60% of Total Inclusionary Units

 

C.      For Sale Project. The Inclusionary Units shall be restricted to occupancy as follows:

 

 

Required Inclusionary Units

Total Units in Project

Total (A + B)

Moderate Income Household (A)

Low Income Owner Household (B)

2 to 6

1 or in-lieu fee

1 or in-lieu fee

0

7 to 9

1

1

0

10 to 13

2

2

0

14 to 16

2

1

1

17 to 23

3

2

1

24 to 29

4

3

1

30 to 36

5

3

2

37 to 43

6

4

2

44 to 49

7

4

3

50+

15% of Total Units

60% of Total Inclusionary Units

40% of Total Inclusionary Units

 

D.    Sequencing Inclusionary Units. To assure that the inclusionary units are occupied at the beginning of the project, a provision outlining the sequencing of the units will be included in the Inclusionary Housing Plan. An example of sequencing might be requiring the very low income inclusionary units to be occupied before moderate- or low-income or affordable units constructed in proportion to construction of Market Rate Units. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-001 § 2; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.116 Exemptions
 

The requirements of this chapter do not apply to:

 

A.    The reconstruction of any structures that have been destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature.

 

B.    Developments that already have more units that qualify as affordable to moderate-, low- and very low-income Households than this chapter requires.

 

C.    Housing constructed by other government agencies.

 

D.    Accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2017-003 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.120 Inclusionary Housing Standards
 

A.    Design. Inclusionary Units built under this chapter shall generally be indistinguishable from the Market Rate Units and shall conform to the following standards:

 

1.     Location within Project. Inclusionary Units shall not be clustered together in any building, complex or area in the Residential Development, whenever feasible,

 

2.     Infrastructure. The Inclusionary Units shall be comparable in infrastructure (including sewer, water, and other utilities) to the Market Rate Units.

 

3.     Exterior of Inclusionary Units. The construction quality and exterior design of the Inclusionary Units shall be architecturally consistent with the Market Rate Units in terms of design, articulation, quality of materials and finishes.

 

4.     Interior of Inclusionary Units. Inclusionary Units may have different interior finishes and features than the Market Rate Units provided the interior features are durable, of good quality, and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing.

 

5.     Size of Inclusionary Units.

 

a.     Projects with Several Housing Products. Where a project consists of several housing products with different lot sizes and lot configurations (e.g., mixture of single-family detached, single-family attached, courtyard housing, townhouses, and/or condominiums), the Inclusionary Units may be comparable to the smallest or lowest priced Market Rate product. The size of the Inclusionary Units may be up to 15 percent smaller in livable floor area than the average size of the smallest or lowest priced Market Rate product. The average number of bedrooms and bathrooms in the Inclusionary Units shall equal the average number of bedrooms and bathrooms in the smallest or lowest priced Market Rate product.

 

b.     Projects with One Housing Product. Where a project consists of one housing product with similar lot sizes and lot configurations, the size of the Inclusionary Units may be up to 25 percent smaller in livable floor area than the average size of the Market Rate Units. The average number of bedrooms and bathrooms in the Inclusionary Units shall equal the average number of bedrooms and bathrooms in the Market Rate Units; however, the Inclusionary Units do not have to exceed three bedrooms with two and one-half bathrooms.

 

c.     Exception to the Minimum Size and Housing Type. For single-family detached projects, the size of the Inclusionary Units may be less than the minimum size stipulated in Subsection A.5.a and b above, if such units are combined to appear as a single-family home and the building is very similar in size and architectural design to a larger single-family detached unit within the project. This is not an exception to the bedroom and bathroom requirements as stipulated in Subsection 5.a and b above.

 

B.    Timing. All Inclusionary Units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with or prior to the construction and occupancy of Market-Rate Units or development or in accordance with the approved Inclusionary Housing Plan sequencing requirements. In phased developments, Inclusionary Units must be constructed and occupied in proportion to the number of units in each phase of the Residential Development.

 

C.    Duration of Affordability Requirement. Inclusionary Units produced under this ordinance must be legally restricted to occupancy by Households of the income levels for which the units were designated for a minimum of 55 years for rental units and 45 years for owner occupied units. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.124 In-Lieu Fees
 

For Residential Developments of a for-sale project of six or fewer units, including Inclusionary Units, the requirements of this chapter may be satisfied by paying an in-lieu fee to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund as provided in Section 6.04.156 Affordable Housing Trust Fund. For Residential Developments with more than six units, including Inclusionary Units, the Approval Authority may allow the requirements on this chapter to be satisfied by paying an in-lieu fee in combination with one or more of the production alternatives described in Section 6.04.132 Off-Site Alternatives.

 

The fee shall be the Median Sales Price of a dwelling unit in San Leandro, (single family detached, single family attached or condominium, whichever is applicable), minus the Affordable Ownership Cost, multiplied by the fractional inclusionary unit required. The fractional inclusionary unit shall be as follows:

 

Total Units in Project

Fractional Inclusionary Unit Required

2

0.30

3

0.45

4

0.60

5

0.75

6

0.90

 

A.    Timing of Payment. The fee shall be calculated based on the price and cost figures established by the City at the time of building permit issuance. The fee must be paid prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the Development with the option to establish an alternative payment schedule if approved by the Community Development Director or designee. For phased developments, payments may be made for each portion prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for that phase. When payment is delayed, in the event of default, or for any other reason, the amount of the in-lieu fee payable under this chapter will be based upon the fee schedule in effect at the time the fee is paid.

 

B.    Effect of No Payment. No final inspection for occupancy will be completed for any corresponding Market-Rate Unit in a Residential Development unless fees required under this chapter have been paid in full to the City. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.128 Compliance Procedures
 

A.    General. The Approval Authority shall approve, conditionally approve, or reject the Inclusionary Housing Plan concurrent with action on any tentative map, parcel map, or planning approval for any Residential Development for which this chapter applies. The subsequent Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall be approved by the Community Development Director prior to approval of a final map or building permit for the applicable Residential Development. This section does not apply to projects where the requirements of this chapter are satisfied by payment of an in lieu fee under Section 6.04.124 In-Lieu Fees.

 

B.    Inclusionary Housing Plan. The Community Development Director must determine completeness within 30 days of submittal of a complete application. If the Inclusionary Housing Plan is incomplete, the Inclusionary Housing Plan will be returned to the Developer along with a list of the deficiencies or the information required. No application for a tentative map, parcel map or planning approval to which this chapter applies may be deemed complete until an Inclusionary Housing Plan is submitted to the Community Development Director. At any time during the review process, the Community Development Director may require from the Developer additional information reasonably necessary to clarify and supplement the application or determine the consistency of the proposed Inclusionary Housing Plan with the requirements of this chapter. The Inclusionary Housing Plan must include:

 

1.     The location, type of structure (attached, semi-attached, or detached), proposed tenure (for sale or rental), and size of the proposed Market-Rate Units, any commercial space and/or Inclusionary Units and the basis for calculating the number of Inclusionary Units;

 

2.     A site plan (and floor plan for multi-story developments) depicting the location of the Inclusionary Units;

 

3.     The income levels to which each Inclusionary Unit will be made affordable;

 

4.     The mechanisms that will be used to assure that the Inclusionary Units remain affordable for the desired term, such as resale and rental restrictions, deeds of trust, and rights of first refusal and other documents;

 

5.     For phased development, a phasing plan that provides for the timely development of the number of Inclusionary Units proportionate to each proposed phase of development as required by Section 6.04.120 Inclusionary Housing Standards;

 

6.     A description of any incentives as indicated in Section 6.04.136 Incentives for Rental and For-Sale On-Site Housing that are requested of the City;

 

7.     Any alternative means designated in Section 6.04.132 Off-Site Alternatives  proposed for the Development along with information necessary to support the findings required by the same Section for approval of such alternatives; and

 

8.     Any other information reasonably requested by the Community Development Director to assist with evaluation of the Plan under the standards of this chapter.

 

C.    Inclusionary Housing Agreement. The Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall consist of deeds of trust and other documents that address resale and rental restrictions, rights of first refusal, and other items required by this subsection. Any changes to such documents which materially alter any policy in the document, must be approved by the Community Development Director prior to being executed with respect to any Residential Development or affordable housing proposals. The form of the Inclusionary Housing Agreement will vary depending on the manner in which the provisions of this chapter are satisfied for a particular development. All Inclusionary Housing Agreements must include, at a minimum, the following:

 

1.     Description of the development, including whether the Inclusionary Units will be rented or owner-occupied;

 

2.     The number, size and location of very low-, low- or moderate-income units;

 

3.     Inclusionary incentives by the City (if any), including the nature and amount of any local public funding;

 

4.     Provisions and/or documents for resale restrictions, deeds of trust, rights of first refusal, and/or rental restrictions;

 

5.     Provisions for monitoring the ongoing affordability of the units, and the process for qualifying prospective resident Households for income eligibility.

 

D.    Recording of Agreement. Inclusionary Housing Agreements that are acceptable to the Community Development Director must be recorded against owner-occupied Inclusionary Units and residential projects containing rental Inclusionary Units. Additional rental or resale restrictions, deeds of trust, rights of first refusal and/or other documents acceptable to the Community Development Director must also be recorded against owner-occupied Inclusionary Units. In cases where the requirements of this chapter are satisfied through the development of Off-Site Units, the Inclusionary Housing Agreement must simultaneously be recorded against the property where the Off-Site Units are to be developed. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-001 § 2; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

 

6.04.132 Off-Site Alternatives
 

A.    Developer Proposal. A Developer may propose and the Approval Authority may approve an alternative means of compliance with an Inclusionary Housing Plan as provided in Subsection B of Section 6.04.128 Compliance Procedures which may include, but is not limited to the following provisions:

 

1.     Off-Site Construction. Inclusionary Units may be constructed off-site if the Inclusionary Units will be located in an area where the Approval Authority finds that, based on the availability of affordable housing, the need for such units is equal or greater than the need in the area of the proposed development.

 

2.     Land Dedication. In lieu of building Inclusionary Units, a Developer may choose to dedicate to the City land suitable for the construction of Inclusionary Units as determined by the Approval Authority. The site must be sufficient to allow construction of the required inclusionary units plus 10 percent. Infrastructure, such as sewer, water, and utilities, must be adjacent to the property.

 

3.     Credit Transfers. In lieu of building Inclusionary Units, the Developer may contribute funds to another project for the purpose of increasing the production of affordable units within said project. The Approval Authority will determine the credit that the developer may receive for the total number of affordable units produced over and above the number of Inclusionary Units that would otherwise be required for said project.

 

4.     In-lieu Fee. The Approval Authority may accept an in-lieu fee to partially satisfy the inclusionary requirement when such fee payment is combined with one or a combination of the above alternatives. (Projects with six or fewer for-sale units may fully satisfy the inclusionary requirement with an in-lieu fee per Section 6.04.124 In-Lieu Fees.)

 

5.     Combination. The Approval Authority may accept any combination of on-site construction, off-site construction, land dedication, credit transfer, or in-lieu fees that produces at least the number of Inclusionary Units that would otherwise be required by this chapter.

 

B.    Discretion. The Approval Authority may approve, conditionally approve or reject any alternative proposed by a Developer as part of an Inclusionary Housing Plan. Any approval or conditional approval must be based on a finding that the purposes of this chapter would be better served by implementation of the proposed alternative(s). In determining whether the purposes of this chapter would be better served under the proposed alternative, the Approval Authority shall consider: (1) whether implementation of an alternative would overly concentrate Inclusionary Units within any specific area and, if so, must reject the alternative unless the undesirable concentration of Inclusionary Units is offset by other identified benefits that flow from implementation of the alternative in issue; and (2) the extent to which other factors affect the feasibility of prompt construction of the Inclusionary Units on the property, such as costs and delays, the need for an appraisal, site design, zoning infrastructure, clear title, grading and environmental review. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.136 Incentives for Rental and For-Sale On-Site Housing
 

A.    Additional incentives may be provided in accord with the Density Bonus Ordinance, Chapter 6.08 Residential Density Bonus. However, the density bonus affordable housing production requirements would be in addition to the requirements to provide inclusionary units.

 

B.    The Approval Authority may consider flexibility in zoning standards for a Residential Development such as, but not limited to, maximum density, lot size, lot width, yards, and parking in order to better accommodate the required Inclusionary Units if it is determined that such flexibility would result in a higher quality project and would improve the financial feasibility of the project. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.140 Eligibility for Inclusionary Units
 

A.    General Eligibility. No Household may occupy an Inclusionary Unit unless the City or its designee has approved the Household’s eligibility. If the City or its designee maintains a list or identifies eligible Households, initial and subsequent occupants will be selected first from the list of identified Households, to the maximum extent possible, in accordance with any rules approved by the Community Development Director.

 

B.    Occupancy. Any Household that occupies a rental Inclusionary Unit or purchases an Inclusionary Unit must occupy that unit as a principal residence. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.144 Owner-Occupied Units
 

A.    Initial Sales Price. The initial sales price of the Inclusionary Unit must be set so that the eligible Household will pay an Affordable Ownership Cost.

 

B.    Resale Agreement. The initial purchaser of each Inclusionary Unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the City restricting the sale of the Inclusionary Unit in accordance with this chapter during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the Inclusionary Unit and shall contain such provisions as the City may require to ensure continued compliance with this chapter.

 

C.    Resale. The maximum sales price permitted on resale of the Inclusionary Unit designated for owner-occupancy shall be the lower of: (1) fair market value; or (2) the seller’s lawful purchase price, increased by the lesser of: (a) the rate of increase of Area Median Income during the seller’s ownership, or (b) the rate at which the consumer price index increased during the seller’s ownership. To the extent authorized in any resale restrictions or operative Inclusionary Housing Agreement, sellers may recover, at time of sale, the market value of capital improvements made by the seller and the seller’s necessary and usual costs of sale, and may authorize an increase in the maximum allowable sales price to achieve such recovery feasible.

 

D.    Changes in Title. Title in the Inclusionary Unit may change due to changes in circumstance, including death, marriage and divorce. Except as otherwise provided, if a change in title is occasioned by events that change the financial situation of the Household so that it is no longer income-eligible, then the property must be sold to an income-eligible Household within 180 days from the date of the event. Upon the death of one of the owners, title in the property may transfer to the surviving joint tenant without respect to the income-eligibility of the Household. Upon the death of a sole owner or all owners and inheritance of the Inclusionary Unit by a non-income-eligible child or step child of one or more owners, there will be a one-year compassion period between the time when the estate is settled and the time when the property must be sold to an income-eligible Household. Inheritance of an Inclusionary Unit by any other person whose Household is not income-eligible shall require resale of the unit to an income-eligible Household as soon as is feasible but not more than 180 days. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.148 Rental Units
 

Rental units will be offered to eligible Households at an Affordable Rent. The owner of rental Inclusionary Units shall certify each tenant Household’s income to the City or City’s designee at the time of initial rental and annually thereafter. The owner must obtain and review documents that demonstrate the prospective renter’s total income, such as income tax returns or W-2s for the previous calendar year, and submit such information on a form approved by the City.

 

A.    Selection of Tenants. The owners of rental Inclusionary Units may fill vacant units by selecting income-eligible Households from the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Waiting List maintained by the Alameda County Housing Authority or any other list maintained by the City or City’s designee. Alternatively, owners may fill vacant units through their own selection process, provided that they publish notices of the availability of Inclusionary Units according to guidelines established by the Community Development Director.

 

B.    Annual Report. The owner shall submit an annual report summarizing the occupancy of each Inclusionary Unit for the year, demonstrating the continuing income-eligibility of the tenant. The Community Development Director may require additional information if he or she deems it necessary.

 

C.    Subsequent Rental to Income-Eligible Tenant. The owner shall apply the same rental terms and conditions to tenants of Inclusionary Units as are applied to all other tenants, except as required to comply with this chapter (for example, rent levels, occupancy restrictions and income requirements) or with other applicable government subsidy programs. Discrimination against persons receiving housing assistance is prohibited.

 

D.    Changes in Tenant Income. If, after moving into an Inclusionary Unit, a tenant’s Household income exceeds the limit for that unit, the tenant Household may remain in the unit as long as his or her Household income does not exceed 140 percent of the income limit. Once the tenant’s income exceeds 140 percent of the income limit, the following shall apply:

 

1.     If the tenant’s income does not exceed the income limits of other Inclusionary Units in the Residential Development, the owner may, at the owner’s option, allow the tenant to remain in the original unit and redesignate the unit as affordable to Households of a higher income level, as long as the next vacant unit is re-designated for the income category previously applicable to the tenant’s Household. Otherwise, the tenant shall be given one year’s notice to vacate the unit. If during the year, an Inclusionary Unit becomes available and the tenant meets the income eligibility for that unit, the owner shall allow the tenant to apply for that unit.

 

2.     If there are no units designated for a higher income category within the Development that may be substituted for the original unit, the tenant shall be given one year’s notice to vacate the unit. If within that year, another unit in the Residential Development is vacated, the owner, at the owner’s option, may allow the tenant to remain in the original unit and raise the tenant’s rent to Market-Rate and designate the newly vacated unit as an Inclusionary Unit affordable at the income level previously applicable to the unit converted to market rate. The newly vacated unit must be comparable in size (for example, number of bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, etc.) as the original unit. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.152 Adjustments, Waivers
 

The requirements of this chapter may be adjusted or waived if the Developer demonstrates to the Approval Authority that there is not a reasonable relationship between the impact of a proposed Residential Development and the requirements of this chapter, or that applying the requirement of this chapter would take property in violation of the United States or California Constitutions.

 

A.    Timing. To receive an adjustment or waiver, the Developer must make a showing when applying for a first approval for the Residential Development, and/or as part of any appeal that the City provides as part of the process for the first approval.

 

B.    Considerations. In making a determination on an application to adjust or waive the requirements of this chapter, the Approval Authority may assume each of the following when applicable: (1) that the Developer is subject to the inclusionary housing requirement or in-lieu fee; (2) the extent to which the Developer will benefit from inclusionary incentives under Section 6.04.136 Incentives for Rental and For-Sale On-Site Housing; (3) that the Developer will be obligated to provide the most economical Inclusionary Units feasible in terms of construction, design, location and tenure; and (4) that the Developer is likely to obtain other housing subsidies where such funds are reasonably available.

 

C.    Modification of Plan. If the Approval Authority determines that the application of the provisions of this chapter lacks a reasonable relationship between the impact of a proposed residential project and the requirements of this chapter, or that applying the requirement of this chapter would take property in violation of the United States or California Constitutions, the Inclusionary Housing Plan shall be modified, adjusted or waived to reduce the obligations under this chapter to the extent necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result. If the Approval Authority determines no violation of the United States or California Constitutions would occur through application of this chapter, the requirements of this chapter remain applicable. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.156 Affordable Housing Trust Fund
 

A.    The Trust Fund. There is hereby established a separate Affordable Housing Trust Fund (“Fund”). This Fund shall receive all fees contributed under Section 6.04.124 In-Lieu Fees, as required in Section 66606(a) of the California Government Code. The Fund may also receive monies from other sources.

 

B.    Purpose and Limitations. Monies deposited in the Fund must be used to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to moderate-, low-, and very low-income Households in the City. Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative or related expenses associated with the administration of this chapter.

 

C.    Administration. The fund shall be administered by the Community Development Director, who may develop procedures to implement the purposes of the Fund consistent with the requirements of this chapter and any adopted budget of the City.

 

D.    Expenditures. Fund monies shall be used in accordance with City’s Housing Element, Consolidated Plan or subsequent plan adopted by the City Council to construct or convert to affordable housing or assist other governmental entities, private organizations or individuals to do so. Permissible uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to housing development corporations, equity participation loans, grants, pre-home ownership co-investment, pre-development loan funds, participation leases or other public-private partnership arrangements. The Fund may be used for the benefit of both rental and owner-occupied housing. The Fund may also be used to administer the City’s housing monitoring program to assure long term compliance with all affordable housing agreements.

 

E.    Annual Report. The Community Development Director shall provide a report to the City Council on the status of activities undertaken with the Fund as provided by Section 66006(b) of the California Government Code. The City Council shall review the information made available to the public at the next regularly scheduled public meeting, not less than 15 days after this information is made available to the City Council and the public. Notice of the time and place of the meeting, including the address where this information may be reviewed, shall be mailed, at least 15 days prior to the meeting, to any interested party who files a written request with the City for mailed notice of the meeting.

 

The report shall include a statement of income, expenses, disbursements and other uses of the Fund. The report should also state the number and type of inclusionary units constructed or assisted during that year and the amount of such assistance. The report will evaluate the efficiency of this chapter in mitigating the City’s shortage of affordable housing and recommend any changes to this chapter necessary to carry out its purposes, including any adjustments to the number of units to be required. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.160 Enforcement
 

A.    Penalty for Violation. It shall be a misdemeanor to violate any provision of this chapter. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it shall also be a misdemeanor for any person to sell or rent to another person an affordable unit under this chapter at a price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to sell or rent an inclusionary unit to a Household not qualified under this chapter. It shall further be a misdemeanor for any person to provide false or materially incomplete information to the City or to a seller or lessor of an Inclusionary Unit to obtain occupancy of housing for which he or she is not eligible.

 

B.    Legal Action. The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, including: (1) actions to revoke, deny or suspend any permit, including a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval; (2) actions to recover from any violator of this chapter civil fines, restitution to prevent unjust enrichment from a violation of this chapter, and/or enforcement costs, including attorneys fees; (3) eviction or foreclosure; and (4) any other appropriate action for injunctive relief or damages. Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any person, owner, Household or other party from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

 

6.04.164 Minimum Requirements
 

The requirements of this chapter are minimum and maximum requirements, although nothing in this chapter limits the ability of a private person to waive his or her rights or voluntarily undertake greater obligations than those imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

 

6.04.168 Appeals
 

Any decision of the Approval Authority pursuant to this chapter may be appealed in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 5.20 Appeals of the Zoning Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2004-023 § 3)

Chapter 6.08 Residential Density Bonus
6.08.100 Purpose and Intent
 

A.    This Density Bonus Ordinance is intended to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low, low, and moderate income households, and certain senior households in accordance with Sections 65915 and 65917 of the California Government Code. In enacting this chapter, it is the intent of the City of San Leandro to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s Housing Element.

 

B.    The regulations and procedures set forth in this chapter shall be publicized by the City and shall apply throughout the City. Sections of the California Government Code referenced in this chapter and application forms for complying with this chapter, shall be available to the public. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.104 Definitions
 

Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section:

 

A.    Affordable Rent means the rent levels specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 50053 for rental Target Units reserved for Very Low or Low Income Households adjusted for household size as set forth in Section 6.08.112 Development Standards.

 

B.    Affordable Sales Price means a sales price resulting in a Housing Cost at which Low, Very Low, and Moderate Income Households can qualify for the purchase of a Target Unit, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the development as adjusted for household size under Section 6.08.112 Development Standards, and not to exceed the parameters set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5.

 

C.    Approval Authority means a person or body that is authorized to approve the Housing Development as specified in the San Leandro Zoning Code.

 

D.    Concession or Incentive means such regulatory concessions as specified in California Government Code Section 65915(d) and (l) to include, but not be limited to, a reduction of site development standards or modification of zoning code requirements, direct financial incentives, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions. (See Section 6.08.116 Development Concessions and Incentives.)

 

E.    Density Bonus means:

 

1.     A minimum density increase of at least 20 percent over the otherwise Maximum Residential Density for development projects meeting the criteria of A through C in Section 6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation, up to a maximum of 35 percent as set forth in Section 6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation;

 

2.     A minimum density increase of at least five percent over the otherwise Maximum Residential Density for development projects meeting the criteria of Subsection D of Section 6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation; and

 

3.     The specific minimum density increase set forth in Section 6.08.128 Child Care Facilities for a project that qualifies for a Density Bonus due to establishment of a qualifying child care facility, and the specific minimum density increase set forth in Section 6.08.132 Donation of Land for a project that qualifies for a Density Bonus due to a qualifying land donation.

 

F.     Density Bonus Condo Conversion means a density bonus provision under Section 65915.5 of the California Government Code. (See Section 5.32.136 Density Bonus for Including Low- and Moderate-Income Housing of the San Leandro Zoning Code.)

 

G.    Density Bonus Housing Agreement means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied. The agreement shall establish at least the following: the number of Target Units; their size; location; terms and conditions of affordability; and production schedule. (See Section 6.08.124 Density Bonus Housing Agreement.)

 

H.    Density Bonus Units means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which exceed the units allowed under the otherwise Maximum Residential Density for the development site.

 

I.      Equivalent Financial Incentive means a monetary contribution, based upon a land cost per dwelling unit value, equal to one of the following:

 

1.     A Density Bonus and a Concession(s) or Incentive(s); or

 

2.     A Density Bonus, where a Concession(s) or Incentive(s) is not requested or is determined to be unnecessary. (See Section 6.08.112 Development Standards.)

 

J.     Housing Cost means the sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale Target Units: principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

 

K.    Housing Development means one or more groups of projects consisting of five or more residential units, including single-family, multi-family, common interest developments and mobile homes for-sale or rent, pursuant to this chapter. The term Housing Development also includes a project that substantially rehabilitates and converts an existing commercial building or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multi-family dwelling where the result would be a net increase in available residential units.

 

L.     Low Income Household means households whose income does not exceed the low income limits (currently 80% of the AMI) applicable to the Oakland, California PMSA, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

M.    Maximum Residential Density means the maximum number of residential units permitted by the City’s Zoning Code and land use element of the General Plan at the time of application, excluding the provisions of this chapter. If the housing development is within a Planned Development overlay zone, the maximum residential density shall be determined on the basis of the general plan and the maximum density of the base zoning.

 

N.    Moderate Income Household means a household whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits (currently 120% of the AMI) applicable to the Oakland, California PMSA, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

O.    Non-Restricted Unit means all units within a Housing Development excluding the Target Units.

 

P.    Qualifying Senior Citizen Resident means a senior citizen or other person eligible to reside in Senior Citizen Housing.

 

Q.    Senior Citizen Housing means a housing development consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq., including 12955.9 in particular), which has been designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens, and which otherwise qualifies as housing for older persons as that phrase is used in the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-430) and implementing regulations (24 CFR, part 100, subpart E), and as defined in California Civil Code Sections 51.2 and 51.3. The term Senior Citizen Housing also includes a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code.

 

R.    Target Unit means a dwelling unit within a Housing Development which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, Very Low, Low, or Moderate Income Households, or Qualifying Senior Citizen Residents.

 

S.    Very Low Income Household means a household whose income does not exceed the very low income (currently 50 percent of the AMI) limits applicable to the Oakland, California, PMSA, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation
 

The City shall grant a Density Bonus, a Density Bonus and a Concession(s) or Incentive(s), or Equivalent Financial Incentives, as set forth in Section 6.08.116 Development Concessions and Incentives of this chapter, to an applicant or developer of a Housing Development, who seeks and agrees to construct a Housing Development that will provide at least one of the following:

 

A.    At least 10 percent of the total units of the Housing Development as Target Units affordable to Low Income Households. For each one percent increment over 10 percent in the number of Target Units in the Housing Development affordable to Low Income Households, the amount of the Density Bonus as defined in Section 6.08.104 Definitions shall be increased by one and one-half percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent;

 

B.    At least five percent of the total units of the Housing Development as Target Units affordable to Very Low Income Households. For each one percent increment over five percent in the number of Target Units in the Housing Development affordable to Very Low Income Households, the amount of the Density Bonus as defined in Section 6.08.020 shall be increased by two and one-half percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent;

 

C.    Senior Citizen Housing as defined in Section 6.08.104 Definitions; or

 

D.    At least 10 percent of the total units in a common interest development as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351 for Moderate Income Households, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. For each one percent over 10 percent in the number of Target Units in the common interest development affordable to Moderate Income Households, the amount of the Density Bonus as defined in Section 6.08.104 Definitions shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent.

 

When calculating the number of permitted Density Bonus Units, any fractions of units shall be rounded to the next highest number. An applicant may elect to receive a Density Bonus that is less than the amount required by this section. An applicant must state in its application which of the density bonuses set forth above is being sought.

 

In determining the number of Target Units required to comply with this section, the Maximum Residential Density shall be multiplied by 0.05, where Very Low Income Households are targeted, by 0.10 where Low Income Households are targeted, or by 0.10 where moderate income households in common interest developments are targeted. The Density Bonus Units shall not be included when determining the total number of Target Units in the Housing Development. When calculating the required number of Target Units, any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer.

 

In cases where a smaller density increase is requested, no reduction will be allowed in the number of Target Units required. In cases where a density increase of more than the amount required by this section is requested, the requested density increase, if granted, may be considered a Concession or Incentive, as outlined in Section 6.08.116 Development Concessions and Incentives. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.112 Development Standards
 

Target Units shall be constructed concurrently with Non-Restricted Units unless both the City and the developer/applicant agree within the Density Bonus Housing Agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

 

Target Units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated group for a period of 55 years for rental units or 45 years for for-sale units.

 

In determining the maximum Affordable Rent or Affordable Sales Price of Target Units the following household and unit size assumptions shall be used, unless the Housing Development is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations:

 

Type of Unit

Household Size

SRO (residential hotel) unit

75% of 1 person

0 bedroom (studio)

1 person

1 bedroom

2 person

2 bedroom

3 person

3 bedroom

4 person

4 bedroom

5 person

 

Target Units should be built on-site wherever possible, should be dispersed randomly throughout a Residential Development, and should be constructed and occupied concurrently with or prior to the construction and occupancy of Non-Restricted Units. The number of bedrooms of the Target Units should be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the non-Target units of the Housing Development; except that the Developer may include a higher proportion of the Target Units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the Target Units shall be compatible with the design of the total Housing Development. Housing Developments shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those which may be modified as provided by this chapter.

 

Circumstances may arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the Target Units associated with one Housing Development to be produced and operated at an alternative development site. Where the developer and the City form such an agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single Housing Development for purposes of this chapter. Under these circumstances, the developer shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter for all Target Units.

 

A Density Bonus Housing Agreement shall be made a condition of any tentative map, parcel map, Planned Development or conditional use permits, or building permit for all Housing Developments pursuant to this chapter. The Agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the Target Units will be constructed. The Agreement shall be consistent with Section 6.08.124 Density Bonus Housing Agreement. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.116 Development Concessions and Incentives
 

In addition to the Density Bonus set forth in Section 6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation, the City shall provide a Concession or Incentive for qualified Housing Developments upon the written request of a developer, unless the City makes a written finding that the Concession or Incentive is not necessary to provide for affordable housing costs, or that the Concession or Incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in California Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), that cannot be satisfactorily mitigated without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

 

The development incentive(s) granted shall contribute significantly to the economic feasibility of providing the Target Units. Applicants seeking a waiver or modification of development or zoning standards shall show that such waivers or modifications are necessary to make the Housing Development economically feasible in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(f). This requirement may be satisfied by reference to applicable sections of the City’s General Plan Housing Element.

 

The need for Concessions or Incentives will vary for different Housing Developments. Therefore, the allocation of Concessions and Incentives shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. The Concession or Incentive may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

 

A.    A reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code and that results in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions. These may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

 

1.     Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.

 

2.     Reduced minimum lot setbacks.

 

3.     Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area.

 

4.     Increased maximum lot coverage.

 

5.     Increased maximum building height and/or stories.

 

6.     Reduced on-site parking standards, including the number or size of spaces and garage requirements.

 

7.     Reduced minimum building separation requirements.

 

8.     Reduced street standards, e.g., reduced minimum street widths.

 

B.    Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the Housing Development;

 

C.    Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City which result in identifiable cost reductions or avoidance;

 

D.    A Density Bonus of greater than the amount required by this chapter;

 

E.    Deferred planning, plan check, construction permit, and/or development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, or traffic fees); or

 

F.     Direct financial aid (e.g., Community Development Block Grant funding) in the form of a loan or a grant to subsidize or provide low interest financing for on or off site improvements, land or construction costs.

 

The City may offer an Equivalent Financial Incentive in lieu of granting a Density Bonus, a Concession or Incentive, or both. The value of the Equivalent Financial Incentive shall equal at least the land cost per dwelling unit savings that would result from a Density Bonus and must contribute significantly to the economic feasibility of providing the Target Units pursuant to this chapter.

 

For projects that qualify under California Government Code Section 65915(d), upon the specific request of the development the City may grant more than one Concession or Incentive. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.120 Application Requirements and Review
 

An application for a Density Bonus and/or a Concession or Incentive shall be processed concurrently with any other application(s) required for the Housing Development. Final approval or disapproval of an application shall be made by the Approval Authority unless direct financial assistance is requested. If direct financial assistance is requested, the City Council shall have the sole authority to make the final decision on the application.

 

An applicant/developer seeking a Density Bonus for a Housing Development pursuant to this chapter shall submit an application with the following information:

 

A.    A brief description of the proposed Housing Development, including the total number of units, Target Units, and Density Bonus Units proposed;

 

B.    The zoning and general plan designations and Assessors Parcel Number(s) of the project site;

 

C.    A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway and parking layout; and

 

D.    If a Concession or Incentive is requested, the application shall describe why the Concession or Incentive is necessary to provide the Target Units, in accordance with Section 6.08.116 Development Concessions and Incentives.

 

Within 90 days of receipt of the preliminary application, the City shall provide to an applicant/developer, a letter which identifies project issues of concern, the maximum financial assistance that the Community Development Director can support when making a recommendation to the Approval Authority, and the procedures for compliance with this chapter.

 

The Community Development Director shall inform the applicant/developer that the requested Concession or Incentive shall be recommended for consideration with the proposed Housing Development, or that an alternative or modified Concession or Incentive pursuant to Section 6.08.116 Development Concessions and Incentives shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested Concession or Incentive. If an alternative or modified Concession or Incentive is recommended by the Community Development Director, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified Concession or Incentive will have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested Concession or Incentive. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.124 Density Bonus Housing Agreement
 

Applicants/Developers requesting a Density Bonus shall enter into a Density Bonus Housing Agreement with the City. The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the Community Planning Director, who shall formulate a recommendation to the Approval Authority for final approval.

 

Following execution of the agreement by all parties, the completed Density Bonus Housing Agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded and the conditions filed and recorded on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of Target Units. The approval and recordation shall take place prior to final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such parcels or units. The Density Bonus Housing Agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest.

 

A.    The Density Bonus Housing Agreement shall include at a minimum the following:

 

1.     The total number of units approved for the Housing Development, including the number of Target Units;

 

2.     A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the Target Units, as outlined in Section 6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation, and the standards for determining the corresponding Affordable Rent or Affordable Sales Price and Housing Cost;

 

3.     The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of Target Units;

 

4.     Tenure of use restrictions for Target Units of at least 55 years for rental units and 45 years for for-sale units, in accordance with Section 6.08.112 Development Standards;

 

5.     A schedule for completion and occupancy of Target Units;

 

6.     A description of any Concession or Incentive, if any, being provided by the City;

 

7.     A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement); and

 

8.     Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter.

 

B.    In the Case of For-Sale Housing Developments, the Density Bonus Housing Agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and use of Target Units during the applicable use restriction period:

 

1.     Target Units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible Very Low, Low Income, or Moderate Income Households at an Affordable Sales Price and Housing Cost, or to Qualified Senior Citizen Residents as defined by this chapter;

 

2.     The initial purchaser of each Target Unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the City restricting the sale of the Target Unit in accordance with this chapter during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the Target Unit and shall contain such provisions as the City may require in order to ensure continued compliance with this chapter and the state Density Bonus Law;

 

3.     Renewed restrictions will be entered into on each change of ownership, with a 45 year renewal term, upon transfer of an owner-occupied Target Unit prior to the expiration of the 45 year affordability period not be subject to any requirement of this chapter thereafter;

 

4.     Target Units may be refinanced if the loan-to-resale value does not exceed 100 percent and the homeowners receive no cash out except cash that would be used for major rehabilitation;

 

5.     The maximum sales price permitted on resale of the Target Unit designated for owner-occupancy shall be the lower of: (a) fair market value, or (b) the seller’s lawful purchase price, increased by the lesser of: (i) the rate of increase of Area Median Income during the seller’s ownership, or (ii) the rate at which the consumer price index increased during the seller’s ownership. The City shall enter into an equity sharing agreement in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(c) to address disposition of proceeds upon resale;

 

6.     Title in the Target Unit may change due to changes in circumstance, including death, marriage and divorce. Except as otherwise provided, if a change in title is occasioned by events that change the financial situation of the Household so that it is no longer income-eligible, then the property must be sold to an income-eligible Household within 180 days. Upon the death of one of the owners, title in the property may transfer to the surviving joint tenant without respect to the income-eligibility of the Household. Upon the death of a sole owner or all owners and inheritance of the Target Unit by a non-income-eligible child or stepchild of one or more owners, there will be a one year compassion period between the time when the estate is settled and the time when the property must be sold to an income-eligible Household. Inheritance of a Target Unit by any other person whose Household is not income-eligible shall require resale of the unit to an income-eligible Household as soon as is feasible but not more than 180 days; and

 

7.     Target Units shall remain owner-occupied. No renting or leasing shall be allowed.

 

C.    In the Case of Rental Housing Developments, the Density Bonus Housing Agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of Target Units during the use restriction period:

 

1.     Rental Units Will be Offered to Eligible Households at an Affordable Rent. The owner of rental Target Units shall certify each tenant Household’s income to the City or City’s designee at the time of initial rental and annually thereafter. The owner must obtain and review documents that demonstrate the prospective renter’s total income, such as income tax returns or W-2s for the previous calendar year, and submit such information on a form approved by the City.

 

2.     Selection of Tenants. The owners of rental Target Units may fill vacant units by selecting income-eligible Households from the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Waiting List maintained by the Alameda County Housing Authority or any other comparable list maintained by the City or City’s designee. Alternatively, owners may fill vacant units through their own selection process, provided that they publish notices of the availability of Target Units according to guidelines established by the Approval Authority;

 

3.     Annual Report. The owner shall submit an annual report summarizing the occupancy of each Target Unit for the year, demonstrating the continuing income-eligibility of the tenant. The City Manager may require additional information if he or she deems it necessary;

 

4.     Subsequent Rental to Income-Eligible Tenant. The owner shall apply the same rental terms and conditions to tenants of Target Units as are applied to all other tenants, except as required to comply with this chapter (for example, rent levels, occupancy restrictions and income requirements) or with other applicable government subsidy programs. Discrimination against persons receiving housing assistance is prohibited;

 

5.     Changes in Tenant Income. If, after moving into a Target Unit, a tenant’s Household income exceeds the limit for that unit, the tenant Household may remain in the unit as long as his or her Household income does not exceed 140 percent of the income limit. Once the tenant’s income exceeds 140 percent of the income limit, the following shall apply:

 

a.     If the tenant’s income does not exceed the income limits of other Target Units in the Housing Development, the owner may, at the owner’s option, allow the tenant to remain in the original unit and redesignate the unit as affordable to Households of a higher income level, as long as the next vacant unit is re-designated for the income category previously applicable to the tenant’s Household. Otherwise, the tenant shall be given one year’s notice to vacate the unit. If during the year, a Target Unit becomes available and the tenant meets the income eligibility for that unit, the owner shall allow the tenant to apply for that unit;

 

b.     If there are no units designated for a higher income category within the Housing Development that may be substituted for the original unit, the tenant shall be given one year’s notice to vacate the unit. If within that year, another unit in the Residential Development is vacated, the owner, at the owner’s option, may allow the tenant to remain in the original unit and raise the tenant’s rent to market-rate and designate the newly vacated unit as a Target Unit affordable at the income-level previously applicable to the unit converted to market rate. The newly vacated unit must be comparable in size (for example, number of bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, etc.) as the original unit. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1; Ord. 2004-017 § 2)

 

6.08.128 Child Care Facilities
 

A.    When an applicant proposes to construct a Housing Development that is eligible for a Density Bonus under Section 6.08.108 Density Bonus Implementation, and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the Housing Development, the City shall grant either:

 

1.     An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the square footage of the child care facility; or

 

2.     An additional Concession or Incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

 

B.    The City shall require, as a condition of approving the housing development that the following occur:

 

1.     The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the Target Units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 6.08.112 Development Standards.

 

2.     Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low, low and moderate income households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of Target Units in the Housing Development that are required for very low, low or moderate income households pursuant to Section 6.08.112 Development Standards.

 

C.    Notwithstanding Subsections A and B above, the City shall not be required to provide a Density Bonus or a Concession or Incentive for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1)

 

6.08.132 Donation of Land
 

When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the City that meets all of the requirements of California Government Code Section 65915(h)(2), the applicant shall be entitled to a Density Bonus of at least 15 percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent depending on the amount of land donated. This section shall not apply when the City requires a developer to donate land as a condition of development. The Density Bonus authorized by this section shall be in addition to any other Density Bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter, provided that the maximum combined Density Bonus for any Housing Development shall be no more than 35 percent. (Ord. 2020-002 § 4; Ord. 2006-010 § 1)


