THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF SEAL BEACH
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ELECTIONS
Title 3 ADMINISTRATION
Title 4 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 FRANCHISES
Title 7 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS, AND WELFARE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 9 PUBLIC PROPERTY, PUBLIC WORKS, AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Title 10 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 11 ZONING
Title 12 MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSION

THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF SEAL BEACH
Note
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND SUCCESSION
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY
ARTICLE III. FORM OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE IV. ELECTIVE OFFICERS
ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS
ARTICLE VI. CITY MANAGER
ARTICLE VII. OFFICERS
ARTICLE VIII. APPOINTIVE BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE IX. CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM
ARTICLE X. FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE XI. FRANCHISES
ARTICLE XII. BOARD OF EDUCATION
ARTICLE XIII. MISCELLANEOUS

Note
*      Amended: November 5, 1968, November 7, 1972, November 5, 1974, March 30, 1976, March 8, 1977, November 7, 1978, June 5, 1990, March 5, 2002, March 28, 2006, and November 4, 2014.

ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND SUCCESSION
SECTION 100. Name of the City.
The Municipal Corporation now existing and known as the City of Seal Beach shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate in name and in fact, by the name of the City of Seal Beach.

 

SECTION 101. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the City of Seal Beach shall continue as now established until changed in the manner authorized by law.

 

SECTION 102. Rights and Liabilities.
The City of Seal Beach shall remain vested with, and continue to have, hold, and enjoy, all property, rights of property and rights of action of every nature and description now pertaining to this municipality, and is hereby declared to be the successor of the same. It shall be subject to all the liabilities that now exist against this municipality.

 

SECTION 103. Ordinances.
All lawful ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, or portions thereof, in force at the time this Charter takes effect and not in conflict with or inconsistent herewith, are hereby continued in force until the same have been duly repealed, amended, changed or superseded by proper authority.

 

SECTION 104. Continuance of Contracts and Public Improvements.
All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which proceedings have been instituted under laws existing at the time this Charter takes effect, in the discretion of the City Council, may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws or may be continued or perfected under this Charter.

 

SECTION 105. Pending Actions and Proceedings.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this Charter takes effect, brought by or against the City or any officer, office, department or agency thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained, but all such actions or proceedings may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any officer, office, department or agency a party thereto, may be assigned or transferred by or under this Charter to another officer, office, department or agency, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the office, department or agency to which such functions, powers and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter.

 

SECTION 106. Continuance of Present Officers and Employees.
The members of the City Council in office at the time of the approval of this Charter by the Legislature shall continue to hold office and discharge their duties for the balance of the term for which they were elected, or until their successors are elected and qualified. All appointive officials, officers and employees of the City now in the office or employed at the time of the approval of this Charter by the Legislature, shall continue to hold their office or employment until they are re-appointed or their successors are appointed in their place in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.

 

SECTION 107. Emergency Powers.
Notwithstanding any general or special provisions of this Charter, the Council, in order to insure continuity of governmental operations in periods of emergency resulting from disasters of whatever nature, shall have the power and immediate duty:

a.     To provide for prompt and temporary succession to the powers and duties of all City officers, of whatever nature and whether filled by election or appointment, the incumbents of which may become unavailable for carrying on the powers and duties of such offices, and

b.     To adopt such other measures as may be necessary and proper for insuring the continuity of City operations, including, but not limited to the financing thereof. In the exercise of the powers herein conferred, the City Council, in all respects, shall conform to the requirements of this Charter except that at such times they may make purchases and enter into contracts without calling for bids or giving therefor; to the extent the emergency requires such action.

 

SECTION 108. Effective Date of Charter.
This Charter shall take effect upon its approval by the Legislature.

ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY
SECTION 200. General Powers.
The City shall have the power to make and enforce all laws and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to such restrictions and limitations as may be provided in this Charter and in the Constitution of the State of California. It shall also have the power to exercise any and all rights, powers and privileges heretofore or hereafter established, granted or prescribed by any law of the State, by this Charter, or by other lawful authority, or which a municipal corporation might or could exercise under the Constitution of the State of California.

The enumeration in this Charter of any particular power shall not be held to be exclusive of or any limitation upon, this general grant of power.

 

SECTION 201. Procedures.
The City shall have the power and may act pursuant to any procedure established by this Charter, or by ordinance.

ARTICLE III. FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 300. Council-Manager Form of Government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council-Manager” form of government.

 

SECTION 301. Residency Requirements.
The Constitution and laws of the State of California shall govern residency requirements for Council members and the City Manager. (Ord. No. 1481, 2002, amended 2014)

ARTICLE IV. ELECTIVE OFFICERS
SECTION 400. Elective Officers.
The elective officers of the City shall consist of five (5) members of the City Council, one (1) elected from each of the five (5) Councilmanic Districts as prescribed in Article V. The terms of elective officers shall be four (4) years and until their respective successors qualify. The term of each elective officer shall commence on the twenty-first (21st) day following his/her election at the time of the completion of the canvass of the election returns. (Amended 1974, 1978, 2006, 2014)

 

SECTION 401. Eligibility.
(Repealed 2002)

 

SECTION 402. Compensation.
Compensation for the members of the City Council shall be established by ordinance in accordance with provisions of Sections 36516 and 36516.5 of the State of California Government Code as such provisions now exist or may thereafter be amended. Each member of the City Council shall receive reimbursement for Council authorized expenses in accordance with provisions of Sections 36514.5 and 37201 through 37205 of the State of California Government Code. (Amended 1990)

 

SECTION 403. Vacancies.
A vacancy in any elective office shall be filled in accordance with State law. (Amended 2006)

 

SECTION 404. City Council. Presiding Officer, Mayor.
a.     Upon the completion of the canvass of the election returns of any municipal election at which any member or members of the City Council is or are elected, the City Council shall meet and shall elect one (1) of its members as its presiding officer, who shall have the title of Mayor. The Mayor shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings. The Mayor shall be the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor shall also act in a liaison capacity between the City Council and the City Manager, and in such capacity shall advise the City Manager on matters of Council Policy. The Mayor shall perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be prescribed by this Charter or as may be imposed by the City Council. The Mayor shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Council.

b.     Mayor Pro Tempore. At the same time as a Mayor is selected, the City Council shall also designate one (1) of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore, who shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Council. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall perform the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability. (Amended 1974)

 

SECTION 405. Powers Vested in the City Council.
All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council except as otherwise provided in this Charter.

 

SECTION 406. Interference in Administrative Service.
Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall interfere with the execution by the City Manager of his/her powers and duties; or order, directly or indirectly, the appointment by the City Manager or by any of the department heads in the administrative service of the City, of any person to an office or employment or removal therefrom. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service under the City Manager solely through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.

 

SECTION 407. Meetings.
The City Council shall hold regular meetings at least once each month in accordance with the Brown Act (California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.), as such statute now exists or may hereafter be amended, at such times, as it shall fix by ordinance or resolution. The City Council may adjourn or re-adjourn any meeting and may call special meetings, in accordance with the Brown Act. If at any time any regular meeting falls on a holiday, such regular meeting may be held thereafter prior to the next regular meeting. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 408. Special Meetings.
(Repealed 2002 – Superseded by Section 407)

 

SECTION 409. Place of Meeting.
All meetings shall be held in such place, as the City Council shall fix by ordinance or resolution, or in such place to which any such meeting may be adjourned and shall be open to the public. If, by reason of fire, flood, or other emergency, it shall be unsafe to meet in the place designated, the meetings will be held for the duration of the emergency at such place as is designated by the Mayor, or if he/she should fail to act, by three (3) members of the City Council.

 

SECTION 410. Quorum. Proceedings.
A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time. In the absence of all of the members of the City Council from any regular meeting, the City Clerk may declare the same adjourned to a stated day and hour. Notice of a meeting adjourned by less than a quorum or by the Clerk shall be given by the Clerk or may be waived by consent in the same manner as specified in this Charter for the giving or waiving of notice of special meetings of the City Council, but need not specify the matters to be acted upon.

The City Council shall judge the qualifications of its members as set forth by the Charter. It shall judge all election returns. It may establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings and evict or prosecute any members or other person for disorderly conduct at any of its meetings.

Each member of the City Council shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or proceedings pending before the City Council. The City Council shall have the power and authority to compel the attendance of witnesses, to examine them under oath, and to compel the production of evidence before it. Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the City attested by the City Clerk. Disobedience of such subpoenas, or the refusal to testify (except as to privileged matters), shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable in the same manner as violations of this Charter are punishable.

At the demand of any member or upon the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or order for the payment of money, the City Clerk shall call the roll and shall cause the ayes and noes taken on such question to be entered upon the minutes of the meeting.

 

SECTION 411. Citizen Participation.
No citizen shall be denied the right, personally or through counsel, to present grievances at any regular meeting of the Council, or offer suggestions for the betterment of municipal affairs subject always to the rules of the City Council governing the conduct of Council meetings.

 

SECTION 412. Adoption of Ordinances and Resolutions.
With the sole exception of ordinances, which take effect upon adoption, referred to in this Article, no ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council on the day neither of its introduction, nor within five (5) days neither thereafter nor at any time other than at a regular or adjourned regular meeting. At the time of its introduction an ordinance shall become part of the proceedings of such meeting in the custody of the City Clerk. At the time of adoption of an ordinance or resolution, it shall be read in full, unless after the reading of the title thereof, the further reading thereof is waived by unanimous consent of the council members present. In the event that any ordinance is altered after its introduction, the same shall not be finally adopted except at a regular or adjourned regular meeting held not less than five (5) days after the date upon which such ordinance was so altered. The correction of typographical or clerical errors shall not constitute the making of an alteration within the meaning of the foregoing sentence.

No order for the payment of money shall be adopted or made at any other than a regular or adjourned regular meeting.

Unless a different vote is required by other provisions of this Charter, the affirmative votes of at least three (3) members of the City Council shall be required for the enactment of any ordinance, or for the making or approving of any order for the payment of money. All ordinances and resolutions shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.

Any ordinance declared by the City Council to be necessary as an emergency measure for preserving the public peace, health, or safety, and containing a statement of the reasons for its urgency, may be introduced and adopted at one and the same meeting.

 

SECTION 413. Ordinances. Enactment.
In addition to such other acts of the City Council as are required by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the City Council establishing a fine or other penalty, or granting a franchise, shall be by ordinance.

The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be substantially as follows: “The City Council of the City of Seal Beach does ordain as follows:”

 

SECTION 414. Ordinances. Publication.
The City Clerk shall cause each ordinance to be published at least once in the official newspaper, within fifteen (15) days after its adoption.

 

SECTION 415. Ordinances. Codification.
Any or all ordinances of the City which have been enacted and published in the manner required at the time of their adoption, and which have not been repealed, may be compiled, consolidated, revised, indexed and arranged as a comprehensive ordinance code, and such code may be adopted by reference, with the same effect as an ordinance, by the passage of an ordinance for such purpose. Such code need not be published in the manner required for other ordinances, but not less than three (3) copies thereof shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk prior to the adoption thereof. Ordinances codified shall be repealed as of the effective date of the code. Such code may be subsequently revised, recompiled, recodified and indexed, including such restatement and substantive change as necessary in the interest of clarity, in the same manner as prescribed in this section for the original adoption by reference of an ordinance code. Amendments to the code shall be enacted in the same manner as ordinances.

Detailed regulations pertaining to the construction of buildings, plumbing and wiring, when arranged as a comprehensive code, may likewise be adopted by reference in the manner provided in this section. Maps, charts and diagrams also may be adopted by reference in the same manner.

 

SECTION 416. Ordinances. When Effective.
No ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30) days from and after the date of its adoption, except the following, which shall take effect upon adoption:

a.     An ordinance calling or otherwise relating to an election.

b.     An improvement proceeding ordinance adopted under some law or procedural ordinance.

c.     An ordinance declaring the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation, or fixing the rate of taxation, or levying the annual tax upon property.

d.     An emergency ordinance adopted in the manner provided for in this Article.

 

SECTION 417. Ordinance Violation Penalty Provisions.
(Repealed 2002)

SECTION 418. Publishing of Legal Notices.
In the event that there is more than one (1) newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the City, the City Council, annually, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall publish a notice inviting bids and contract for the publication of all legal notices or other matter required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in said City during the ensuing fiscal year. In the event there is only one (1) newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the City, then the City Council shall have the power to contract with such newspaper for the printing and publishing of such legal notices or matter without being required to advertise for bids therefor. The newspaper with which any such contract is made shall be designated the official newspaper for the publication of such notices or other matter for the period of such contract.

In no case shall the contract prices for such publications exceed the customary rates charged by such newspaper for the publication of legal notices of a private character.

In the event there is no newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the City, then all legal notices or other matter may be published by posting copies thereof in at least three (3) public places in the City.

No defect or irregularity in proceedings taken under this section, or failure to designate an official newspaper, shall invalidate any publication where the same is otherwise in conformity with this Charter or law or ordinance.

 

SECTION 419. Contracts. Restrictions.
The City Council shall not have the power to make or authorize any contract or lease or extension thereof for a longer period than sixty-six (66) years unless said contract, lease or extension is approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting on such question at any election. This section shall not apply to any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, or to any contract for the furnishings, or acquisition of the products, commodity or services of any public utility.

 

SECTION 420. Contracts. Execution.
The City shall not be bound by any contract, except as hereinafter provided, unless the same shall be made in writing, approved by the City Council and signed on behalf of the City by the Mayor and City Clerk or by such other officer or officers as shall be designated by the City Council. Any of said officers shall sign a contract on behalf of the City when directed to do so by the City Council.

By ordinance or resolution the City Council may authorize the City Manager to bind the City, with or without a written contract, for the acquisition of equipment, materials, supplies, labor, services or other items included within the budget approved by the City Council, and may impose a monetary limit upon such authority.

The City Council may by ordinance or resolution provide a method for the sale or exchange of personal property not needed in the City service or not fit for the purpose for which intended and for the conveyance of title thereto.

Contracts for the sale of products, commodities or services of any public utility owned, controlled or operated by the City may be made by the Manager of such utility or by the head of the department or City Manager upon forms approved by the City Manager and at rates fixed by the City Council.

The provision of this section shall not apply to the services rendered by any person in the employ of the City at a regular salary.

 

SECTION 421. Repealed.
(1978, repealed 2014)

 

SECTION 422. Members of the City Council. Consecutive Elective Terms.
A member of the City Council shall not be elected to more than two (2) consecutive elective four (4) year terms. (Amended 1974)

ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS
SECTION 500. Municipal Elections.
Municipal elections held in the City shall be classified as either:

a.     General Municipal Elections.

b.     Municipal Run-Off Elections.

c.     Special Municipal Elections. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 501. General Municipal Elections.
General Municipal Elections shall be held on the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in November in even-numbered years commencing with the year 2008. The City Council may by ordinance fix another date in any even-numbered year, if such change will not extend or reduce any elective officer’s term by more than twelve (12) months. The City Council may order any special municipal election consolidated with the General Municipal Election by following the procedure prescribed by State law for the consolidation of Special Elections with Municipal Elections. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 502. Municipal Run-Off Elections.
Municipal Run-Off Elections for the election of officers shall be held on the last Tuesday in January in each odd-numbered year commencing with the year 2009. If, pursuant to Section 501, the City Council has fixed another date for the General Municipal Election, the Municipal Run-Off Election shall be held on a Tuesday no later than seven (7) weeks after the date fixed for the General Municipal Election. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 503. First Election.
(Repealed 2006)

 

SECTION 504. Special Municipal Elections.
All other municipal elections that may be held in the City of Seal Beach by the authority of the Constitution of the State of California, this Charter, or general law, or by ordinance of the City shall be known as special municipal elections. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 505. Consolidation of Elections.
The City Council shall have the power to submit to the electors of the City of Seal Beach, at any election, any measure or proposition required to be submitted by the constitution, this Charter, general law, or by ordinance of the City; provided, that in case such measure or proposition is required by said constitution, charter, general law, or ordinance to be submitted at a special or other particular kind of election, or within any specified time, it shall be so submitted, and not otherwise. The City Council may cause to be mailed to all registered electors of the City, at any election at which all the qualified electors of the City are entitled to vote, arguments, in printed pamphlet form, relating to each measure or proposition to be voted upon at any such election; the procedure for the preparation and form of such arguments shall be as provided by the City Council by ordinance. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 506. Holding Elections.
The City Council shall, by ordinance, order the holding of all elections. Such ordinance shall conform in all respects to the general law of the State of California governing the conduct of municipal elections, now or hereafter in force, except as in this Charter or by ordinance otherwise provided. All ordinances ordering the holding of elections shall be published at least three (3) times in the official newspaper of the City of Seal Beach ten (10) days prior to the date of the election. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 507. Law Governing Elections.
Except as otherwise provided or required by this Charter or Ordinance, the provisions of the general law relating to the qualifications of electors, the manner of voting, the duties of election officers, the canvassing of returns, and all particulars in respect to the management of elections, so far as they may be applicable, shall govern all municipal elections of the City of Seal Beach; provided that the City Council shall meet as a canvassing board and duly canvass the election returns at the hour set for holding regular meetings on the seventh day following any municipal election. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 508. Voting for Candidates for Elective Offices at General Municipal Elections.
Each elector may vote for one (1) candidate for the office of Councilmember from the district in which the elector resides. Only one (1) person shall be elected to the City Council from each district. (Res. No. 5443, 2006, amended 2014)

 

SECTION 509. Number of Votes Needed for Elective Offices.
The City Council shall declare any candidate who receives a majority (50% plus 1) of all the votes cast for an office at any general municipal election to be elected to such office. If no candidate for an office receives a majority (50% plus 1) of all the votes cast, the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the General Municipal Election shall be the only candidates for such office printed upon the ballots at the Municipal Run-Off Election. The City Council shall declare the candidate who receives the most votes at the Municipal Run-Off Election to be elected to such office. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 510. General Municipal Election.
(Repealed 2006)

 

SECTION 511. City Clerk. Duties.
The City Clerk shall cause ballots to be printed, bound and numbered as provided by the general law, except as otherwise required in this Charter or ordinance. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 512. Informality.
No informalities in conducting any municipal election shall invalidate the election, if such election has been fairly conducted and in substantial conformity to the requirements of this Charter, and the election laws of the State of California. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 513. Majority Elects.
(Repealed 2006)

 

SECTION 514. Measures, Initiatives, Referenda and Recalls.
The electors of the City shall have the powers of the measures, initiatives, and referenda, and may recall Municipal Elective Officers. The provisions of the California Elections Code governing measures, initiatives, referenda, and recalls of municipal officers shall govern such subjects provided such provisions are not in conflict with this Charter. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 515. Councilmanic Districts.
The five (5) members of the City Council shall be elected by districts, the boundaries of which shall be as defined by ordinance adopted by the City Council.

In 1980 and each tenth (10th) year thereafter, the City Council shall appoint a committee to study and report to the City Council on the advisability of redistricting the City. Upon receipt of any such committee report, and at any other time deemed necessary or desirable in order that the district boundaries be in accordance with constitutional requirement, fair and logical, the City Council may by ordinance change and redefine the boundaries of any or all of such districts. The boundaries so defined shall be established in such manner that the district shall, as nearly as practicable, constitute natural areas of contiguous and compact territory and provide fair representation on the City Council. Any territory hereafter annexed to or consolidated with the City shall, at the time of such annexation or consolidation, be added by ordinance of the City Council to any adjacent district or districts. (Amended 1974, Res. No. 5443, 2006)

ARTICLE VI. CITY MANAGER
SECTION 600. City Manager.
There shall be a City Manager appointed by the City Council who shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. In the selection of a City Manager, the City Council shall screen qualified applicants and other qualified persons known by the Council to be available. It shall appoint by a majority vote, the person that it believes to be best qualified on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to experience in, and knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this Charter. The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.

 

SECTION 601. Residence.
(Repealed 2002)

 

SECTION 602. Eligibility.
No person shall be eligible to receive appointment as City Manager while serving as a member neither of the City Council nor within one (1) year after the member has ceased to be a City Councilmember.

 

SECTION 603. Compensation and Bond.
The City Manager shall be paid a salary commensurate with his/her responsibilities as Chief Administrative Officer of the City, which salary shall be established by ordinance or resolution. The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties in such form and in such amount as may be determined by the City Council.

 

SECTION 604. Powers and Duties.
The City Manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the City government and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. Without limiting the foregoing general grant of powers, responsibilities and duties, the City Manager shall have the power and be required:

a.     To enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed.

b.     To exercise administrative control over all departments, divisions and employees of the City government, except the City Attorney.

c.     To appoint, promote, discipline, and remove employees of the City, except the City Attorney, subject to the Civil Service rules and regulations.

d.     To organize or reorganize such offices, positions, departments, or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the City’s business.

e.     To attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom by the City Council.

f.      To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary or expedient.

g.     To serve as finance officer and to keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City. The City Manager shall be the chief financial officer of the City.

h.     To prepare and submit to the City Council an annual or bi-annual budget and be responsible for its administration after adoption by the Council.

i.      To recommend a comprehensive salary plan for all City employees and to recommend changes in line with current conditions.

j.      To organize for and supervise the purchase of all supplies for all departments or divisions of the City. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except on report and approval of the City Manager.

k.     To make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and any contract, and the proper performance of any obligation of or to the City.

l.      To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the services maintained by public utilities in the City.

m.    To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council.

n.     To devote his/her entire time to the duties and interests of the City, except as may be specifically authorized by the City Council.

o.     To represent the City in discussions of administrative and policy questions between the City and other levels of government, i.e., County, State, Federal and other cities, when and if requested by the Council to do so.

p.     To cooperate with leadership of civic movements designed to benefit the residents of the City when so directed by the City Council.

q.     To attend any and all meetings of any commissions or committees heretofore or hereafter created by the City Council, upon his/her own volition or upon the direction of the City Council.

r.      To act as personnel officer for the City and to develop a comprehensive personnel program.

s.     To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her from time to time by resolution, ordinance or other action of the City Council. (Amended 1973 Statutes, 1978, 2002, 2006, 2014)

 

SECTION 605. Financial Duties of the City Manager.
The City Manager shall perform the following duties:

a.     Maintenance of Financial Records. Maintain all records readily reflecting the financial condition of the City and all of its departments.

b.     Report for Fiscal Year. At the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the City Council a summary statement of receipts and disbursements by departments and funds, including opening and closing fund balances in the City Treasury.

c.     Publication of Financial Statement. Cause the financial statement of the City to be published in accordance with the provisions of Sections 40804 and 40805 of the Government Code.

d.     Compilation of Financial Information for Budget. Compile all financial information necessary for the preparation of the City’s budget and make such information available to the officer whose responsibility it is to prepare the budget.

e.     Monthly Financial Report. Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the City and each of its departments.

f.      Licenses. Supervise and be in charge of all license issuance and inspection.

g.     Payroll Records. Supervise and be in charge of all payroll records.

h.     Insurance Policies. Maintain a record of all insurance policies and their expiration dates.

i.      Collection of Taxes, Assessments, Etc. See that all taxes, assessments and other fees and revenues of the City, or for whose collection the City is responsible, and all other money receivable by the City from the County, State or Federal government, or from any court, office, department or agency of the City are collected, and perform such other duties that are from time to time assigned to him/her by the City Council. (Amended by Statutes 1973)

 

SECTION 606. Meetings.
The City Manager shall be accorded a seat at the City Council table and at all meetings of boards and commissions and shall be entitled to participate in their deliberations, but shall not have a vote.

 

SECTION 607. Removal.
The City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any municipal election at which a member of the City Council is elected. At any other time the City Manager may be removed only at a regular meeting of the City Council and upon the affirmative votes of a majority of the entire membership of the City Council.

 

SECTION 608. Notification of Resignation.
The City Manager shall notify the City Council at least thirty (30) days in advance of his/her intended resignation. Failure to do so shall be grounds for withholding payment due for services. This provision may, however, be waived by majority vote of the City Council.

 

SECTION 609. Manager Pro Tempore.
The City Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as Manager Pro Tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. If the Manager fails to make such appointment, the City Council may appoint an officer or department head to serve as such Manager Pro Tempore.

ARTICLE VII. OFFICERS
SECTION 700. Officers.
The officers of the City shall be the following:

a.     The five (5) members of the City Council, who shall be elected.

b.     A City Clerk.

c.     A City Treasurer, who shall be the Finance Director.

d.     A City Manager, who shall be appointed by the City Council.

e.     A City Attorney, who shall be appointed by the City Council.

f.      The incumbents of such other offices as the City Council may by ordinance, or resolution, establish. (Amended 1978, 2014)

 

SECTION 701. Administrative Departments.
The City Council may provide, by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter, for the organization, conduct and operation of the several offices and departments of the City as established by this Charter, and for the creation of additional departments, divisions, offices and agencies and for their consolidation, alteration or abolition. Each new department created by the City Council shall be headed by an officer as department head that shall be appointed and may be suspended or removed by the City Manager.

The City Council, by ordinance or resolution, may assign additional functions or duties, to offices, departments or agencies not inconsistent with this Charter. Where the positions are not incompatible, the City Council may combine in one person the powers and duties of two (2) or more offices created or authorized by this Charter. No office provided in this Charter to be filled by appointment by the City Manager may be consolidated with any office to be filled by appointment by the City Council. The City Council shall provide for the number, titles, qualifications, powers, duties, and compensation of all officers and employees.

 

SECTION 702. City Clerk. Powers and Duties.
The City Clerk shall have the power and be required to:

a.     Attend all meetings of the City Council and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a full and true report of all the proceedings of the City Council in books, which shall bear appropriate titles and be devoted to such purposes.

b.     Maintain separate books in which shall be recorded respectively all ordinances and resolutions, with a certificate of the clerk annexed to each thereof stating the same to be the original or a corrected copy, and as to any ordinance requiring publication, stating that the same has been published or posted in accordance with this Charter; to keep all books properly indexed and open to public inspection when not in actual use.

c.     Maintain separate books in which a record shall be made of all written contracts and fidelity and performance bonds.

d.     Be the custodian of the Seal of the City.

e.     Administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits, and depositions pertaining to the affairs and business of the City, and certify copies of official records.

f.      Be ex-officio assessor, unless the City Council has availed itself or does in the future avail itself of the provisions of the general laws of the State relative to any assessment of property and the collection of City taxes, of any, by county officers, or the City Council by ordinance provides otherwise.

g.     Be responsible for the conduct of all City elections.

h.     Deputize other persons to assist in carrying out the duties of the City Clerk.

 

SECTION 703. Treasurer and Finance Director.
As treasurer, the Finance Director shall be required to:

a.     Collect any license fees or other revenues of the City, or for whose collection the City is responsible and receives all taxes or other money receivable by the City from the County, State or Federal Government, or from any Court or from any office, department or agency of the City.

b.     Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the City or any office, department or agency of the City government and deposit all funds coming into his/her hands in such depository as may be designated by resolution of the City Council or if no such resolution be adopted, then in such depository designated in writing by the City Manager, and in compliance with all of the provisions of the State Constitution and laws of the State governing the handling, depositing and securing of public funds.

c.     Disburse moneys on demands audited in the manner provided for in the Charter.

d.     Prepare and submit to the City Council monthly written reports of all receipts, disbursements and fund balances, copies of which reports shall be filed with the City Manager. (Amended 1978)

 

SECTION 704. City Attorney. Powers and Duties.
To become eligible for City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney the person appointed shall be an Attorney at Law duly licensed as such under the laws of the State of California and shall have engaged in the practice of law for at least three (3) years prior to appointment. The City Attorney shall have the power and be required to:

a.     Represent and advise the City Council and all City Officers in matters of law pertaining to their office.

b.     Represent and appear for the City in any or all actions and proceedings in which the City is concerned or is a party, except the prosecution of criminal actions, and represent and appear for any City Officer or employee, or former City Officer or employee, in any or all actions and proceedings in which any such officer or employee is concerned or is a party, for any act arising out of the officer’s employment or by reason of his/her official capacity.

c.     Attend all regular meetings of the City Council and give advice and opinions in writing whenever requested to do so by the City Council or by any of the boards or officers of the City.

d.     Approve the form of all contracts made by and all bonds given to the City, endorsing approval thereon in writing.

e.     Prepare any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the City and amendments thereto.

f.      Approve, as to legality, all investments of City funds.

The City Council shall have control of all legal business and proceedings and may employ other attorneys to take charge of a litigation or matter or to assist the City Attorney therein.

 

SECTION 705. City Attorney. Deputies and Employees.
The City Attorney shall, subject to the approval of the City Council, appoint such deputies, to assist the City Attorney at such salaries or compensation as the Council may, by ordinance, prescribe.

 

SECTION 706. Administering Oaths.
Each department head and deputy shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with any official business pertaining to his/her department.

SECTION 707. Department Heads. Appointment Powers.
Each department head and appointive officer shall have the power to appoint, suspend and remove such deputies, assistants, subordinates and employees as are provided for by the City Council for his/her department or office, subject to the provisions of this Charter and of any personnel, merit or Civil Service System adopted hereunder. Any such appointment or removal by a department head appointed by the City Manager shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager.

 

SECTION 708. Illegal Contracts. Financial Interest.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1090 et seq. of the State of California Government Code as such provisions now exist or may hereafter be amended, no City officer or employee shall be financially interested in any contract made by them in their official capacity. Section 1090 et seq., in their entirety, are hereby incorporated by reference into this section. One true and correct copy of the current Section 1090 et seq. shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 709. Acceptance of Other Office.
Any elective officer of the City who shall accept or retain any other elective public office shall be deemed thereby to have vacated his/her office under the City government.

 

SECTION 710. Nepotism.
The City Council shall not appoint to a salaried position under the City government any person who is a relative by blood or marriage within the second degree of any one or more of the members of such City Council, nor shall any department head or other officer having appointive power appoint any relative of his/hers within such degree to any such position.

This section, however, shall not apply to the probationary or permanent appointment of any person to a position included in the Civil Service System.

 

SECTION 711. Official Bonds.
The City Council shall fix by ordinance or resolution the amounts and terms of the official bonds of all officials or employees who are required by this Charter or by ordinance to give such bonds. All bonds shall be executed by responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the City.

There shall be no personal liability upon, or any right to recover against, a superior officer, or his/her bond, for any wrongful act or omission of a subordinate, unless such superior officer was a party to, or conspired in, such wrongful act or omission.

ARTICLE VIII. APPOINTIVE BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 800. In General.
The City Council may create by ordinance such boards or commissions as in its judgment are required and may grant to them such powers and duties as are consistent with the provisions of this Charter.

 

SECTION 801. Appropriations.
The City Council shall include in its annual budget such appropriations of funds as in its opinion shall be sufficient for the efficient and proper functioning of such boards and commissions.

 

SECTION 802. Appointments. Terms.
The number of members to comprise such boards and commissions shall be specified by ordinance if not specified by this Charter. The members of each such board shall be commissioned and appointed by motion of the City Council adopted by at least three (3) affirmative votes. Each member of the City Council shall nominate one qualified elector from said member’s district to serve on each such board or commission. All such nominations shall be confirmed by at least three (3) affirmative votes of the City Council. Such nominees shall hold no paid office or employment in the City government and shall serve for terms to be fixed by ordinance, and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified, subject to removal by motion of the City Council adopted by at least three (3) affirmative votes.

The members first appointed to such boards and commissions shall so classify themselves by lot that each succeeding July 1st the term of one (1) of their number shall expire. If the total number of members of a board or commission exceeds four (4), the classification by lot shall provide for the grouping of terms to such an extent as is necessary in order that the term of at least one (1) member shall expire on each succeeding July 1st. (Amended 1974)

 

SECTION 803. Existing Boards.
The members of the boards and commissions holding office when this Charter takes effect shall continue to hold office thereafter until their respective terms of office shall expire and until their successors shall be appointed and qualified. The successors of such members shall be appointed for terms as prescribed in the preceding section. (Amended by Statutes 1969)

 

SECTION 804. Meetings. Chairpersons.
As soon as practicable, following the first (1st) day of July of every year, each of such boards and commissions shall organize by electing one (1) of its members to serve as presiding officer at the pleasure of such board or commission. Each board or commission shall hold regular meetings as required by ordinance of the City Council, and such special meetings as such board or commission may require. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Brown Act (California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.) as such statute now exists or may hereafter be amended.

Except as may be otherwise provided in this Charter, the City Manager shall designate a secretary for the recording of minutes for each of such boards and commissions, who shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Each board or commission may prescribe its own rules and regulations which shall be consistent with this Charter and subject to the approval of the City Council, and copies of which shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk or such office as the City Council may, by ordinance prescribe where they shall be available for public inspection. Each board or commission shall have the same power as the City Council to compel the attendance of witnesses, to examine them under oath, to compel the production of evidence before it and to administer oaths and affirmations. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 805. Compensation. Vacancies.
The members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation for their services as such but may receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received authorization by the City Council.

Any vacancies in any board or commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the City Council. Upon a vacancy occurring leaving an unexpired portion of a term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. If a member of a board or commission is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, unless by permission of such board or commission expressed in its official minutes, or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or ceases to be a qualified elector of the City, the office shall become vacant and shall be so declared by the City Council.

ARTICLE IX. CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM
SECTION 900. Civil Service System.
In order to: establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel and employment matters; attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive test; and provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the City Council, by ordinance, may establish a Civil Service System for City employees. The Civil Service System may include provisions for: the method of selection of City employees; the classification, advancement, suspension, discharge and termination of City employees; the consolidation and elimination of positions; and other provisions as deemed reasonable and necessary to govern personnel and employment matters of the City. The City Council may further adopt personnel rules to implement the provisions of any ordinance. In the event of an appeal of disciplinary action of a civil service employee, the appeal may be heard by an impartial arbitrator designated by mutual agreement of the appellant and his/her representative and the City Manager, or as otherwise agreed upon through a memorandum of understanding negotiated during the collective bargaining process between the City and the applicable bargaining unit. The Civil Service System shall govern all employees of the City unless exempted by Section 901. (Res. No. 5443, 2006)

 

SECTION 901. Exemptions.
The following persons are exempt from the Civil Service System:

a.     City Councilmembers;

b.     Appointed persons;

c.     City Attorney;

d.     City Manager;

e.     City Clerk;

f.      Department heads;

g.     Temporary, seasonal, part-time and hourly employees;

h.     Any employee designated as exempt by City ordinance;

i.      Volunteers;

j.      Independent contractors.

The City Council, by ordinance, resolution or personnel rules, may establish provisions governing the selection, discipline and dismissal of non-civil service employees. (Adopted by the voters in 2006, replaced and amended previous Section 904)

 

SECTION 902. Discrimination.
No person employed by, or seeking admission into employment with the City, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race or religious belief, or any other basis prohibited by law. (Adopted by the voters in 2006, replaced and amended previous Section 917)

 

Note
*      Sections 903, 905 through 916, and 918 through 920 were repealed by the voters in 2006. Portions of such sections have been incorporated in the Seal Beach Municipal Code and Seal Beach Personnel Rules and Regulations.

ARTICLE X. FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1000. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first (1st) day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth (30th) day of June of the following year.

 

SECTION 1001. Annual/Bi-Annual Budget. Preparation by the City Manager.
At such date as he/she shall determine, the City Manager shall obtain from each department head estimates of revenue and expenditures for his/her department, detailed in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Manager. In preparing the proposed annual or bi-annual budget, the City Manager shall review the estimates, hold conferences thereon with the respective department heads and may revise the estimates as the manager may deem advisable. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 1002. Budget. Submission to City Council.
At least thirty-five (35) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council the proposed budget as prepared by him/her. After reviewing same and making such revisions as it may deem advisable, the City Council shall determine the time for the holding of a public hearing thereon and shall cause to be published a notice thereof not less than ten (10) days prior to said hearing, by at least one (1) insertion in the official newspaper. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to said hearing.

SECTION 1003. Budget. Public Hearing.
At the time so advertised or at any time to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, at which interested persons desiring to be heard shall be given such opportunity.

 

SECTION 1004. Budget. Adoption.
After the conclusion of the public hearing the City Council shall make any revisions of the proposed budget that it may deem advisable and on or before June 30th, it shall adopt the budget. A copy thereof, certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed with the person retained by the City Council to perform auditing functions for the Council and a further copy shall be placed, and shall remain on file, in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. The budget so certified shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of the public and of departments, offices and agencies of the City.

 

SECTION 1005. Budget. Appropriations.
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several departments, offices, and agencies for the respective objects and purposes therein named. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.

At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the City Council may amend or supplement the budget by motion adopted by the affirmative votes of at least three (3) members so as to authorize the transfer of unused balances appropriated for one purpose to another purpose or to appropriate available funds not included in the budget or to cancel any appropriation not expended or encumbered.

 

SECTION 1006. Centralized Purchasing.
Under the control and direction of the City Manager there shall be established a centralized purchasing system for all City departments and agencies, except as otherwise in this Charter provided.

 

SECTION 1007. Tax Limits.
Unless a majority of the city electors voting at an election held for that purpose are in favor of it, annual property tax shall not exceed one dollar ($1.00) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) exclusive of such tax as may be necessary to pay the costs of any pension plan for City employees adopted pursuant to Article 2, Chapter 2, of Division 5, exclusive of such tax, not to exceed five cents ($0.05) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00), as may be necessary to pay the costs of civil defense or disaster preparedness, exclusive of such tax as may be necessary to pay the costs of sewerage facilities, exclusive of such tax as may be necessary to pay the costs of park and recreation facilities and exclusive of such tax in addition to the annual tax levy for other municipal purposes authorized by Sections 20532, 37465, 37558, and 43069 of the Government Code, Section 5304 of the Public Resources Code and Section 22241 of the Education Code, as they now exist or forever may be amended.

SECTION 1008. Tax Procedure.
The procedure for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes upon property, taxable for municipal purposes, may be prescribed by ordinance of the City Council.

 

SECTION 1009. Bonded Debt Limit.
The City shall not incur indebtedness evidence by general obligation bonds, which shall in the aggregate exceed the sum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total assessed valuation, for purposes of City taxation, of all the real and personal property within the City.

No bonded indebtedness which shall constitute a general obligation of the City may be created unless authorized by the affirmative votes of two-thirds (2/3) of the electors voting on such proposition at any election at which the question is submitted to the electors and unless in full compliance with the provisions of the State Constitution and of this Charter.

 

SECTION 1010. Contracts on Public Works.
The City Council shall adopt policies and procedures governing contracting for public works which are defined to include the construction or improvement of public buildings, works, streets, drains, sewers, utilities, parks or playgrounds. The City Council may, in its sole discretion, adopt selected policies and procedures by reference to State law, but no State law shall govern public works contracting unless it is expressly adopted by the City Council or has been finally determined to be applicable to all charter law cities by an appellate court with jurisdiction over the City of Seal Beach. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by State law made applicable to the City of Seal Beach, the City Council shall award to the lowest responsible bidder each contract involving an expenditure of more than the bidding threshold amount (as defined in this section) for the construction or improvement of public works or for the purchase of supplies or materials for any such project. Bids shall be solicited via notice by publication in the official newspaper by one (1) or more insertions, the first of which shall be at least ten (10) days before the time for opening bids and such other forms of notice as the City Council may direct. Public Works are exempted from the requirements of this section where the work will be performed by a City or County of Orange department.

All bids may be accompanied by either a certified or cashier’s check, or a bidder’s bond executed by a corporate surety authorized to engage in such business in California, made payable to the City. Such security shall be in an amount not less than that specified in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to therein, or if no amount be so specified then in an amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the aggregate amount of the bid. If the successful bidder neglects or refuses to enter into the contract, within the time specified in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to therein, the amount of his/her bidder’s security shall be declared forfeited to the City and shall be collected and paid into its general fund, and all bonds so forfeited shall be prosecuted and the amount thereof collected and paid into such fund.

The City Council may reject any and all bids presented and may re-advertise in its discretion.

The City Council, without advertising for bids, or after rejecting bids, or if no bids were received, may declare and determine that in its opinion, based on estimates approved by the City Manager, the work in question may be performed better or more economically by the City with its own employees or the supplies or materials may be purchased more economically on the open market. Contracts likewise may be let without advertising for bids, if such work, supplies or materials shall be deemed by the City Council to be of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health, or property. In either event, the Council shall adopt a resolution with findings supporting the letting of a contract without advertising for bids by at least three (3) affirmative votes of the Council, after which the City may proceed to have such work done or said supplies and materials purchased in the manner stated, without further observance of the provisions of this section.

The bidding threshold amount shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) initially, and shall annually be adjusted by the City Engineer upon confirmation by the City Council. On June 1st of each year, the City Engineer shall compute the percentage difference between the current Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index – 20 City Average (ENR) and the ENR for the previous June 1st. The City Engineer shall adjust the bidding threshold amount by such percentage, rounding to the nearest dollar. The City Council shall review such adjustment at a public hearing and upon Council confirmation; the bidding threshold amount shall be the adjusted figure. Should the ENR be revised or discontinued, the City Engineer shall use the revised index or a comparable index approved by the City Council. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 1010.5. Design-Build Contracts on Public Works.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the City may enter into a design-build contract for both the design and construction of a project in accordance with this section. Prior to the execution of a design-build contract, the City Council shall evaluate at a public meeting the comparative advantages for the particular project of the traditional design, bid, and build process of construction and the design-build process. No design-build process contract shall be executed unless the City Council makes written findings that use of the design-build process on the project will accomplish one or more of the following objectives: reduction of project costs; expediting project completion; or provision of design features not achievable through the design, bid, and build process. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 1011. Presentation of Demands.
Any demand against the City must be in writing and may be in the form of a bill, invoice, payroll or formal demand. Each such demand shall be presented to the financial designee of the City Manager, who shall examine the same. If the amount thereof is legally due and there remains on the City books an unexhausted balance of an appropriation against which the same may be charged, he/she shall approve such demand and draw a warrant on the City Treasury, payable out of the proper fund. Objections of the financial designee of the City Manager may be overruled by the City Council and warrant ordered drawn.

The financial designee of the City Manager shall transmit such demand, with his/her approval or rejection thereof, endorsed thereon, and warrant, if any, to the City Manager. If a demand is one for an item included within an approved budget appropriation, it shall require the approval of the City Manager; otherwise it shall require the approval of the City Council. Any person dissatisfied with the refusal of the City Manager to approve any demand, in whole or in part, may present the same to the City Council which, after examining the matter, may approve or disapprove the demand in whole or in part. (Amended 1973)

 

SECTION 1012. Registering Warrants.
Warrants on the City Treasurer, which are not paid for lack of funds, shall be registered. All registered warrants shall be paid in the order of their registration when funds therefor are available and shall bear interest from the date of registration at such rate as shall be fixed by the City Council by resolution.

 

SECTION 1013. Independent Audit.
The City Council shall employ at the beginning of each fiscal year, a certified public accountant who shall, at such time or times as may be specified by the City Council, and at such other times as he/she shall determine, examine the official books, records, inventories and reports of all officers and employees who receive, handle or disburse public funds and all such other officers, employees or departments as the City Council may direct. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of the fiscal year, unless such time shall be extended by the Council, a final audit and report shall be submitted by such accountant to the City Council, one copy thereof to each member, one to the City Manager, Treasurer and City Attorney, respectively, and three (3) additional copies to be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for inspection by the general public. (Amended 1974)

ARTICLE XI. FRANCHISES
SECTION 1100. Franchises to Operate.
No person, firm or corporation shall exercise any franchise, right or privilege mentioned in this Article in the City except insofar as he/she/it may be entitled to do so by direct authority of the Constitution of the State of California or of the United States, unless he/she/it shall have obtained a grant therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and in accordance with the procedure prescribed by ordinance. Nothing contained in the Article shall be construed to invalidate any lawful franchise heretofore granted or to necessitate the obtaining of a new franchise for a use for which a franchise holder shall have a valid unexpired franchise.

 

SECTION 1101. Authority to Grant Franchises.
The Council is empowered to grant by ordinance a franchise to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, to furnish the City and its inhabitants with transportation, communication, terminal facilities, water, light, heat, power, refrigeration, storage, or any other public utility or service, or to use the public streets, ways, alleys and places, as the same may now or may hereafter exist, in connection therewith.

 

SECTION 1102. Franchise Terms, Conditions and Procedures.
The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions under which franchises will be granted, subject to the provisions of this Charter, and the procedure for granting franchises; provided, however that such procedural ordinance or ordinances shall make provisions for the giving of notice of franchise applications, for protests against the granting of such franchises and for public hearings on such applications.

The Council, in granting franchises, shall prescribe the terms and conditions of such franchises in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Charter and any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, and may in such franchise impose such other and additional terms and conditions not in conflict with said Charter or ordinances, whether governmental or contractual in character, as in the judgment of said Council are in the public interest or as the people, by initiative, indicate they desire to have so imposed.

 

SECTION 1103. Method of Granting Franchise.
The Council may grant a franchise without calling for bids or may, in its discretion, advertise for bids for the sale of a franchise upon a basis, not in conflict with the provisions of this Article, to be set out in the advertisement for bids and notice of sale.

 

SECTION 1104. Term of Franchise.
Every franchise shall be either a fixed term not to exceed twenty-five (25) years, or for an indeterminate period. If for a fixed term, the franchise shall state the terms for which it is granted; if indeterminate, it shall set forth the terms and conditions under which it may be terminated.

 

SECTION 1105. Purchase or Condemnation by City.
No franchise grant shall in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the City now or hereafter conferred upon it by law to acquire the property of the grantee thereof either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or to abridge either for a term or in perpetuity the City’s right of eminent domain with respect to any public utility.

 

SECTION 1106. Compensation.
No new franchise or the renewal of an existing franchise shall be granted without reserving to the City just and adequate compensation.

 

SECTION 1107. Article Not Applicable to Certain Cases.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as applying to or requiring the operators of refrigeration or storage utilities or the carriers of freight or passengers not operating over a fixed route, or other public utilities or services not specifically described in this Article, to obtain a franchise to operate within the City unless required so to do by ordinance of the City of Seal Beach.

 

SECTION 1108. Exercising Right Without Franchise.
The exercise by any person, firm or corporation of any privilege for which a franchise is required without procuring such franchise shall be a misdemeanor, and each day that such condition continues shall constitute a separate violation.

ARTICLE XII. BOARD OF EDUCATION
SECTION 1200. State Law Governs.
The manner in which, the times at which, and the terms for which the members of Boards of Education shall be elected or appointed, their qualifications, compensation and removal and the number which shall constitute any one of such boards shall be as now or hereafter prescribed by the laws of the State of California.

 

SECTION 1201. Effect of Charter.
The adoption of the Charter shall not have the effect of creating any new school district nor shall the adoption of this Charter have any effect upon the existence or boundaries of any present school districts within the City or of which the City comprises a part, but such present school districts shall continue in existence subject to the provisions of the laws of the State of California as the same now exists or hereafter may exist.

ARTICLE XIII. MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 1300. Definitions.
Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, as used in this Charter:

a.     “Shall” is mandatory, and “may” is permissive.

b.     “City” is the City of Seal Beach and “department,” “board,” “commission,” “agency,” “officer,” or “employee,” is a department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee, as the case may be, of the City of Seal Beach.

c.     “County” is the County of Orange.

d.     “State” is the State of California.

 

SECTION 1301. Purpose of Charter.
It shall be the purpose of this Charter to maintain a City government responsive to the citizens of the City of Seal Beach, to provide adequate local government with a minimum of taxation and, in addition to other municipal purposes, to promote, foster and preserve agriculture within the City.

 

SECTION 1302. Violations.
The violation of any provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term of not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Amended 2002)

 

SECTION 1303. Validity.
If any provision of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Charter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstance, shall not be affected thereby.

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.10 IMPLEMENTATION
Chapter 1.15 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 1.20 REVIEW OF QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISIONS

Chapter 1.10 IMPLEMENTATION
1.10.005 Short Title.
        This code shall be known and may be cited as the “Seal Beach Municipal Code.” (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this code and all ordinances of the city, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall mean:

        Board of Supervisors: governing body of the County of Orange of the State of California.

        City: City of Seal Beach in the County of Orange of the State of California.

        City Charter: laws and regulations of the City of Seal Beach.

        City Council: governing body of the City of Seal Beach.

        City Hall: administrative building of the City of Seal Beach.

        Code: Seal Beach Municipal Code.

        County: County of Orange of the State of California.

        County Recorder: Orange County Clerk-Recorder.

        In the City: in any territory over which the city has jurisdiction for the exercise of its authority.

        Occupant: when applied to a building or parcel of land, includes any person who leases the whole or a part of such building or parcel.

        Owner: when applied to a building or parcel of land, includes any part owner or joint owner of the whole or a part of such building or parcel.

        Person: a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, company or other legal entity.

        State: State of California in the United States of America.

        Tenant: when applied to a building or parcel of land, includes any person who leases the whole or a part of such building or parcel. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.015 Rules of Construction.
        A.     In General. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect their objectives and to promote justice.

        B.     Scope. This code refers only to the commission or omission of acts within the territorial limits of the city, and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction by virtue of any law or by reason of ownership or control of property.

        C.    Delegation of Responsibility. Whenever a power is granted to an official or employee by this code, the power may be exercised by a duly authorized designee of such official or employee unless otherwise expressly provided. Whenever a duty is imposed upon an official or employee by this code, the duty may be performed by a duly authorized designee of such official or employee unless otherwise expressly provided.

        D.    Grammatical Interpretation. Any gender includes the other genders. The single number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses, and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. Words and phrases used in this code and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and to the approved usage of the language.

        E.     Shall - May. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive unless the context requires otherwise.

        F.     Cross-References. Whenever a cross-reference is made to any provision of this code, or to any ordinance, statute or regulation, such cross-reference shall be deemed to refer to the then current version of the code provision, ordinance, statute or regulation.

        G.    Statutory References. Whenever any code of statutes is referred to by this code, the reference shall apply to a code of statutes of the State of California unless otherwise expressly provided.

        H.    References Applicable to City. Whenever any officer, employee, department, division, board or commission is referred to by this code, the reference shall apply to an officer, employee, department, division, board or commission of the city unless otherwise expressly provided.

        I.      Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it also is excluded. A reference to “days” shall mean calendar days unless otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.020 Existing Ordinances Continued.
        The provisions of this code, so far as they are substantially the same as those of city ordinances existing at the effective date of this code, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.025 Existing Actions and Obligations Unaffected.
        The adoption of this code shall not in any manner affect:

        A.     Prosecutions for ordinance violations that were committed prior to the effective date of this code.

        B.     Collection of any unpaid amount due under any law.

        C.    The validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any law.

        D.    Existing rights and obligations, this shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.030 Repealed Ordinances.
        The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the repealed ordinance took effect. Nor shall the repeal of an ordinance affect any punishment imposed for violation of the repealed ordinance before the repeal became effective. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.035 City Seal.
        A.     The common seal of the city, which has been adopted previously, shall be so constructed as to make the following impression:

        A circle, with a center consisting of an impression of a seal, and with the words: “City of Seal Beach, Orange County, California, incorporated, October 27, 1915, A.D.” surrounding such centerpiece near the inside margin of such circle.

 



 

        B.     The city clerk shall have charge of the city seal, and shall be held responsible for its care and proper use. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.040 Service of Notices.
        Unless otherwise expressly provided, whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, such notice may be given by either (i) personal delivery or (ii) deposit in the United States mail in postage prepaid, sealed envelope. If notice is given by mail, then the notice shall be addressed to the notice recipient’s last known business or residence address as reflected in the city’s records. Service of notice by mail shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of deposit in the mail. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.045 Proof of Notice.
        Proof of giving any notice may be made by the declaration or affidavit of any city officer or employee, or by any person over the age of 18 years. Such declaration or affidavit shall indicate that service was performed in conformity with this code or with such other provisions of law as are applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.050 Application of Code to City.
        No provision of this code shall apply to, direct or restrict the city unless the provision expressly indicates that it is intended to apply to, direct or restrict the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.055 Fees for Applications and Appeals.
        Fees for applications for licenses, permits and other entitlements referenced in this code shall be in an amount set by city council resolution. Fees for appeals authorized by this code shall be in an amount set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.10.060 Severability.
        If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, then such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this code. The council hereby declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 1.15 ENFORCEMENT
1.15.005 Classification of Offenses.
        A.     In General. No person shall violate any provision, or shall fail to comply with any requirement, of this code. Violations of, and failures to comply with, this code are punishable as set forth in this section. Each person violating any provision, or failing to comply with any requirement, of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor unless such a violation or failure is either (1) designated as an infraction or subsequently prosecuted as an infraction, in which case such person is guilty of an infraction, or (2) prosecuted through the administrative penalty procedure of this chapter. Any violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this code may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, as an infraction or through the administrative penalty procedure in the discretion of the city prosecutor.

        B.     Misdemeanor. Each person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine, imprisonment or both as provided by state law.

        C.    Infraction. Each person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine as provided by state law. Notwithstanding the preceding, any person who violates, or fails to comply with, any requirement of this code 3 times within a 12-month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each subsequent violation of such provision within that period.

        D.    Administrative Penalty. Each person who is assessed with an administrative penalty for a particular offense 3 times within a 12-month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each subsequent offense within that period.

        E.     Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as such. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.15.010 Citation Authority.
        A.     Pursuant to Penal Code Sections 836.5 and 853.6 et seq., the following city personnel may make arrests and may issue citations for misdemeanor violations of those provisions of this code that such personnel have the duty to enforce:

        1.     Lifeguards.

        2.     Code enforcement officer.

        3.     Designee of the city manager.

        B.     City personnel designated by the city manager may issue citations for infractions and for administrative penalties for those provisions of this code that such personnel have the duty to enforce. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.15.015 Administrative Penalty Procedure.
        A.     In General. Administrative penalties shall be set forth in a penalty schedule established by city council resolution and shall be payable directly to the city. Any person who fails to pay an administrative penalty, or to perform in a timely manner the corrective action designated in an administrative citation, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The city manager may dismiss an administrative citation at any time upon a determination that the citation has been erroneously issued. Any deposit submitted in connection with a request for administrative review of a dismissed citation shall be refunded in full.

        B.     Definitions. For purposes of this section, the words and phrases set forth in this subsection shall mean:

        1.     Administrative Citation: a citation containing the following:

        a.     The code section violated and a description of the violation including the date, location and approximate time of the violation.

        b.     The corrective action required and the deadline for completing such action, if any.

        c.     The administrative penalty imposed for the violation and the deadline for paying such penalty.

        d.     The procedure for appealing the citation by requesting administrative review and the deadline for filing an appeal.

        e.     The printed name and signature of the code enforcement officer issuing the citation.

        2.     Code Enforcement Officer: an officer or employee who is authorized to issue administrative citations.

        3.     Legal Interest: an interest in real property that is represented by a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien or other similar instrument that has been recorded with the county recorder.

        4.     Responsible Party: a person determined by a code enforcement officer to be responsible for violating any provision, or failing to comply with any requirement, of this code.

        C.    Imposition. An administrative penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by a code enforcement officer. Payment of an administrative penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. If a violation pertains to a building, plumbing, electrical or similar structural or zoning issue, and if the violation does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, then an administrative citation shall not be issued for the violation until the responsible party has been provided notice and has failed to take corrective action after being afforded a reasonable opportunity to do so.

        D.    Enforcement.

        1.     Service. The code enforcement officer shall successively attempt to issue an administrative citation to the responsible party by means of personal service, mail, posting or publication. Once service has been effected, the code enforcement officer need not undertake any subsequent method of service.

        a.     Personal Service. If the administrative citation is issued by personal service, then the code enforcement officer shall attempt to obtain the responsible party’s signature on the citation. Failure of the responsible party to sign the citation shall not affect the validity of the citation or of subsequent proceedings. Service shall be deemed complete upon delivery of the citation to the responsible party.

        b.     Mail. To issue an administrative citation by mail, the code enforcement officer shall send the citation by certified mail postage prepaid with return receipt requested. The citation may be sent by regular mail in conjunction with the issuance by certified mail. If a citation sent by certified mail is returned unsigned and a duplicate citation sent by regular mail is not returned due to an incorrect address, then the service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail. Service shall be deemed complete on the date of deposit in the mail.

        c.     Posting. To issue an administrative citation by posting, the code enforcement officer shall post the citation on a real property parcel that the responsible party has a legal interest in and that is within the city. Service shall be deemed complete on the posting date.

        d.     Publication. To issue an administrative citation by publication, the code enforcement officer shall cause the citation to be published once a week for 4 successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation for the city. Service shall be deemed complete on the date of the 4th publication.

        2.     Satisfaction. Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible party shall satisfy the citation by doing the following on or before the deadlines indicated in the citation: (i) complete the corrective action required, if any, and (ii) pay the administrative penalty. Alternatively, no later than 10 days after service of the citation, the responsible party may appeal the citation by requesting administrative review; provided, however, that if the appeal period expires on a day that city hall is not open for business, then the period shall be extended to the next city business day. An appeal shall be submitted to the city clerk in writing and shall be accompanied by a deposit of the full amount of the administrative penalty or by written proof of financial hardship. Proof of financial hardship shall consist of tax returns, bank statements, salary statements or similar documentation demonstrating that the responsible party is unable to deposit the full amount of the administrative penalty. The city manager shall determine whether the deposit shall be reduced or waived due to financial hardship.

        E.     Collection. If a responsible party fails or refuses to satisfy an administrative citation, then the administrative penalty shall be immediately due the city. Such amount may be collected in any manner allowed by law.

        F.     Administrative Review.

        1.     Time and Notice of Hearing. The administrative review hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and take the matter under submission no later than 30 city business days following the timely filing of an appeal, unless the responsible party consents in writing to an extension. At least 10 calendar days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the responsible party.

        2.     Hearing Procedure. Administrative review hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the hearing officer. All parties involved shall have a right to: (i) offer testimonial and documentary evidence bearing on the issues; (ii) be represented by counsel; and (iii) confront and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing officer shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence and may receive, under penalty of perjury, any relevant evidence that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. A hearing may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. An administrative citation is prima facie proof of the violation and the code enforcement officer who issued the citation is not required to participate in the hearing.

        3.     Burden of Proof. The city bears the burden of proof of establishing, by preponderance of the evidence, the occurrence of the violation.

        4.     Failure to Attend Hearing. If a responsible party fails to attend an administrative review hearing that such person has requested, and also fails to send a representative to the hearing, then the hearing officer shall dismiss the appeal and the administrative penalty shall be deemed upheld. The hearing officer shall notify the responsible party in writing within 10 days of the dismissal of an appeal due to non-attendance.

        5.     Decision. The hearing officer may uphold, overturn or modify the administrative penalty and any corrective action imposed by an administrative citation. The hearing officer shall, within 45 city business days of the appeal filing date, render a written decision supported by findings. The time period set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the responsible party. Notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the responsible party. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless council review is ordered.

        6.     Judicial Review. A responsible party may seek judicial review of a final city decision regarding an administrative penalty in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.15.020 Aiding and Abetting.
        Whenever any act or omission is prohibited by this code, such prohibition shall be deemed to prohibit the aiding, abetting, causing, concealing or permitting of such act or omission. Any person who shall aid, abet, cause, conceal or permit such act or omission shall be guilty of a violation of this code and shall be punishable in accordance with the punishment prescribed for such act or omission. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.15.025 Continuing Violations.
        Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day any violation of this code, or any failure to comply with a requirement of this code, is committed, continued or permitted and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.15.030 Recovery of Criminal Justice Administration Fees.
        In any case in which a person is arrested for a criminal offense, a criminal justice administrative fee is imposed by the county for the arrest, and the person is convicted of a criminal offense related to the arrest, the convicted person shall reimburse the city for the entire amount of such fee. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 1.20 REVIEW OF QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISIONS
1.20.005 Administrative Review.
        A.     Applicability. This section applies only when expressly deemed applicable to a particular license or permit by another provision of this code.

        B.     Appeal Eligibility. Any interested person may appeal the issuance, denial of issuance, renewal, denial of renewal or imposition of disciplinary action in connection with the license or permit.

        C.    Appeal Period. A written appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 10 calendar days after the decision; provided, however, that if the appeal period expires on a day that city hall is not open for business, then the period shall be extended to the next city business day.

        D.    Appeal Contents. The appeal must indicate in what way the appellant contends the decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances that the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the decision.

        E.     Stay of Decision. The effectiveness of any decision to suspend or revoke a license or permit shall be stayed during (1) the appeal period and (2) the pendency of any appeal.

        F.     Time and Notice of Hearing. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and take the matter under submission no later than 30 city business days following the timely filing of an appeal, unless the appellant, as well as the applicant if different than the appellant, consents in writing to an extension. At least 10 days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the appellant and applicant (if different than the appellant). Public notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same manner, if any, as was provided in connection with the consideration of the original decision.

        G.    Hearing Procedure. Appeal hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the hearing officer. All parties involved shall have a right to: (1) offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; (2) be represented by counsel; and (3) confront and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing officer shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence and may receive, under penalty of perjury, any relevant evidence that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

        H.    Burden of Proof. Unless otherwise provided by law or with respect to appeals of decisions made pursuant to Titles 10, 11 and 12, the burden is on the city to show the decision that is being appealed is reasonable and not an abuse of discretion.

        I.      Decision. The hearing officer may uphold, overturn or modify the decision being appealed. The hearing officer shall, within 45 city business days of the appeal filing date, render a written decision supported by findings. The time period set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the appellant and the applicant (if different than the appellant). Notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the appellant and to the applicant (if different than the appellant). The decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless council review is ordered. (Ord. 1570; Ord. 1515)

 

1.20.010 Council Review.
        A.     Authority to Order Review. Except as otherwise provided in this code, the city council may on its own motion order council review of any quasi-judicial administrative decision made by any board, commission, hearing officer or official of the city. Such motion must be duly adopted within 10 days of the issuance of the decision, and must find that the subject matter has city-wide significance warranting a determination by the city council.

        B.     Stay of Decision. The effectiveness of an administrative decision for which council review has been ordered shall be stayed pending completion of the council review proceedings.

        C.    Time and Notice of Hearing. The city clerk shall schedule the council review hearing for commencement within 40 city business days of the motion ordering council review. Public notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same manner, if any, as was provided in connection with the consideration by the board, commission, hearing officer or official having original jurisdiction.

        D.    Hearing Procedure. The council review hearing shall be conducted as a de novo hearing. The city council shall apply the same decision criteria as the board, commission, hearing officer or official having original jurisdiction.

        E.     Council Decision. The city council may uphold, overturn or modify the decision of the board, commission, hearing officer or official. Any such action shall be made by resolution, shall be supported by findings and shall be the final city decision on the subject matter. Alternatively, the city council may remand the matter for further consideration by the board, commission, hearing officer or official having original jurisdiction. In the event of a tie vote by the city council, the decision of the board, commission, hearing officer or official shall be effective. (Ord. 1515)

 

1.20.015 Judicial Review.
        A.     In General. In accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6, or other applicable law, any interested person may seek judicial review of a final city decision suspending, demoting or dismissing an officer or employee; revoking or denying an application for a permit, license or other entitlement; imposing a civil or administrative penalty, fine, charge or cost; or denying any application for any retirement benefit or allowance.

        B.     First Amendment Activities. In accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8, or other applicable law, any interested person may seek prompt judicial review of a final city decision regarding the issuance, revocation, suspension or denial of a permit or other entitlement for expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.

        C.    Development Agreements. Any judicial review of an ordinance approving a development agreement shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1085 or any successor statute; and judicial review of any city action as to a development agreement, other than initial approval of a development agreement, shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 or any successor statute.

        D.    Statute of Limitations for Actions Challenging Certain Decisions. No court action or proceeding to challenge, review, set aside, void or annul (hereinafter collectively “challenge” in this subsection D) any decision as to:

        1.     The General Plan or any matter mentioned in Titles 10, 11, and 12, other than development agreements;

        2.     Any proceedings, acts or determinations related to such decision; or

        3.     Any condition imposed in connection with such decision, shall be maintained unless such action or proceeding is commenced within 60 days after the effective date of such decision. No action or proceeding to challenge any decision as to a development agreement shall be maintained unless the action or proceeding is commenced within 90 days after the effective date of the decision. Failure to timely file a challenge bars any action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision, proceedings, acts, determinations or conditions. (Ord. 1570; Ord. 1515)

Title 2 ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.05 ELECTIVE OFFICES
Chapter 2.10 CAMPAIGN REFORM

Chapter 2.05 ELECTIVE OFFICES
2.05.005 Councilmanic Districts.
        The 5 political subdivisions of the city are respectively designated and established below:

        A.     Councilmanic District No. 1.

        In the City of Seal Beach, County of Orange, State of California described as follows:

        Beginning at a point of intersection of the Los Angeles County/City of Seal Beach boundary with the centerline of Marina Drive as shown on Tract Map No. 9783, as recorded in Book 437, page 34, Records of Orange County;

        Thence, southeasterly along the centerline of said Marina Drive to a point of intersection with the centerline of 6th Street;

        Thence, northeasterly along the centerline of said 6th Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Pacific Electric Right-of-Way;

        Thence, southeasterly along the centerline of said right-of-way to a point of intersection with the centerline of 8th Street;

        Thence, northeasterly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the centerline of Pacific Coast Highway (State Highway Route I);

        Thence, southeasterly along the centerline of Pacific Coast Highway to a point of intersection with the west line of the east half of Section 13, Township 5 south, Range 12 west, also being the City of Seal Beach boundary as described in original incorporation;

        Thence, southerly along said boundary line to a point of intersection with the northerly boundary of location No. 141 State Tidelands, described in patent issued April 4, 1901, also being the City of Seal Beach boundary as described in Annexation No. 7 and the common boundary line between Annexation No. 7 and Annexation No. 67-1;

        Thence, easterly, southerly, southeasterly, southwesterly, northwesterly and southwesterly along the northerly and northeasterly line of the lands described in Annexation No. 67-1 to the north line of California State Highway 101 (presently known as Pacific Coast Highway);

        Thence, southeasterly along said north line of Pacific Coast Highway and its southeasterly projection to a point of intersection with the centerline of Anderson Street, also being the common boundary line between Rancho Los Alamitos and Rancho La Bolsa Chica;

        Thence, southwesterly along said common line and its southwesterly projection 3 miles to the southwesterly boundary line of the City of Seal Beach;

        Thence, northwesterly along said boundary line of the City of Seal Beach, said boundary line being parallel with the 3 miles southwesterly from the Mean High Tide Line of the Pacific Ocean, to a point of intersection with the prolongation of the common boundary line between Los Angeles County and Orange County (the City of Seal Beach);

        Thence, northeasterly along said boundary line to the true point of beginning.

        B.     Councilmanic District No. 2.

        In the City of Seal Beach, County of Orange, State of California described as follows:

        Beginning at a point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way of the Bolsa Chica Flood Control Channel and the northerly right-of-way of the San Diego/Garden Grove Freeway;

        Thence, southerly along the City of Seal Beach boundary being a common boundary with the city of Westminster to the centerline of Westminster Avenue;

        Thence, westerly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard;

        Thence, northerly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the centerline of St. Andrews Drive;

        Thence, westerly and continuing northwesterly along said centerline of St. Andrews Drive to a point of intersection with the centerline of Northwood Road;

        Thence, westerly along the centerline of said Northwood Road to a point of intersection with the southerly projection of the easterly boundary of that portion of land recorded as Parcel Map 33-17, Miscellaneous Maps, Orange County;

        Thence, northerly along said line and the easterly line of said Parcel to a point of intersection with the southerly line of Garden Grove Boulevard (Old Name), also being the southerly line of State of California Route 22;

        Thence, westerly along said line to a point of intersection with the common line between Los Angeles County and the City of Seal Beach;

        Thence, northwesterly and northeasterly along said boundary line to a point of intersection with the northerly line of Annexation 64-1, also being the common boundary of Orange County and the City of Seal Beach;

        Thence, along said common boundary and following the northerly line of Annexation 64-1 generally southeasterly, southerly, southeasterly, northeasterly and northerly to the intersection with the southerly boundary of Annexation 66-1;

        Thence, westerly, northerly, easterly, northerly, easterly and southerly along the boundary of said annexation to a point of intersection with the northerly boundary of Annexation 64-1, also being the common boundary of the city of Los Alamitos and the City of Seal Beach;

        Thence, westerly along said boundary line 30 feet to a point of intersection with the centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard;

        Thence, southerly and southwesterly along said centerline to a point of intersection with northerly right-of-way line of the San Diego/Garden Grove Freeway;

        Thence, easterly along said right-of-way line of San Diego/Garden Grove Freeway to the true point of beginning.

        C.    Councilmanic District No. 3.

        In the City of Seal Beach, County of Orange, State of California described as follows:

        Beginning at a point of intersection of the Los Angeles County/City of Seal Beach boundary with the centerline of Marina Drive as shown on Tract Map No. 9783, as recorded in Book 437, page 34, Records of Orange County;

        Thence, southeasterly along the centerline of said Marina Drive to a point of intersection with the centerline of 6th Street;

        Thence, northeasterly along the centerline of said 6th Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Pacific Electric Right-of-Way;

        Thence, southeasterly along the centerline of said right-of-way to a point of intersection with the centerline of 8th Street;

        Thence, northeasterly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the centerline of Pacific Coast Highway (State Highway Route I);

        Thence, southeasterly along the centerline of Pacific Coast Highway to a point of intersection with the west line of the east half of Section 13, Township 5 south, Range 12 west also being the City of Seal Beach boundary as described in original incorporation;

        Thence, southerly along said boundary line to a point of intersection with the northerly boundary of location No. 141 State Tidelands, described in patent issued April 4, 1901, also being the City of Seal Beach boundary as described in Annexation No. 7 and the common boundary line between Annexation No. 7 and Annexation No. 67-1;

        Thence, easterly, southerly and southeasterly along said common boundary line and continuing southeasterly, northeasterly and easterly along said boundary line of Annexation No. 7 to a point of intersection with the easterly boundary of the City of Seal Beach common with the city of Huntington Beach, said point also being the northerly line of Edinger Avenue and the westerly line of Bolsa Chica Avenue;

        Thence, northerly along said boundary line with the city of Huntington Beach and continuing northerly along with the common boundary line with the city of Westminster to a point of intersection with the centerline of Westminster Avenue;

        Thence, westerly along the centerline of Westminster Avenue to a point of intersection with the common boundary between Los Angeles County and the City of Seal Beach;

        Thence, southerly and southwesterly along said common boundary line to a point of intersection with the centerline of Marina Drive as shown on Tract Map No. 9783, being the true point of beginning.

        D.    Councilmanic District No. 4.

        In the City of Seal Beach, County of Orange, State of California described as follows:

        Beginning at the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Lampson Avenue and the easterly right-of-way of the Bolsa Chica Flood Control Channel;

        Thence, southerly to an intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of the Bolsa Chica Flood Control Channel with the northerly right-of-way line of the San Diego/Garden Grove Freeway;

        Thence, westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of the San Diego/Garden Grove Freeway to a point of intersection with the centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard;

        Thence, northeasterly and northerly along said centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard to a point of intersection with the city of Los Alamitos/City of Seal Beach boundary line, also being the northerly boundary of Annexation 64-1;

        Thence, easterly, southerly and easterly along said boundary line with the city of Los Alamitos (also, being the northerly boundary of Annexation 64-1 and along the northerly right-of-way line of Lampson Avenue) to the true point of beginning.

        E.     Councilmanic District No. 5.

        In the City of Seal Beach, County of Orange, State of California described as follows:

        Beginning at a point of intersection of the centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard and the centerline of Westminster Avenue;

        Thence, westerly along said centerline of Westminster Avenue to a point of intersection with the common boundary line between Los Angeles County and the City of Seal Beach;

        Thence, northerly and northwesterly along said common boundary line to a point of intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of Garden Grove Boulevard (old name) also being the southerly right-of-way line of the State of California Route 22;

        Thence, easterly along said line to easterly boundary of that portion of land recorded as Parcel Map 33-17, Miscellaneous Maps, County of Orange;

        Thence, southerly along said easterly boundary line and its prolongation to a point of intersection with the centerline of Northwood Road;

        Thence, easterly along said centerline to a point of intersection with St. Andrews Drive;

        Thence, southeasterly and easterly along said centerline of St. Andrews Drive to a point of intersection with the centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard;

        Thence, southerly along said centerline of Seal Beach Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Westminster Avenue, being the true point of beginning. (Ord. 1613; Ord. 1515)

 

2.05.010 2000 Census Redistricting.
        The 5 political subdivisions or districts set forth in this chapter are in accordance with the city charter and Elections Code Section 21620. No political subdivision or district adjustments are necessary based on the results of the 2000 federal census. (Ord. 1515)

 

2.05.015 Filing Fee.
        A filing fee for candidates’ nomination papers for elective offices held in the city shall be set by city council resolution. Each candidate for the city council or for city clerk shall pay the filing fee to the city clerk at the time the candidate’s nomination paper is filed with the city clerk. The city clerk may waive the filing fee if the candidate files a written affidavit declaring, under penalty of perjury, an inability to pay the fee. The city clerk shall remit to the finance department all filing fees received, and such fees shall be deposited in the general fund. (Ord. 1515)

 

2.05.020 Mail Ballot General Municipal Elections, Municipal Run-off Elections, and Special Elections.
        A.     Pursuant to Section 507 of the Seal Beach Official Charter, the city council hereby authorizes, provides for and mandates the conduct of all-mailed ballot elections for general municipal elections, municipal run-off elections, and special elections, including any election to authorize the issuance of general obligation bonds. Such mail ballot elections shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 2 of Division 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of the California Elections Code, except as otherwise provided in this Section 2.05.020.

        B.     Election Code Sections 3001 through 3008, 3013, 3015 through 3017, and 3020 through 3022 shall not be applicable to city elections conducted pursuant to this Section 2.05.020. Chapter 1 of Division 4 of the Elections Code (commencing with Section 4000) and Election Code Sections 4104 through 4108 shall not be applicable to the city elections conducted pursuant to this Section 2.05.020.

        C.    Elections Code Section 4103 shall apply with the added provision that, at the time of calling an all-mailed ballot election, the city council may change the deadline for the receipt of ballots by the city clerk for that election. In the event the council makes such a change, the change shall also apply to the 8:00 p.m. deadline specified in subsections F, K and N of this section.

        D.    Any voter may personally return his or her ballot to the city clerk’s office, to any designated drop-off site, or the voter may designate and authorize, in the voter’s own handwriting at the appropriate place on the outside of the ballot envelope, any adult person other than any candidate for any office in such election, to deliver the voter’s ballot to the city clerk’s office or to any designated drop-off site. The city clerk shall provide the appropriate form on the ballot envelope for the voter’s handwritten and signed designation and authorization. The person who delivers any other voter’s ballot to the city clerk’s office or to any designated drop-off site shall, at the time of such delivery, present sufficient photographic identification to prove that he or she is the person who has been expressly designated and authorized by the voter, and shall personally sign, in the presence of the city clerk or the city clerk’s representatives, a declaration under penalty of perjury relating to such designation, authorization, and delivery on a form furnished by the city clerk’s office.

        E.     Elections Code Section 3019 shall apply with the added provision that the city clerk may compare a copy of a voter’s signature produced from the original ballot envelope to the voter’s signature on the original affidavit, or may arrange with the county registrar of voters to compare such signature copies on the city’s behalf, and if a ballot shall be rejected on the basis of such comparison an appropriate notation shall be marked on the original ballot envelope as required by Section 3019.

        F.     The city clerk’s office shall be open 29 days before election day on weekdays (excluding holidays) from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on election day from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., and at that time, shall be closed.

        G.    Each ballot mailed by the city clerk shall be accompanied by instructions for return of the ballot, including the location of the city clerk’s office for in-person drop-offs of ballots, and the date and time by which such ballots must be received at the city clerk’s office or to any designated drop-off site to be counted for the election.

        H.    Each ballot mailed by the city clerk shall be accompanied by an official return envelope bearing sufficient postage for return by regular first class United States mail.

        I.      The failure of any registered voter to receive an official ballot shall not invalidate any election conducted pursuant to this chapter.

        J.     Ballots may be returned by regular, certified or registered United States mail, overnight commercial carrier, or in person. Ballots returned in person may be returned to the city clerk’s office or to any designated drop-off site. The city clerk may include a notice to voters to the effect that they are permitted to return the voted ballot by certified or registered United States mail or overnight commercial carrier. Any voter electing to use such means of delivery shall pay any additional postage required as a result.

        K.     Any ballot received by the city clerk by mail at the city clerk’s office or to any designated drop-off site after 8:00 p.m. on election day shall not be accepted or counted; however, if at 8:00 p.m. on election day there are any voters inside city hall who have not been able to deposit their official ballot envelope with the election officials there, the election officials shall continue to accept envelopes from such voters until all have had the opportunity to deliver their ballots.

        L.     Any registered voter who will be absent from the city prior to the mailed-ballot election to and including the date of the election may file a written application with the city clerk to receive an “absentee” mailed ballot at an address other than the voter’s residence. The application shall be filed following the adoption of the ordinance or resolution calling the mailed ballot election and on or before the 7th day prior to the election. The application shall show the voter’s place of residence and the address to which the ballot should be mailed, and state that the voter will be unable to receive and return the mailed ballot by the election date, and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. No voter who requests an absentee mailed ballot shall be required to return or surrender a duplicate mailed ballot sent to the voter’s residence.

        M.    Any registered voter who has not already cast his or her vote may obtain a ballot at the city clerk’s office or at designated drop-off sites. Such places should provide the necessary materials to enable voters to cast their votes in person in accordance with the provisional ballot provisions of the Elections Code.

        N.    Notwithstanding any provision in the California Elections Code, the city clerk may commence processing the ballots no earlier than the 7th working day prior to the election. However, the city clerk shall not release any results until 8:00 p.m. on election day. (Ord. 1539; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 2.10 CAMPAIGN REFORM
2.10.005 State and Federal Law.
        Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter 2.10, election campaigns shall comply with applicable state and federal laws governing elections. (Ord. 1592)

 

2.10.010 Maximum Contribution Limit for City Candidate Elections.
        A.     Purpose.

        1.     To eliminate the possibility of corruption or the appearance of corruption in local elections, arising as a result of disproportionately large political contributions, whether cash or in-kind, by adopting limits on the amount of money any person may contribute or otherwise cause to be available to candidates for the city council and those who support or oppose such candidates.

        2.     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 81013 and Elections Code Section 10202, to impose contribution limits and other regulations in addition to those imposed by state law, but that do not prevent any person from complying with state law.

        B.     Definitions. The following terms used in this section shall have the meanings set forth below. Except as otherwise provided here, the terms and provisions of this section shall have the meanings and shall be interpreted in accordance with the applicable definitions and provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended (Government Code Section 81000, et seq.) and the regulations of the California Fair Political Practices Commission, as amended.

        1.     Candidate: any person who is a candidate for member of the Seal Beach City Council, or any elective city officer whether or not such officer is a candidate for reelection.

        2.     Committee: any person or combination of persons who directly or indirectly does any of the following in connection with supporting or opposing a candidate or candidates for the city council, or supporting, opposing or attempting to qualify the recall of a member of the city council:

        a.     Receives contributions totaling $500 or more in a calendar year.

        b.     Makes independent expenditures totaling $1,000 or more in a calendar year.

        c.     Makes contributions totaling $1,000 or more in a calendar year.

        A person or combination of persons that becomes a committee shall file statements of organization with the city clerk within 48 hours of qualifying as a committee in the city and shall retain the status as a committee until such time as that status is terminated pursuant to Government Code Section 84214 or a successor statute.

        3.     Contribution:

        a.     A payment, a forgiveness of a loan, a payment of a loan by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a payment except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received unless it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for political purposes. An expenditure made at the behest of a candidate, committee or elected officer is a contribution to the candidate, committee or elected officer unless full and adequate consideration is received for making the expenditure. The term “contribution” includes:

        (1)    The purchase of tickets for events such as dinners, luncheons, rallies and similar fund-raising events;

        (2)    The granting of discounts or rebates not extended to the public generally or the granting of discounts or rebates by television and radio stations and newspapers not extended on an equal basis to all candidates for the same office;

        (3)    The payment of compensation by any person for the personal services or expenses of any other person if such services are rendered or expenses incurred on behalf of a candidate or committee without payment of full and adequate consideration;

        (4)    Any transfer of anything of value received by a committee from another committee, unless full and adequate consideration is received;

        (5)    A loan and any extension of credit in excess of 30 days, except as provided below, which shall be considered a contribution from the maker of the loan, and shall be by written agreement, a copy of which agreement shall be filed with the candidate’s or committee’s campaign statement on which the loan is first reported.

        b.     The term “contribution” does not include:

        (1)    Amounts received pursuant to an enforceable promise to the extent such amounts have been previously reported as a contribution. However, the fact that such amounts have been received shall be indicated in the appropriate campaign statement;

        (2)    A payment made by an occupant of a home or office for costs related to any meeting or fund-raising event held in the occupant’s home or office if the costs for the meeting or fund-raising event are $500 or less;

        (3)    Volunteer personal services or payments made by any individual for his or her own travel expenses if such payments are made voluntarily without any understanding or agreement that they shall be, directly or indirectly, repaid to him or her;

        (4)    The proceeds of a loan made to a candidate by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public and which is secured or guaranteed, or a loan made under circumstances making it clear that the loan is not for political purposes;

        (5)    An independent expenditure.

        c.     A contribution shall not be considered to be received if it is not negotiated, deposited, or utilized, and in addition it is returned to the donor within 14 days of receipt.

        4.     Controlled Committee: a committee that is controlled directly or indirectly by a candidate or city measure proponent or that acts jointly with a candidate, controlled committee, or city measure proponent in connection with the making of expenditures. A candidate or city measure proponent controls a committee if he or she, his or her agent, or any other committee he or she controls has a significant influence on the actions or decisions of the committee.

        5.     Election: any general election, special election or recall election.

        6.     Elective City Officer: any person who is a member of the city council of the City of Seal Beach or any other elective city office, whether that person was appointed or elected to office.

        7.     Person: an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, committee, company, corporation, limited liability corporation, association, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert.

        C.    Contribution Limitations.

        1.     No person or committee shall make to any candidate, including the controlled committee of such candidate, a contribution in excess of $500 either cash or in-kind, for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be, or is, on the ballot. Such limit shall apply to contributions from the candidate’s spouse. Additionally, no candidate or candidate’s controlled committee shall solicit or accept any contribution that will cause the amount contributed by the contributor to the candidate or the candidate’s controlled committee to exceed $500 for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be, or is, on the ballot.

        2.     The limitations of this section shall not apply to contributions of a candidate’s personal funds to his or her controlled campaign committee on behalf of his or her own candidacy.

        3.     No person shall make a contribution in the name of another.

        4.     No person shall reimburse, pay in advance, or otherwise compensate another person for a contribution made.

        5.     No person shall knowingly solicit or accept a contribution in violation of this section.

        6.     No person shall knowingly take any action with the intent of evading the contribution limits imposed by this section or concealing violations of this section.

        7.     Candidates with existing campaign accounts from a prior election for any office, whether local, state or federal, shall open a new account for the next city election in which they are or will be a candidate. No person, committee or candidate shall contribute more than $500 from the prior campaign account into the new campaign account.

        8.     Any committee that makes contributions to support or oppose a candidate for city elective office or to support, oppose or qualify the recall of any member of the city council shall do so only from a segregated committee account established for that specific purpose and from funds that are raised in compliance with the limits set forth in this section.

        9.     A candidate for city office or elective city officer shall have no more than one controlled campaign committee for election to city office. Such a committee shall have only one bank account out of which all qualified campaign expenses shall be made. This section does not prevent a candidate or elective city officer from establishing another committee solely for the purpose of running for a state, federal, county, special district or other office, or solely formed to support or oppose a ballot measure.

        D.    Violations—Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.15 of this code. In the event of a violation of Sections 2.10.010.C.1, C.3, C.4, C.5, C.7, C.8 or C.9 by a candidate or a candidate’s controlled committee, the candidate shall be held personally responsible for the violation. In the event of a violation by any noncandidate controlled committee, the committee treasurer shall be held responsible for the violation. (Ord. 1592)

Title 3 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 3.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 3.10 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 3.15 PERSONNEL
Chapter 3.20 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 3.25 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER

Chapter 3.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
3.05.005 Council Meetings.
        The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the 2nd and 4th Monday of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m. in the city council chambers of city hall. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.05.010 Council Compensation.
        Pursuant to Government Code Section 36516, each member of the city council shall receive as salary the sum of $600 per month. Such salary shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to other officers and employees. The city council may increase its salary in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 36516 et seq. (Ord. 1561; Ord. 1515)

 

3.05.020 Bond Requirements.
        A corporate surety bond is hereby prescribed for the city clerk and the city manager and is fixed in the sum of $2,500. A corporate surety bond is hereby prescribed for the city treasurer and is fixed in the amount of $25,000. The city shall pay the premium for these bonds. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.05.025 Administrative Departments.
        Unless otherwise required by the city charter or other applicable law, the city council may by resolution establish the offices and positions for the city government, the duties incident thereto and the salaries to be paid therefor and time of payment. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.05.030 Redevelopment Agency.
        A.     Declaration of Findings. In accordance with the Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq.), it is hereby found and declared that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by such statute to function in the city. Such agency is hereby authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law.

        B.     Agency Constitution. The city council hereby declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city. All rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency are vested in the city council.

        C.    Exclusion of Residential Areas. The redevelopment agency shall not include in any redevelopment project land within the city that was zoned, developed and used as residential property on March 20, 1967, the effective date of the ordinance enacting this provision. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.05.035 Surplus Property.
        The city manager may sell or exchange city supplies and equipment that are no longer used, have become obsolete or are worn out. Any such sales shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the purchasing ordinance. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 3.10 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
3.10.005 Environmental Quality Control Board.
        A.     Establishment. The environmental quality control board is hereby established for the purpose of exercising such powers and performing such duties as are prescribed by this code.

        B.     Composition. The environmental quality control board shall consist of 5 members. The members of the board shall be appointed and subject to removal in accordance with the city charter. The term of membership on the board shall be 4 years.

        C.    Meetings. Regular meetings of the environmental quality control board shall be held once per month on a day and at a time fixed by board resolution and confirmed by the city council. The city clerk shall distribute minutes of board meetings to the city council.

        D.    Powers and Duties. The environmental quality control board shall have the following powers and duties:

        1.     To study the environment of the city and to investigate all threats to the maintenance of a high quality, clean environment for the city.

        2.     To report to the city council its recommendations for legislation or other action deemed necessary or appropriate for the maintenance or improvement of a high quality, clean environment for the city.

        3.     To report to the city council its recommendations for legislation or other action deemed necessary or appropriate for the mitigation of threats to the maintenance of a high quality, clean environment for the city.

        4.     To exercise such other powers and to perform such other duties as may be delegated from time to time by resolution, ordinance or other action of the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.10.010 Planning Commission.
        A.     Establishment. The planning commission is hereby established for the purpose of exercising such powers and performing such duties as are prescribed by this code.

        B.     Composition. The planning commission shall consist of 5 members. The members of the commission shall be appointed and subject to approval in accordance with the city charter. The term of membership on the commission shall be 4 years.

        C.    Meetings. Regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held twice per month on a day and at a time fixed by commission resolution and confirmed by the city council. The city clerk shall distribute minutes of commission meetings to the city council.

        D.    Powers and Duties. The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties:

        1.     To remain informed on matters affecting the function and duties of, and matters before, the commission.

        2.     To exercise such powers and perform such duties as are provided by state law for planning commissions of general law cities. (Ord. 1593; Ord. 1583; Ord. 1515)

 

3.10.015 Recreation and Parks Commission.
        A.     Establishment. The recreation and parks commission is hereby established for the purpose of exercising such powers and performing such duties as are prescribed by this code.

 

        B.     Composition.

        1.     Regular Members. The recreation and parks commission shall consist of 5 regular members. The regular members of the commission shall be appointed and subject to removal in accordance with the city charter. The term of membership on the commission for regular members shall be 4 years.

        2.     Ex Officio Members. The city council additionally may appoint ex-officio members to the commission in such numbers and for such terms as deemed appropriate. Such ex-officio members shall not have the authority to vote on commission actions.

        C.    Meetings. Regular meetings of the recreation and parks commission shall be held once per month on a day and at a time fixed by commission resolution and confirmed by the city council. The city clerk shall distribute minutes of commission meetings to the city council.

        D.    Powers and Duties. The recreation and parks commission shall have the following powers and duties:

        1.     To advise the city council in the advancement of sound recreation and parks planning and programming.

        2.     To periodically prepare an inventory of recreation services that exists or may be needed in the city, and to convey the results of such inventory to the city council.

        3.     To aid in coordinating recreation services with programs of other governmental agencies and civic groups.

        4.     To advise the city council in the preparation of long-range recreation capital improvement programs. (Ord. 1582; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 3.15 PERSONNEL
3.15.005 Civil Service.
        A.     The provisions of the city charter, this code, memoranda of understanding and the personnel rules and regulations govern the civil service. In the event of any inconsistency, the city charter and this code shall prevail. Pursuant to Article IX of the city charter, the following personnel system is hereby adopted.

        B.     No person shall have any authority, either directly or indirectly, to modify any provision of this chapter, or to take any action in conflict with the requirements and provisions set forth herein. Amendments and modifications to this chapter shall be effective only upon formal adoption of an ordinance by the city council in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.010 Authority of City Manager.
        A.     Personnel Officer. The city manager shall be the ex-officio personnel officer. With the approval of the city council, the city manager may delegate any of the personnel officer powers and duties to any other officer or employee of the city. The city manager shall:

        1.     Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules and regulations not specifically reserved to the city council;

        2.     Prepare and submit to the city council revisions and amendments to the personnel rules and regulations;

        3.     Prepare a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council;

        4.     Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council.

        B.     Appointment of City Clerk. The city manager is the appointing authority for the position of city clerk. The compensation of the city clerk shall be designated in the city council resolution establishing salary rates for management and non-represented employees. (Ord. 1645; Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.020 At-Will Relationship; Exempt Status.
        A.     Except as otherwise specifically provided in the city charter, all employees of the city are at-will employees who may be terminated at any time without prior notice or cause and without right of hearing or appeal.

        B.     At-will positions include, but are not limited to, the following:

        1.     All positions listed in Section 901 of the city charter, and persons serving in those positions.

        2.     Newly hired full-time employees serving their initial probationary period or any extension of such initial probationary period; and full-time employees serving a promotional probationary period or any extension of a promotional probationary period.

        3.     Employees serving in a provisional appointment, non-benefited employees and contract employees.

        4.     Any position and/or person designated as at-will by city ordinance or personnel rules and regulations.

        C.    As used in the city charter and herein, the term “department heads” includes chief of police, director of public works/city engineer, director of development services, director of administrative services/finances, assistant city manager, and marine safety/lifeguard chief, and as such titles may be amended or modified from time to time; and any newly created position, and person serving in such position, designated as a department head by ordinance or resolution.

        D.    All at-will positions, and persons serving in at-will positions as set forth in this section, are exempt from the civil service system of the city. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.030 Appointment of City Manager.
        A.     Employment Agreement. Except as indicated in this chapter, the provisions of Article VI of the city charter, and the employment agreement between the city and the city manager, govern the position of city manager. No provision of any employment agreement may modify any provision of the city charter or municipal code governing the city manager. In the event of any inconsistency between the city charter, the municipal code and an employment agreement, the city charter and this code shall prevail.

        B.     Removal of City Manager. The city council shall furnish the city manager with written notice stating its intention to remove such official from city employment and any reasons for its intended action at least 30 days before the effective date of the removal. The city council action to remove shall be final. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify the city manager’s status as an at-will employee serving at the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.040 Employer-Employee Relations.
        The city charter and resolutions of the city council shall govern procedures for the administration of employer-employee relations. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.050 Civil Service, Classified Service or Competitive Service.
        The terms “civil service,” “classified service,” and “competitive service” may be used interchangeably to describe the civil service system established by the city charter. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.060 Appointing Authority.
        The city manager, or such other person designated by the city charter or ordinance to appoint persons to positions of employment, is the appointing authority for the city. The term “appointing authority” may be used interchangeably with “appointing power.” (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.070 Adoption of Rules for Civil Service.
        A.     The city council shall adopt personnel rules and regulations to govern all employees in the civil service. Such rules may be amended from time to time. The rules shall be consistent with the city charter, and shall establish, at a minimum, specific procedures and regulations governing the following phases of the civil service system:

        1.     Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

        2.     Preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

        3.     Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

        4.     Certification and appointment of persons from eligibility lists;

        5.     Temporary and emergency appointments;

        6.     Evaluation of employees;

        7.     Transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees;

        8.     Separation of employees through layoff, suspension, and dismissal;

        9.     Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare, and training;

        10.   Suitable provision for orderly and equitable presentations to the city manager by employees relating to general conditions of employment;

        11.   Content, maintenance, and use of personnel records and forms.

        B.     The city manager may adopt any other policies and procedures not inconsistent with the city charter, this code or the personnel rules and regulations, as he or she deems necessary to administer the civil service system. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.080 Adoption of Rules for Exempt Positions.
        A.     The city council, through consultation with the city manager and city attorney, may adopt and/or enact personnel rules and regulations and/or other regulations by resolution to govern the employment, discipline, termination, salaries, and benefits, of positions and persons exempt from the civil service system and all other persons holding at-will positions with the city.

        B.     The city manager may adopt policies and procedures for at-will positions subject to his or her power of appointment, where such policies and procedures are not inconsistent with the city charter, this code, or any personnel rules and regulations adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.090 Subpoenas.
        A.     The personnel rules and regulations may authorize the personnel officer and any arbitrator or other hearing officer to have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of documents by subpoenas issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk.

        B.     The chief of police shall serve subpoenas authorized pursuant to this section and the personnel rules and regulations. Any person who refuses to attend or testify in accordance with such subpoena may be prosecuted. (Ord. 1545)

 

3.15.100 Solicitation of Contributions.
        A.     No officer, agent, clerk, or employee, under the government of the city, and no candidate for any city office shall, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription, contribution, or political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any political purpose whatsoever, from anyone on the employment lists or holding any position under the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     No officer or employee in the competitive service, shall, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription or contribution, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any purpose affecting his or her working conditions, from any person other than an officer or employee in the competitive service. (Ord. 1545)

Chapter 3.20 PURCHASING SYSTEM
3.20.005 Purchasing Officer.
        A.     Position Creation. There is hereby created in the city government the position of purchasing officer. The city manager shall serve as the purchasing officer except that, with approval of the city council, the city manager may delegate to another officer or employee some or all of the powers and duties of the purchasing officer.

        B.     Powers and Duties. The purchasing officer shall have the following powers and duties:

        1.     To purchase supplies and equipment in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

        2.     To negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment.

        3.     To discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases.

        4.     To recommend to the city council rules to govern the purchase of supplies and equipment.

        5.     To keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products.

        6.     To maintain such forms as reasonably necessary for the implementation of this chapter.

        7.     To supervise the inspection of all purchased supplies and equipment to ensure conformance with specifications.

        8.     To maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ catalog file and other records appropriate for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.010 Estimates of Requirements.
        The head of each department shall file with the purchasing officer detailed estimates of the department’s requirements in supplies and equipment. Such filing shall be made at the time and in the manner prescribed by the purchasing officer. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.015 Purchase Orders.
        Department requests for supplies and equipment shall be made by standard purchase order forms. Prior to submission to the purchasing officer, each purchase order shall be reviewed and approved by the head of the department making the request. (Ord. 1515)

3.20.020 Encumbrance of Funds.
        Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not purchase supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.025 Purchases Exempt from Bidding Requirements.
        The following purchases are exempt from the bidding requirements of this chapter:

        A.     Purchases made during an emergency from the nearest available source of supply.

        B.     Purchases of a commodity that can be obtained only from one vendor.

        C.    Purchases of professional services. This exemption applies without limitation to purchases of: architectural services; bond services; election services; engineering services; insurance services; legal services; public relations services; real estate services; and solid waste disposal services.

        D.    Purchases made in cooperation with the state, the county or another government entity for the purpose of obtaining a lower price upon the same terms, conditions and specifications. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.030 Formal Bid Procedure.
        A.     Requirement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases of supplies and equipment having an estimated value greater than $20,000 shall be made from the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section.

        B.     Bid Invitation Notice. The bid invitation notice shall describe the articles to be purchased, shall indicate the time and place for bid opening and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured.

        1.     Published Notice. Bid invitation notices shall be published at least 10 days before the opening of bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city. If there is no such paper, then notice shall be given by public posting.

        2.     Bidders’ List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective vendors whose names are on the bidders’ list or who have requested that their names be added thereto.

        3.     Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases by posting the notice on a public bulletin board at city hall.

        C.    Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary, the purchasing officer may prescribe bidder’s security in the bid invitation notice. The bid security shall be returned to bidders provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit its bid security upon failure to execute the purchase contract within 10 days after mailing of the notice of award of the contract.

        D.    Bid Opening Procedure. The purchasing officer shall receive only those bids that are sealed and identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place indicated in the bid invitation notice.

        E.     Bid Rejection. In its absolute discretion, the city council may reject all submitted bids and direct the purchasing officer to issue a new bid invitation notice.

        F.     Contract Award. The city council shall award the purchase contract to the lowest responsible bidder. If the lowest responsible bidder fails to execute the contract within the allotted time, then the city council may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder. In such event, the bidder’s security of the lowest responsible bidder shall be applied to the difference between the low bid and the next lowest bid and any surplus shall be returned to the lowest responsible bidder.

        G.    Tie Bids. If the lowest monetary bid is submitted by multiple responsive bidders, then the city council may award the purchase contract to the lowest responsible bidder that it deems appropriate. Alternatively, the city council may accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening.

        H.    Performance Bonds. When deemed necessary, the city council may require a performance bond as a condition to the award of a purchase contract. If a performance bond is required, then the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the bid invitation notice. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.035 Informal Bid Procedure.
        A.     Requirement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases of supplies and equipment having an estimated value less than $20,000 shall be made by written contract pursuant to the applicable procedure set forth in this section.

        B.     Low Tier Purchases. The purchasing officer may purchase supplies and equipment having an estimated value not more than $1,000 by soliciting a single vendor.

        C.    Middle Tier Purchases. The purchasing officer may purchase supplies and equipment having an estimated value in excess of $1,000 and not more than $5,000 by soliciting verbal bids from at least 3 vendors. The purchase contract shall be awarded to the vendor offering the lowest acceptable quotation.

        D.    High Tier Purchases. The purchasing officer may purchase supplies and equipment having an estimated value in excess of $5,000 and not more than $20,000 by soliciting written bids from at least 3 vendors. The purchase contract shall be awarded to the vendor offering the lowest acceptable quotation. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.040 Inspection and Testing.
        The purchasing officer shall inspect purchased supplies and equipment to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase contract. The purchasing officer may require chemical and physical tests of samples. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.20.045 Council Authority to Waive Requirements.
        A.     The city council may award a contract for the purchase of supplies and equipment without satisfaction of the bid requirements of this chapter upon making a finding that, due to the circumstances applicable to the particular purchase, the net cost to the city will be reduced by dispensing with bidding. Such finding shall be set forth in a resolution authorizing the waiver of the bid requirements.

        B.     The city council may award a contract for the purchase of supplies and equipment to other than the lowest responsible bidder upon making a finding that, due to the circumstances applicable to the particular purchase, the net cost to the city will be reduced by selection of a different vendor. Such finding shall be set forth in a resolution authorizing the waiver of the lowest responsible bidder requirement. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 3.25 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER
3.25.005 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Assistant Director: assistant director of emergency services.

        Director: director of emergency services.

        Emergency: actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property in the city caused.

        Emergency Organization: city officers and employees, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups or persons who by agreement or law are charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during an emergency. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.25.010 Disaster Council Membership.
        The disaster council has previously been created and shall consist of the following:

        A.     The mayor, who shall be chair of the council.

        B.     The director, who shall be vice-chair of the council.

        C.    The assistant director.

        D.    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of the city.

        E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.25.015 Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
        The disaster council shall have the following powers and duties:

        A.     To develop and submit to the city council emergency and mutual aid plans, ordinances, resolutions and agreements.

        B.     To provide for the organization, powers, duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.25.020 Director and Assistant Director Powers and Duties.
        A.     The director shall have the following powers and duties:

        1.     To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session.

        2.     To proclaim the existence of a local emergency if the city council is not in session. Such proclamation shall be null and void seven days after issuance unless ratified by the city council.

        3.     To request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency if locally available resources are inadequate to cope with an emergency.

        4.     To direct the efforts of the emergency organization.

        5.     To represent the city in dealings pertaining to an emergency.

        6.     To designate the order of succession of the director’s office, which order shall be subject to city council approval and shall be effective in the event the director is unavailable during an emergency.

        7.     To do the following in the event of a proclaimed local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency:

        a.     Issue regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency. Such regulations shall be confirmed or repealed by the city council at the earliest practical time.

        b.     Obtain vital supplies and equipment at fair market value or to commandeer such items if immediately required.

        c.     Command the aid of as many citizens of the city as deemed necessary. This provision applies only to a state of emergency or state of war emergency.

        d.     Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency.

        B.     The assistant director shall have the following powers and duties:

        1.     Develop emergency plans under the director’s supervision and with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs.

        2.     Manage emergency programs of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.25.025 Expenditures.
        Expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be conclusively deemed to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

3.25.030 Prohibitions.
        No person shall do any of the following during an emergency:

        A.     Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of a regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed by this chapter.

        B.     Perform any act forbidden by regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if the act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense thereof.

        C.    Wear, carry or display without authority any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1515)

Title 4 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 4.05 COMMUNITY SERVICE FEES
Chapter 4.10 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT DEVELOPMENT FEE
Chapter 4.15 SPECIAL FUNDS
Chapter 4.20 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
Chapter 4.25 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 4.30 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAX
Chapter 4.35 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 4.40 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 4.45 ENVIRONMENTAL RESERVE TAX
Chapter 4.50 UTILITY USERS TAX
Chapter 4.55 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX

Chapter 4.05 COMMUNITY SERVICE FEES
4.05.005 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Community Service: tree trimming service, street sweeping service and any other public service provided by the city to the residents and property owners of the city.

        Community Service Fee: the charge for a community service.

        Dwelling: any building designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.

        Dwelling Unit: one or more rooms in a dwelling designed as a unit of occupancy by not more than one family for living and sleeping purposes and having kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants of such dwelling unit.

        Nonresidential Property: real property within the city that is not used for residential occupancy. Nonresidential property includes without limitation: motels; hotels; restaurants; vacant property; and any other building or structure designed or intended to be used for commercial or industrial purposes. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.05.010 Imposition.
        The city council may, by resolution, impose a community service fee upon each dwelling unit and nonresidential property in the city. The amount of such fee shall not exceed the cost of providing the community service for which the fee is imposed. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.05.015 Billing.
        The community service fee for a particular dwelling unit or nonresidential property shall be billed on the same bill and to the same person as the water bill for that unit or property. In the event the city does not furnish water service to a dwelling unit or nonresidential property, the community service fee for such unit or property shall be billed independently. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.05.020 Delinquency.
        The community service fee shall be due on the 1st day of every month following the reading of the water meter by the city. A community service fee shall be deemed delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days of the due date. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.05.025 Collection.
        A.     Interest. Any amount of a community service fee that is not paid within the allotted period shall bear interest at the then maximum legal rate. Additionally, if the city incurs costs for the collection of such fee, those collection costs (including attorney’s fees) may be charged.

        B.     Procedure. Community service fees that remain unpaid for a period of 60 days after their due date may be collected from the owner of record of the premises, along with interest and collection costs, in accordance with the procedure set forth below. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from utilizing any other available legal remedy for collecting delinquent fees.

        1.     Once each year the city council shall cause to be prepared a report of delinquent charges and costs of collection. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing on the report and any objections thereto.

        2.     Not less than 10 days before the date set for the hearing on the report, the city clerk shall mail notice of the hearing to each property owner listed in the report.

        3.     At the hearing, the city council shall receive objections to the report and may modify the report in any manner deemed just. Following the hearing, the city council shall by resolution confirm the report.

        4.     The delinquent charges and collection costs set forth in the confirmed report shall constitute a special assessment against the respective properties listed in the report and shall be a lien on such properties for the applicable amounts. The city manager shall cause a certified copy of the confirmed report to be filed with the county auditor for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective properties as they appear on the current assessment roll. The city manager also shall cause a certified copy of the confirmed report to be filed with the county recorder. Upon recordation of the confirmed report, the assessment shall constitute a lien against the parcel. The assessment shall thereafter be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general taxes of the city on real property. The assessments and the annual interest thereon shall be payable and become delinquent at the same times, and shall bear the same proportionate penalties and interest after delinquency, as do the general taxes on real property within the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.05.030 Disposition.
        All proceeds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and may be expended for any proper municipal purpose. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.10 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT DEVELOPMENT FEE
4.10.005 Purpose.
        The city council previously has established a transportation facilities and programs development fee that imposes upon commercial, industrial and residential development projects an equitable share of the cost of mitigating future transportation facility and program needs created by such projects. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Application Fee: the transportation facilities and program development application fee.

        Building Permit: as defined in the Uniform California Code.

        Certificate of Occupancy: a permit to occupy and use a building.

        Developer: an applicant for a building permit for a development project.

        Development Project: (1) a construction or addition of commercial or industrial floor area that requires a building permit; (2) a construction of residential dwelling units that requires a building permit; and (3) a change of property use that requires a building permit and that will generate additional daily trips above the amount that can be reasonably associated with the current use of such property.

        Public Facilities: publicly owned or operated buildings and structures used for conducting government business. “Public facilities” includes without limitation: city hall; police and fire stations; offices; and equipment yards. “Public facilities” does not include private commercial development projects on leased public land.

        Transportation Facilities: projects to improve the city’s transportation system that require physical alteration of such system. Examples of transportation facilities include without limitation: roadway improvements; signalization improvements; and other ancillary public right-of-way improvements.

        Transportation Impact Fee: the transportation facilities and programs development fee.

        Transportation Programs: projects to improve the city’s transportation system that do not require physical alteration of such system. Examples of transportation programs include without limitation: ride sharing programs; transit subsidies; alternative work week scheduling; and education/marketing programs designed to reduce automobile trips.

        Transportation System Facilities and Programs Improvement Plan: a program for improving the city’s transportation system in order to mitigate the adverse impacts on such system resulting from a new development project.

        Trip Generation Rate: the number of peak-trips generated by each type of commercial, industrial or residential development project. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.015 Establishment of Fees.
        A.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, developers shall pay a Transportation Impact Fee in an amount established by city council resolution. The transportation impact fee generally shall be calculated as follows:

        1.     The additional development in the city anticipated to be constructed by January 1, 2000 shall be determined.

        2.     Using generally accepted trip generation rates, the number of peak-time trips generated by the additional development shall be determined. The trip generation rate for each land use category used in developing the aggregate future trip project shall be set forth in the city council resolution establishing the transportation impact fee amounts.

        3.     The cost to construct transportation facilities and implement transportation programs to mitigate the additional peak-time trips shall be determined.

        4.     The cost of new facilities and programs shall be divided by the number of additional peak-time trips to establish a trip cost factor.

        5.     The trip cost factor shall be multiplied by either the peak-trip generation rates per square foot for commercial and industrial development, or by the peak-trip generation rates per residential dwelling unit, to establish the transportation impact fee for the development project.

        B.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, developers shall pay an application fee in an amount established by city council resolution. Such fee shall be based on the estimated administrative and personnel costs of determining the transportation impact fee amount to be paid by the developer.

        C.    The city manager shall be responsible for calculating the fees required by this section. This calculation shall be made at the time of application for the building permit for the development project.

        D.    The city council shall approve a transportation system facilities and programs improvement plan prior to or concurrently with the resolution establishing the amounts of the transportation impact fee. The plan shall describe the nature and extent of these improvements and their associated cost estimates. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.020 Exemptions.
        The following development projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

        A.     Public facilities.

        B.     Public elementary schools and secondary schools.

        C.    Multiple family residential developments with more than 25% affordable housing dwelling units.

        D.    Residential development that will not result in an increase in dwelling units over those existing on the project’s site.

        E.     Development projects for which all discretionary permits have been granted prior to October 25, 1989. This exemption does not override any condition of approval that requires payment of fees for mitigation of adverse traffic impacts. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.025 Payment.
        A.     The application fee shall be paid at the time a building permit application is submitted for a development project that is subject to the transportation impact fee.

        B.     The transportation impact fee shall be paid as follows:

        1.     Commercial/Industrial Development Projects. The fee shall be paid at the time of building permit issuance for commercial or industrial development projects. Notwithstanding the preceding, if a commercial or industrial development project will be constructed in phases, and if separate building permits will be issued for each phase, then the fee may be paid separately for each phase in proportion to the percentage of the project’s floor area to be constructed pursuant to each building permit. Alternatively, the fee shall be paid in full at the time of the issuance of the first building permit.

        2.     Residential Development Projects. The fee shall be paid prior to final inspection for the first dwelling unit of the project. For purposes of this provision, “final inspection” has the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 66007. If the fee is not paid prior to issuance of the building permit for the project, then the developer shall execute a contract with the city guaranteeing payment of the fee prior to final inspection. Such contract shall be recorded with the county recorder and shall constitute a lien for the payment of the fee. The lien shall be enforceable against successors in interest to the developer. Such contract also shall require the developer to provide appropriate notification of the opening of any escrow or the sale of the property for which the building permit is issued and to provide escrow instructions that the fee shall be paid from the sale proceeds in escrow prior to disbursement of proceeds to the seller. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.030 Adjustment.
        The city council may approve adjustments or waiver of the transportation impact fee, or modification of the payment schedule, upon request of affected developers. Any such request shall be made on an application form provided by the city and shall be submitted no later than the time of the building permit application. The city council shall consider the request at a public hearing within 60 days after the filing of a complete application. No adjustment or waiver of the transportation impact fee shall be approved unless the city council finds that there is not a reasonable relationship between the development project’s impact on transportation facilities and programs in the city and either the fee amount or the type of transportation facilities or programs to be provided. No modification of the fee schedule shall be approved unless the city council finds that there are special circumstances applicable to the developer or the development project that justify a different schedule. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.035 Refunds.
        A.     Upon application, transportation impact fees collected by the city shall be refunded if either of the following circumstances is shown to have occurred: (1) the fee was erroneously collected; or (2) the development project’s building permit has expired and no extension has been granted.

        B.     Refund applications for fees collected erroneously shall be filed no later than 90 days after payment of the fee. Refund applications for fees pertaining to abandoned projects shall be filed no later than 90 days after the expiration of the building permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.040 Credits.
        A person shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the fees required by this chapter in an amount determined by the city manager if that person constructs transportation facilities that are included in the transportation system facilities and programs improvement plan applicable to the development project constructed by such person. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.045 Reserve Account.
        Pursuant to Government Code Section 66006, there is a separate reserve account in the city’s general fund entitled the “Transportation Facilities and Programs Improvement Fund.” The fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be placed into such reserve account and used solely for the purpose of providing transportation facilities and programs within the city. All monies in the reserve account shall be held separate from other city funds, and all interest or other earnings of the reserve account shall be credited to that account. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.050 Reserve Account Expenditures.
        All monies and interest in the transportation facilities and programs improvement fund shall be expended on transportation facilities and programs approved by the city council. Such expenditures may include without limitation the following:

        A.     Reimbursement of costs incurred by the city for development of transportation facilities and programs. Reimbursable costs include without limitation expenses related to the following: land acquisition; planning; legal advice; engineering; design; construction; and equipment.

        B.     Reimbursement of costs incurred by the city in connection with the administration of the reserve account.

        C.    Issuance of bonds or notes, secured by the reserve account, for the provision of transportation facilities and programs.

        D.    Land acquisition, planning, design and construction (including rehabilitation) that result in the provision of transportation facilities and programs. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.055 Review of Fee Formula.
        Prior to July 1st, during the budget review process, the city council shall review the degree to which fees collected pursuant to this chapter are mitigating the impacts caused by new development projects on transportation facilities and programs. Five years after the effective date of this chapter, the city council shall consider a report by the director of development services reviewing the transportation impact fee formula in order to determine whether any adjustments are warranted. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.10.060 Additional Transportation Facilities and Programs.
        This chapter shall not limit the city’s police power authority to require, as a condition of development, additional transportation facilities and transportation programs by persons using real property within the city. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.15 SPECIAL FUNDS
4.15.005 Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.
        The city council has previously created a special gas tax street improvement fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts received by the city pursuant to Streets and Highways Code Sections 180 through 207 for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways. Disbursements from such fund shall be used only for the purposes authorized by and in accordance with state law. Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be accredited to the fund. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.15.010 Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund.
        The city council has previously created an air quality improvement trust fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts received by the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 44243 and 44244, along with any other monies designated by the city council. Disbursements from such fund shall be used only to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs. Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be accredited to the fund. For purposes of this section, the term “mobile source air pollution reduction program” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution emitted from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Quality Management District prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 40460 through 40470. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.15.015 Revenue Sharing Trust Fund.
        The city council has previously created a revenue sharing trust fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts received by the city pursuant to the State and Local Assistance Act of 1972. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.15.020 Self-Insurer’s Loss Reserve Fund.
        A.     The city council has previously created a self-insurer’s loss fund trustee account. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts from those sources as designated by and appropriated by the city council. Disbursements from the fund shall be used only to pay for the following:

        1.     Medical and disability compensation benefits as required by state law for city employees who incur job-related injuries.

        2.     Premiums for worker’s compensation insurance.

        3.     Costs of worker’s compensation claims administration as performed by city staff or by an outside consultant.

        4.     Fees for legal services required to minimize the city’s worker’s compensation liability and to recover worker’s compensation costs from prior insurers and other third parties.

        5.     Personnel costs associated with the temporary replacement of injured employees.

        6.     Salaries, fees and expenses of medical and safety consultants and staff, including appropriate city staff personnel for their expenses.

        7.     Any other costs required for the city to satisfy its legal obligations under the state worker’s compensation laws; to reduce employee injuries and the employee lost time and suffering associated therewith; and to participate in and pay the dues of organizations that serve the needs of employers obligated to pay worker’s compensation benefits.

        B.     The city council has previously created a liability insurance reserve fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts from those sources as designated by and appropriated by the city council. Disbursements from the fund shall be used only to pay for the following:

        1.     Approved liability claims against the city that are within the self-insured limits set by the city council or that fall outside of the scope of coverage provided by the city’s excess insurance.

        2.     Costs associated with liability claims that are within the self-insured limits set by city council. These costs include legal costs, risk management costs, loss prevention program costs, insurance analyst service costs, claims, settlements, additional special investigation service costs, and other related costs. All payments from the fund shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.15.025 Water Funds.
        A.     The city council has previously created a water operations fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts generated from sources designated by the city council as funds secured through the sale and distribution of water and water services. Disbursements from the fund shall be used only to pay for the following:

        1.     Costs associated with the maintenance and operations of the water utility.

        2.     Costs associated with the servicing or the sale or payment of water bonds.

        Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be credited to the fund. The city council may authorize direct transfers from the fund to other city funds during the fiscal year as the need arises so long as all monies transferred shall be returned to the fund by June 30th of the fiscal year.

        B.     The city council has previously created a water plant and equipment fund. The purpose of such fund is to accumulate sufficient monies to pay for the replacement of and capital improvements to the city’s water system. The city council shall annually consider appropriations to the fund in accordance with generally accepted methods of determining depreciation on buildings, machinery and other water system equipment. Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be credited to the fund. The city council may authorize direct transfers from the fund to other city funds during the fiscal year as the need arises so long as all monies transferred shall be returned to the fund by June 30th of the fiscal year. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.15.030 Sewer Funds.
        A.     The city council has previously created a sewer operations fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts generated from sources designated by the city council as funds secured through the provision of sewer services. Disbursements from the fund shall be used only to pay those costs directly or indirectly associated with the maintenance and operations of the sewer utility. Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be credited to the fund. The city council may authorize direct transfers from the fund to other city funds during the fiscal year as the need arises so long as all monies transferred shall be returned to the fund by June 30th of the fiscal year.

        B.     The city council has previously created a sewer plant and equipment fund. The purpose of such fund is to accumulate sufficient monies to pay for the replacement of and capital improvements to the city’s sewer system. The city council shall annually consider appropriations to the fund in accordance with generally accepted methods of determining depreciation on buildings, machinery and other sewer system equipment. Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be credited to the fund. The city council may authorize direct transfers from the fund to other city funds during the fiscal year as the need arises so long as all monies transferred shall be returned to the fund by June 30th of the fiscal year. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.15.035 Landscaping and Lighting District No. 1 Improvement Fund.
        The city council has previously created a Landscaping and Lighting District No. 1 improvement fund. Such fund shall receive as revenues those amounts designated by the city council as funds secured through the establishment of Landscaping and Lighting District No. 1. Disbursements from the fund shall be used only to pay those costs associated with the maintenance and operations for such district. Until expended, all monies in the fund shall be invested to earn interest that shall be accredited to the fund. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.20 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
4.20.005 Transfer.
        The duties of the assessment of city property for city taxes, the equalization and correction of the assessment, the collection, payment and enforcement of taxes, including delinquent taxes, and the redemption of property from sales or other penalty for the nonpayment of city taxes, now provided by law to be assessed by the assessor and collected by the tax collector and equalized by the city council, shall be performed by the county assessor, the county tax collector, the county auditor and the board of supervisors of the county when acting as a board of equalization. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.20.010 Payment of Collections to City.
        All moneys collected for and on behalf of the city by the county tax collector and deposited with the county treasurer shall be paid over to the city treasurer without delay. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.20.015 Compensation of County.
        Compensation paid to the county for the assessment and collection of taxes for and on behalf of the city shall not be more than 1% of the first $25,000, and not more than 0.0025% for all sums over and above that amount so collected. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.20.020 Continuation of County Duties.
        County officials shall continue to assess and collect the real and personal property taxes of the city until such time as this chapter shall be repealed by a vote of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.25 SALES AND USE TAX
4.25.005 Purpose.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter has been adopted to achieve, and shall be interpreted to accomplish, the following purposes:

        A.     To adopt sales and use tax ordinance that complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5.

        B.     To adopt sales and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the California Sales and Use Tax Law insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5.

        C.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting state sales and use taxes.

        D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.010 Operative Date.
        The operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is January 1, 1974. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.015 Rate.
        The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be 1%. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.020 Contract with State.
        The city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.025 Sales Tax.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax shall be imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.030 Place of Sale.
        A.     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or retailer’s agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

        B.     In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has multiple places of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations of the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.035 Use Tax.
        An excise tax shall be imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in this chapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.040 Adoption of State Law Provisions.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5, all of the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1 are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.045 Limitations on Adoption of State Law.
        In adopting the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. Notwithstanding the preceding, the substitution shall not be made in the following circumstances:

        A.     When the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California.

        B.     When the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

        C.    In those sections, including without limitation sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not be subject to tax by the state under such provisions.

        D.    In Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828.

        E.     In the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.050 Seller’s Permit Not Required.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6067, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.055 Exemptions.
        A.     The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

        B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sales of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5 by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

        C.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the federal government, or any foreign government.

        D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the federal government, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.055 Exemptions.
        A.     The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

        B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxations Code Division 2, Part 1.5 by any city and county, county, or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

        C.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

        D.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

        E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the federal government or any foreign government.

        F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxations Code Sections 6366 and 6366.1 the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws to the state, the federal government, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

 

*      This Section 4.25.055 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the California Legislature amending Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7202 or repealing and reenacting Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7202 to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Revenue and Taxations Code Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.

(Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.060 Amendments.
        All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code that relate to the sales and use tax and are not inconsistent with Revenue and Taxations Code Division 2; Part 1.5 shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.25.065 Enjoining Collection Forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, or action against proceedings in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Revenue and Taxations Code Division 2, Part 1.5 of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.30 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAX
4.30.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Apartment Unit: a dwelling designed for human occupancy where there are 3 or more dwelling units, each containing a kitchen, occupying a single lot or parcel of land.

        Bachelor Apartment: a dwelling or portion thereof designed for human occupancy, which has one or more rooms with bath, without kitchen or cooking facilities, in a multiple dwelling.

        Commercial Unit: any space in a building or structure designed or intended to be occupied or used for business or commercial purposes. “Commercial unit” includes without limitation sleeping rooms in hotels and motels without kitchens or kitchen facilities.

        Duplex Unit: a dwelling designed for human occupancy where there are 2 dwelling units each containing a kitchen occupying a single lot or parcel of land.

        Industrial Unit: any space in a building or structure designed or intended for manufacturing, processing, research, warehousing and similar uses.

        Mobile Home Park: any area where one or more lots or spaces are rented or held out for rent to be occupied by a house trailer, travel trailer, mobile home, camper or similar vehicle.

        Residential Unit: a single-family dwelling, designed for human occupancy where there is only one such unit on a lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.010 Rates.
        The rates of the tax are:

        A.     Single-family dwelling: $75 for each dwelling unit.

        B.     Duplex unit: $65 for each dwelling unit.

        C.    Apartment unit: $55 for each dwelling unit.

        D.    Bachelor apartment: $50 for each dwelling unit.

        E.     Mobile home park space: $45 for each space or lot.

        F.     Commercial: For each commercial building or commercial unit in a building, the amount of 1¢ per square foot or gross floor area including any area in a building designed for the parking of vehicles.

        G.    Industrial: For each industrial building or industrial unit in a building, the amount of 1¢ per square foot of gross floor area including any area in a building designed for the parking of vehicles. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.015 Imposition.
        A.     An excise tax shall be imposed upon the construction and occupancy of each residential unit, apartment unit, duplex unit, bachelor apartment, mobile home park, space, commercial unit, and industrial unit in the city.

        B.     No person shall begin construction of any residential building, commercial or industrial unit or building or any mobile home park in the city without first having paid the tax and any penalty and interest due the city under this chapter.

        C.    No occupancy permit shall be issued for, and no person shall occupy or offer for occupancy, any residential building, commercial or industrial unit or building or any space in a mobile home park in the city unless the tax and any penalty and interest imposed upon the construction and occupancy thereof by this chapter have been paid. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.020 Exemption for Replacement Units or Spaces.
        The city shall not impose an excise tax for a new unit or space to be constructed and occupied where such new unit or space is replacing a demolished unit or space, based upon a formula of one exempted unit or space per one replaced unit or space. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.025 Determination.
        The amount of the tax due hereunder shall be determined at the time a building permit is sought for the construction of residential buildings, commercial or industrial units or buildings or for the construction or reconstruction of any mobile home park, and the full amount of the tax shall be due and payable concurrently with the application for such permit. If such tax is not fully paid on or before the date the permit is issued, the tax or the amount thereof not paid shall thereupon become delinquent. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.030 Delinquency.
        There shall be added to the tax for any unit or so much of the tax as becomes delinquent a penalty of 25%, which shall thereupon become payable in the same manner as the tax. The tax and penalty shall bear interest at the prime lending rate per month until paid. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.035 Collection.
        The director of administrative services/treasurer shall collect the tax and any penalty and interest due hereunder. The full amount due under this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. An action for the collection thereof may be commenced in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.040 Refunds.
        Any tax, penalty or interest paid to the city under this chapter for any building or unit of a building or mobile home park that is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the taxpayer and a showing to the satisfaction of the director of administrative services/treasurer that the building, unit or mobile home park has not been constructed or construction commenced and that the building permit issued for such building, unit or mobile home park has been cancelled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction of such building, unit or mobile home park. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.30.045 Disposition.
        All proceeds from the tax, penalty and interest collected under this chapter shall be paid into a special capital outlays fund of the city entitled “Capital Outlays Fund for Acquiring, Constructing and Equipping of Fire Stations, Parks, and Public Service Facilities,” which fund has previously been created. Such fund shall be used only for the purpose of acquiring, building, improving, expanding and equipping city fire stations, city parks and other public service facilities as determined by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.35 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
4.35.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Hotel: any structure, or any portion of any structure, that is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. “Hotel” includes without limitation: hotel; inn; tourist home or house; motel; studio hotel; bachelor hotel; lodging house; rooming house; apartment house; dormitory; public or private club; mobile home; or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof.

        Occupancy: the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

        Operator: the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator utilizes a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

        Rent: the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

        Tax Administrator: city treasurer.

        Transient: any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.010 Imposition.
        A.     Rate. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 12% of the rent charged by the operator.

        B.     Payment. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator.

        C.    Liability. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator that has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.

        D.    Maximum. Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel shall not be required to pay the tax for any day in excess of 30 consecutive days of such occupancy. (Ord. 1541; Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.015 Sublessor Liability.
        In the event that an agreement exists between the hotel and any person for occupancy for a period in excess of 30 days, and in the event that such person allows occupancy by another person as subtenant, guest, licensee or permittee, the person who has made the agreement with the hotel shall be subject to and shall pay the tax provided for herein. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.020 Exemptions.
        A.     No tax shall be imposed upon:

        1.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided.

        2.     Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business.

        3.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

        4.     Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 31 consecutive days or more pursuant to an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant.

        B.     No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.025 Collection.
        Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.030 Prohibited Advertisements.
        No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.035 Registration Certificate.
        Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and shall obtain a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

        A.     The name of the operator.

        B.     The address of the hotel.

        C.    The date upon which the certificate was issued.

        The substance of the following statement: “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Seal Beach Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting the tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying all applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City of Seal Beach. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.040 Remittance.
        Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period that may be established by the tax administrator, make a report to the tax administrator, on forms provided by such official, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the report is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if deemed necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.045 Delinquency.
        A.     Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

        B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10% penalty first imposed.

        C.    Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto.

        D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the prime lending rate per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

        E.     Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.050 Tax Administrator Determination.
        A.     If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as deemed appropriate to obtain facts and information on which to estimate the tax due. Upon gathering sufficient facts, the tax administrator shall determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties referenced in this chapter.

        B.     The tax administrator shall provide notice of the assessment to the operator. An operator may within 10 days after the service of notice request a hearing with the tax administrator. If the operator fails to file a timely request, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If a request is timely filed, the tax administrator shall provide not less than 5 days written notice to the operator of a hearing to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence contesting the assessment, or any portion thereof. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person of such determination and the amount of tax, interest and penalties. The operator shall pay such amount within 15 days unless an appeal of the tax administrator’s determination is appealed as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.055 Appeal.
        An operator may appeal the determination made pursuant to Section 4.35.050 by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 10 days of the service of the determination. The city clerk shall fix a time and place for a hearing before the city council, and provide written notice to the operator at least 5 days before the hearing. After the hearing, the city council shall issue its decision and findings. The decision and findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive. The city shall provide written notice to the operator of the council’s decision and findings within 10 days of the decision. Any amount assessed shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.060 Records Maintenance.
        It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of 3 years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.065 Refunds.
        A.     Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in this section if a written claim, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within 3 years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

        B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

        C.    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

        D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes a right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.35.070 Violations.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim that makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.40 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
4.40.005 Authority.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.40.010 Imposition.
        A tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500, or fractional part thereof, shall be imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.40.015 Payment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.40.020 Exemptions.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the following:

        A.     Any instrument or writing given to secure a debt.

        B.     Any deed, instrument or writing to which the federal government, a state, territory or political subdivision thereof is a party, when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

        C.    The making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment that is either:

        1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended.

        2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.

        3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.

        4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

        This subsection shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within 5 years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.

        D.    The making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if all of the following are satisfied:

        1.     The order recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.

        2.     The order specifies the property that is ordered to be conveyed.

        3.     The conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

        E.     Partnerships.

        1.     In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if both of the following are satisfied:

        a.     The partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.

        b.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

        2.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.40.025 Administration.
        The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 6.7 and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.40.030 Refunds.
        Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 5096 et seq. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.40.035 Operative Date.
        This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq., or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is the later. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 4.45 ENVIRONMENTAL RESERVE TAX
4.45.005 Findings.
        The city council previously has determined that the development and construction of new residential living units within the city creates an immediate and present danger to the existing quality of life and ecology of the city, and threatens to contaminate and pollute the air, water and land within and surrounding the city, and threatens to burden and overtax existing public facilities that provide public services, police and fire protection, public utilities, water, and the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage, which thus pose a direct threat and danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants, and their environment. The city council further determined that the imposition and collection of a special, non-recurring tax upon the occupancy and construction of new residential dwelling units within the city is the most practical and equitable method of providing revenues with which the city may address the serious ecological and environmental problems created by the occupancy and construction of such new residential dwelling units within the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Dwelling Unit: any dwelling designed for human occupancy that has one or more rooms, with or without a kitchen or cooking facilities. “Dwelling unit” does not include a “hotel” as defined in the transient occupancy tax ordinance.

        Conforming Dwelling Unit: any dwelling unit situated within a RLD Zone and having a minimum floor area of at least 1,200 square feet, and any such dwelling unit situated within a RMD Zone and having a floor area of at least 1,000 square feet and any such dwelling unit within a RHD Zone and having a floor area of at least 700 square feet.

        Nonconforming Dwelling Unit: any dwelling unit situated within a RLD Zone and having a floor area of less than 1,200 square feet, and any such dwelling situated within an RMD Zone and having a floor area less than 1,000 square feet, and any such dwelling unit within an RHD Zone and having a floor area of less than 700 square feet. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.015 Imposition.
        A.     An environmental reserve tax shall be imposed upon the occupancy and construction of each new dwelling unit within the city.

        B.     No occupancy permit shall be issued for, and no person shall occupy or offer for occupancy, any dwelling unit in the city unless the tax and any penalty or interest imposed upon the occupancy and construction thereof by this chapter has been paid. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.020 Rates.
        The rates of the environmental reserve tax are:

        A.     151¢ per square foot for each square foot of floor area within each conforming dwelling unit located on any of the first 3 floors of any building so occupied or constructed within the city.

        B.     351¢ per square foot for each square foot of floor area within each nonconforming dwelling unit located on any of the first 3 floors of any building so occupied or constructed within the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.025 Determination.
        The amount of tax due hereunder shall be determined prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any dwelling unit subject to the tax. The full amount of the tax shall be due and payable to the city concurrently with any application for an occupancy permit for such dwelling unit or units. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.030 Delinquency.
        There shall be added to the tax for any such dwelling unit, or so much of the tax as becomes delinquent, a penalty of 25%, which shall thereupon become payable in the same manner as the tax. The tax and penalty shall bear interest at the prime lending rate per month until paid. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.035 Collection.
        The director of finance shall collect the tax and any penalty and interest due hereunder. The full amount due under this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. An action for the collection thereof may be commenced in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.040 Refunds.
        Any tax, penalty or interest paid under this chapter for any dwelling unit that is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the taxpayer and showing to the satisfaction of the director of administrative services/treasurer that the dwelling unit has not been constructed or construction commenced and that the building permit issued for such dwelling unit has been cancelled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction of such dwelling unit. (Ord. 1515)

 

4.45.045 Disposition.
        All proceeds from the tax, penalty and interest collected under this chapter shall be paid into a special capital outlays fund of the city to provide open space, improve the quality of life and the ecology of the city, or of any distressed or environmentally endangered portion thereof, and to fight pollution and contamination of the air, water and land within and surrounding the city, to be entitled the “Environmental Reserve Fund,” which fund has previously been created. Such fund shall be used only for the purposes of purchasing land, constructing buildings and improvements, and purchasing machinery, equipment and other capital type facilities with which the city may develop, improve, and expand public parks, public services, police and fire protection and public utilities, water, and the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage. In expending such fund for these purposes, the city may act alone or may exercise its powers jointly with any other public entity to accomplish any of the foregoing purposes for the benefit of the whole, or any portion, of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 
Chapter 4.50 UTILITY USERS TAX
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 1610, 1550 and 1515.

 

4.50.005 Purpose.
        The taxes imposed by this chapter previously have been established solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the city. The revenues generated thereby shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and may be expended for any proper municipal purpose. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        Ancillary telecommunication services shall mean services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services:

        1.     Conference bridging service shall mean an ancillary service that links 2 or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.

        2.     Detailed telecommunications billing service shall mean an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

        3.     Directory assistance shall mean an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information.

        4.     Vertical service shall mean an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.

        5.     Voice mail service shall mean an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.

        Billing address shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service provider submits invoices or bills for payment by the service users.

        City shall mean the City of Seal Beach.

        City manager shall mean the city manager, or his or her authorized representative.

        Gas shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternative hydrocarbon fuel, which may be substituted therefor.

        Mobile telecommunications service shall mean commercial mobile radio service, as defined in Section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations there under.

        Month shall mean a calendar month.

        Non-utility service supplier shall mean:

        1.     A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City of Seal Beach, which generates electricity for the sale to others, and shall include but not be limited to any publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator, (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;

        2.     An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a provider of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City of Seal Beach, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the City of Seal Beach; and

        3.     A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City of Seal Beach, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the City of Seal Beach.

        Paging service shall mean a “telecommunications service” that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds.

        Person shall mean, without limitation, any domestic, non-profit or foreign corporation; firm; association; syndicate; joint stock company; partnership of any kind; limited liability company; joint venture; club; trust: Massachusetts business or common law trust; estate; society; cooperative; receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court; any natural individual; joint power agency, municipal district or municipal corporation, other than the City of Seal Beach.

        Place of primary use shall mean the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.

        Post-paid telecommunication service shall mean the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.

        Prepaid telecommunication service (including prepaid mobile telecommunication service) shall mean the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed.

        Private telecommunication service shall mean a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).

        Service address shall mean the residential street address or the business street address of the service user. For a telecommunications service user, “service address” means either:

        1.     The location of the service user’s telecommunication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or,

        2.     If the location in paragraph 1 of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address shall mean the location of the service user’s place of primary use.

        3.     For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the point of sale of the services where the point of sale is within the city, or if unknown, the known address of the service user (e.g., billing address or location associated with the service number), which locations shall be presumed to be the place of primary use.

        Service supplier shall mean any person, including the city, who provides or sells telecommunication, electric or gas service to a user of such services within the city. The term shall include any person required to collect, or self-collect under Section 4.50.040 hereof, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric or gas suppliers.

        Service user shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

        State shall mean the State of California.

        Tax administrator shall mean the Seal Beach Finance Director, or his or her authorized representative.

        Telecommunications services shall mean the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used, and includes broadband service (e.g., digital subscriber line (DSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband, including Wi-Fi, WiMAX, and Wireless MESH) to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such broadband services, now or in the future. The term “telecommunications service” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such service is referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or is classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data service that is functionally integrated with “telecommunication services.” Telecommunications services include, but is not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; intrastate, interstate and international telecommunication services; all forms of VoIP service; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers call in to prerecorded or live service).

        VoIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol) shall mean the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet Protocol network.

        800 service shall mean a “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name “800,” “855,” “866,” “877,” and “888” toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

        900 service shall mean an inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. “900 service” does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the “telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed under the name “900” service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.015 Constitutional and Statutory Exemptions.
        A.     The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to:

        1.     Any person or service if imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute or the Constitution of the State of California, or the Constitution of the United States; or

        2.     The city.

        B.     Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of a users’ tax collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.

        C.    The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 4.50.095. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city administrator, or designee, pursuant to Section 4.50.095 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

        D.    The city council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified period of time. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.020 Low Income Senior Citizen.
        The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:

        A.     Any individual 65 years of age or older who uses telephone, electric, or gas services, in or upon any premises occupied by such individual, provided that the combined adjusted gross income (as such term is used for federal income tax purposes) of all members of the household in which such individual resides, for the calendar year prior to the fiscal year (July 1st through June 30th) for which the exemption provided in this section is applied (as documented by a copy of the current federal income tax return(s) or California income tax return(s)) is below the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Section 8 Income Limit established for the calendar year ending within the fiscal year for which the exemption is applied. The income limit set forth in this subsection in the year 2014 is $45,650. If for any reason, the HUD Section 8 Income limit is not adjusted in a given year, the income limit for purposes of the exemption provided in this section shall be established by reference to an index deemed appropriate for these purposes by the city council.

        B.     Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this chapter because of age and household income, may file an application with the finance director for an exemption. Such application shall be made upon forms supplied by the finance director and shall recite facts under oath that qualify the applicant for an exemption. The finance director shall review all such applications and certify as exempt those applicants determined to qualify therefor and shall notify all service suppliers affected that such exemption has been approved, stating the name of the applicant, the address to which such exempt service is being supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure. Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall not be required to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this chapter from such exempt service user until further notice by the finance director is given. The service supplier shall eliminate such exempt service user from its tax billing procedure for the 1st regular full billings dated on or after November 1, 1975, upon receipt of such notice from the finance director prior to October 1, 1975, and thereafter, no later than 60 days after receipt of such notice from the finance director.

        C.    All exemptions shall continue and be renewed automatically by the finance director so long as the prerequisite facts supporting the initial qualification for exemption shall continue; provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual; further provided, such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence. Any individual exempt from the tax shall notify the finance director within 10 days of any change in fact or circumstance that might disqualify said individual from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemption provided by this section when the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases to exist. Any service supplier who determines by any means that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of an exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter or connection shall immediately notify the finance director of such fact. The finance director shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with, and, where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.025 Telecommunication Users Tax.
        A.     There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using telecommunication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 10% of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the telecommunication services supplier or its billing agent, or as otherwise provided by law. There is a rebuttable presumption that telecommunication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this section. There is also a rebuttable presumption that prepaid telecommunication services sold within the city are primarily used, in whole or in part, within the city and are therefore subject to taxation under this section. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services.

        B.     “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this section, sourcing rules for the taxation of other telecommunication services, including but not limited to post-paid telecommunication services, prepaid telecommunication services, and private telecommunication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation.

        C.    The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this section, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services, or charges therefor, that is subject to the tax of subsection A of this section. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2)(A).

        D.    As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory or administrative fees, charges or surcharges; charges or surcharges for programs imposed by state or federal law (whether such charges or surcharges are imposed on the service supplier or the customer); local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. “Telecommunication services” shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services,” such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products.

        E.     To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telecommunication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telecommunication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

        F.     The tax on telecommunication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the 20th day of the following month. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.030 Electricity Users Tax.
        A.     There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this subsection shall be at the rate of 10% of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility service supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent.

        B.     As used in this subsection, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

        1.     Energy charges;

        2.     Distribution or transmission charges;

        3.     Metering charges;

        4.     Standby, reserves, firming, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar charges for supplemental services to self-generation service users;

        5.     Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and

        6.     Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or by any state or federal law, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing, or whether they are imposed on the service provider or the customer.

        C.    As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.

        D.    The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service providers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

        E.     As used in this section, the term “using electricity” shall not be construed to include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale, or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency.

        F.     The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 4.50.040 hereof. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this subsection shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before 20th day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the 20th day of following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.035 Gas Users Tax.
        A.     There is imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the City of Seal Beach which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 10% of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, and shall apply to all uses of gas, including but not limited to, heating, electric generation by a non-public utility, and the use of gas as a component of a manufactured product.

        B.     As used in this subsection, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

        1.     The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;

        2.     Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges);

        3.     Storage charges; provided, however, that the service provider shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service providers cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;

        4.     Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, marketing charges, administrative charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and

        5.     Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing, or whether they are imposed on the service provider or the customer.

        C.    As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.

        D.    The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial / industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

        E.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed by this section is computed charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or government agency; and charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities.

        F.     The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 4.50.040 hereof. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the 20th day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the 20th day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.040 Collection of Tax From Service Users Receiving Direct Purchase of Gas or Electricity.
        A.     Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Section 4.50.030 or 4.50.035 hereof, which produces gas or electricity for self-use; which receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services, directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter; or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the city, including any related supplemental services, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the tax administrator within 30 days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within 30 days for such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment patter of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

        B.     The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility service supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion of the tax administrator is excessive, the tax administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.045 Effect of Commingling Taxable Items with Nontaxable Items.
        If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and non-taxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.050 Substantial Nexus/Minimum Contacts.
        For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus,” “substantial economic presence,” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any telecommunication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent, affiliate or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents, affiliates or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and maintain a market in the city for the provision of utility services that are subject to a tax under this chapter (e.g., an affiliated person engaging in activities in the city that inure to the benefit of the service supplier in its development or maintenance of a market for its services in the city). (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.055 Duty to Collect—Procedures.
        A.     Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

        1.     The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 4.50.070 shall apply.

        2.     The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.

        B.     Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.060 Collection Penalties—Service Suppliers or Self-Collectors.
        A.     Taxes collected from a service user, or owed by a service user subject to Section 4.50.040 hereof, are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following business day.

        B.     If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users’ tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under Section 4.50.040 hereof on or before the due date, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first become delinquent, until paid.

        C.    The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

        D.    For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

        E.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates and/or penalty and interest provisions of this section to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by UUT public agencies, or otherwise legally established, to create a UUT central payment location or mechanism. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.065 Deficiency Determination and Assessment—Tax Application Errors.
        A.     The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

        B.     The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within 14 calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter.

        C.    If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within 30 days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

        D.    At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 4.50.095. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city administrator, or designee, pursuant to Section 4.50.090 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

        E.     Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the 30th day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be 15% on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection E.

        F.     All notices under this chapter may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.070 Administrative Remedy—Nonpaying Service Users.
        A.     Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this section certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of 2 or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

        B.     In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

        C.    The tax administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

        D.    If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15% of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.075 Actions to Collect.
        Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the City of Seal Beach as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees. In the event that a service user or service supplier owing a tax under this chapter files bankruptcy, then such debt to the city shall be deemed an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). Service suppliers who seek to collect charges for service in bankruptcy proceedings shall also include in any such claim the amount of taxes due the city for those services, unless the tax administrator determines that such duty is in conflict with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation or that such action would be administratively impractical. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.080 Additional Powers and Duties of the Tax Administrator.
        A.     The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this chapter, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2). A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office. To the extent that the tax administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that determination shall be considered an exercise of the tax administrator’s discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 or otherwise. The tax administrator is not authorized to amend the city’s methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the utility users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.

        C.    Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to Section 4.50.040 hereof) so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and are voidable by the tax administrator or the City of Seal Beach at any time.

        D.    The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period or review shall not exceed a period of 3 years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 4.50.060 for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to be a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

        E.     Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of 0.75% per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

        F.     The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

        G.    The tax administrator, with the written approval of the city manager, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the portion of the claim proposed to be released is equal to or less than $4,999; and, with the approval of the city council, may compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is greater than $4,999.

        H.    Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration the uniqueness of the product or service, industry practice or other precedence, or whether the person offers to voluntarily disclose its tax liability. The tax administrator may also participate with other utility users’ tax public agencies in conducting coordinated compliance reviews with the goal of achieving administrative efficiency and uniform tax application determinations, where possible. To encourage full disclosure and ongoing cooperation on annual compliance reviews, the tax administrator, and its agents, may enter into agreements with the tax-collecting service providers and grant prospective only effect on any changes regarding the taxation of services or charges that were previously deemed by the service provider, in good faith and without gross negligence, to be non-taxable. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith and without gross negligence, the tax administrator shall take into consideration the uniqueness of the product or service, industry practice or other precedence. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.085 Records.
        A.     It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least 3 years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax that such person may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

        B.     The tax administrator may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection.

        C.    The tax administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The tax administrator may request from a person providing transportation or distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the city, a list of the names, billing and service addresses, quantities of gas or electricity delivered, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public Utilities Code.

        D.    If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (2) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.

        E.     If any person subject to record-keeping under this chapter unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, the tax administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on such person for each day following (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.090 Refunds/Credits.
        Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded or credited as provided in this section:

        A.     The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this section.

        B.     The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the city council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See California Government Code Section 935.) The tax administrator, or the city council where the claim is in excess of $4,999 shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The tax administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

        C.    Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the city upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the tax administrator, provided that, prior to taking such credit by the service supplier (1) such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax; (2) the tax administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and (3) in the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the city, the tax administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.095 Appeals.
        A.     The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 4.50.085), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 4.50.085 hereof), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).) Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

        B.     If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 4.50.090 hereof), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator; he or she may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

        C.    The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent hearing officer selected by the city manager, or designee, no more than 30 days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least 5 calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, the city manager, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

        D.    Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the city manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

        E.     All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.100 No Injunction/Writ of Mandate.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.105 Remedies Cumulative.
        All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1643)

4.50.110 Notice of Changes to Chapter.
        If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of Public Utilities Code Section 799. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.115 Future Amendment to Cited Statute.
        Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of a utility service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent.

        To the extent that the city’s authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.120 Penalties.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or an infraction at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.125 Annual Rate Review and Independent Audit of Tax Collection, Exemption, Remittance and Expenditure.
        The rates set forth in this chapter shall be reviewed by the city council on an annual basis at a regularly scheduled meeting in conjunction with the adoption of the budget. The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this section have been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with this section, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed. (Ord. 1643)

 

4.50.130 No Increase in Tax Percentage or Change in Methodology Without Voter Approval—Amendment or Repeal.
        This chapter may be repealed or amended by the city council without a vote of the people. However, as required by Chapter XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment provision that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:

        A.     The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this chapter, if the city council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax;

        B.     An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as such interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter;

        C.    The establishment of a class of persons that is exempt or excepted from the tax or the discontinuation of any such exemption or exception (other than the discontinuation of an exemption or exception specifically set forth in this chapter); and

        D.    The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, even if the city had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. (Ord. 1643)

Chapter 4.55 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
4.55.005 Short Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “City of Seal Beach Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance of 2018.” The City of Seal Beach hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.010 Operative Date.
        “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.015 Purpose.
        This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

        A.     To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, authorizing the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

        B.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        C.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

        D.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.020 Contract With State.
        Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance, provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.025 Transactions Tax Rate.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of 1.0% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.030 Place of Sale.
        For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than 1 place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.035 Use Tax Rate.
        An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 1.0% of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.040 Adoption of Provisions of State Law.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.045 Limitations on Adoption of State Law and Collection of Use Taxes.
        In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

        A.     Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

        1.     The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California.

        2.     The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

        3.     In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

        a.     Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

        b.     Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

        4.     In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        B.     The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.050 Permit Not Required.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.055 Exemptions and Exclusions.
        A.     There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

        B.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

        1.     Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

        2.     Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

        a.     With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

        b.     With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

        3.     The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter, in which case the tax rate shall be the rate in effect in the city prior to the operative date of this chapter.

        4.     A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter, in which case the tax rate shall be the rate in effect in the city prior to the operative date of this chapter.

        5.     For the purposes of subsection (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

        C.    There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

        1.     The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

        2.     Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

        3.     If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

        4.     If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter, in which case the tax rate shall be the rate in effect in the city prior to the operative date of this chapter.

        5.     For the purposes of subsection (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

        6.     Except as provided in subsection (C)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

        7.     “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

        D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.060 Amendments.
        All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. Pursuant to Elections Code Section 9217, the city council may make amendments to this chapter that do not increase the rate of the tax without further voter approval. (Ord. 1671)

 

4.55.065 Enjoining Collection Forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1671)

 
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 5.10 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Chapter 5.15 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Chapter 5.20 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 5.25 AMBULANCE SERVICE
Chapter 5.30 CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
Chapter 5.35 FILMING ACTIVITIES
Chapter 5.40 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES AND HEALTH SERVICES FEES
Chapter 5.45 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.50 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
Chapter 5.55 OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION
Chapter 5.60 PUBLIC AND CLUB DANCES
Chapter 5.65 TAXICABS
Chapter 5.70 MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.75 SMOKE SHOPS, ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES, AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Chapter 5.80 SIDEWALK VENDING

Chapter 5.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
5.05.005 Bonds and Insurance.
        A.     Whenever any bond or insurance policy is required to be filed in connection with the issuance of a license or permit pursuant to this title, such license or permit shall not be effective until the bond or insurance policy has been approved by the city attorney as to sufficiency and form. If the bond or insurance policy becomes ineffective during the term of such license or permit, then the license or permit shall automatically be suspended until a new bond or insurance policy is furnished and approved by the city attorney as to sufficiency and form.

        B.     The city and its officers, employees and agents shall be named as additional insureds under any liability insurance policy required by this title, which policy shall not be subject to cancellation without 30 days written notice to the city. The liability on any surety bond deposited with the city pursuant to this title may be terminated upon the surety’s filing of 30 day advance written notice with the city clerk. In no case shall the termination of liability by the surety on any bond affect any liability incurred prior to the date of termination. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.05.010 Photographs.
        Photographs required to be furnished in connection with a license or permit application pursuant to this title, whether initial or renewal, shall be in good condition and shall have been taken within 6 months prior to the date the application is filed. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.05.015 Fingerprints.
        Whenever fingerprints are required to be furnished in connection with a license or permit application pursuant to this title, the applicant shall bear the cost of providing the fingerprints and the application fee shall include the actual cost incurred by the city in performing a criminal background check of the applicant. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.10 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
5.10.005 Definitions (A—L).
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Advertising:

        1.     The operation or maintenance of a billboard, signboard, window display, motion picture, theater curtain, stereopticon, biograph, moving picture machine or vehicle displaying commercial advertising matter thereon.

        2.     The distribution of commercial handbills.

        3.     The distribution of merchandise samples.

        “Advertising” does not include the following:

        1.     Delivery of commercial handbills or samples to the premises of the business being promoted by such handbills or samples.

        2.     Operation or maintenance of on-premises advertising displays as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 5490.

        3.     Newspapers of general circulation.

        Aircraft Repair Shop: a business that repairs, alters, remodels, overhauls or paints aircraft or parts thereof.

        Arcade: a business that operates or exhibits a phonograph, graphophone, talking machine, kinetoscope, biograph, projectoscope, microscope, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic batter, weighing machine or similar coin-operated machine.

        Auctioneer: a person engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale any property at public auction or by public outcry.

        Auto for Hire: a motor vehicle that for monetary consideration is used for the transportation of passengers over public highways on undefined routes. “Auto for hire” includes the leasing of a motor vehicle, whether with or without driver, used for carrying passengers over public highways on an undefined route having a terminus inside the city. “Auto for hire” also includes the leasing of a motor vehicle used primarily for the transportation of property over public highways on an undefined route.

        Auto Parking Space: a vacant lot on which automobiles are lawfully parked by the hour, day, week or month for monetary consideration. “Auto parking space” does not include a lot maintained exclusively for patrons of any business where no monetary consideration is charged for the parking.

        Auto Parts, Service and Equipment Business: a business that buys and sells automobile replacement parts and accessories. “Auto parts, service and equipment business” includes the performance of such machine work and assembling as is necessary to install parts or equipment. “Auto parts, service and equipment business” does not include duly licensed garages or repair shops.

        Auto Repair Shop: a business that repairs, remodels, overhauls, reconditions or paints automobiles or parts thereof. “Auto repair shop” does not include the following activities performed at a gasoline station or service station:

        1.     Tire repair or changing.

        2.     Spark plug or battery cleaning, charging or replacement.

        3.     Automobile washing.

        4.     Fan belt, light bulb or radiator hose replacement.

        5.     Brake adjustment.

        6.     Similar services that commonly are completed with the customer present and do not require a qualified automobile mechanic.

        Average Number of Individuals Employed: the average number of persons employed daily by the business for the year period ending on the 30th day prior to the due date of the license. This figure shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of service hours performed by all employees during such period and dividing that amount by the number of service hours constituting a day’s work, and by again dividing the sum thus obtained by the number of business days in such period. Fractions of numbers shall be excluded for purposes of these calculations.

        Boarding Kennel: a business that houses dogs, cats or other small animals.

        Boat for Hire: a boat that for monetary consideration is used to transport passengers from a pier, wharf or landing place in the city. “Boat for hire” includes the leasing of a boat, whether with or without an operator.

        Building Contractor: a person engaged in the business of constructing, altering, repairing, removing or demolishing any building, structure or portion thereof. “Building contractor” includes a person erecting scaffolding or other structures in connection with work upon any building or structure. The following do not constitute a “building contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed building contractor.

        2.     A licensed architect or registered civil engineer who acts solely in the capacity of an architect or civil engineer.

        3.     An owner of a building who personally works upon such building. This exemption shall not apply if the building is being erected for purposes of sale.

        Business: professions, trades and occupations of every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

        Carnival: a business consisting of sideshows, vaudeville, ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, riding devices or similar amusement devices.

        Cement Contractor: a person engaged in the business of repairing, placing or installing poured and tamped Portland cement concrete in connection with any foundation, pier, floor, structural framework, retaining wall, coping, step, stairway, gutter, curbing, walk, driveway, pavement or other type of plain or reinforced concrete construction. The following do not constitute a “cement contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed cement contractor.

        2.     A duly licensed and authorized building contractor if such person is working upon a public street, alleyway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, storm drain or similar public improvement.

        3.     A resident of a single-family dwelling who personally works upon such dwelling or an accessory building thereof.

        Circus: a business consisting of a tent, canvas or open-air enclosure exhibiting feats of horsemanship, trained animals, clowns, acrobatic performances or similar forms of skill or amusement.

        Collection Agency: a business that collects accounts receivable for another business. “Collection agency” includes any business that uses a fictitious name in collecting its own accounts receivable with the intention of conveying to the debtor that a third party has been employed to collect such accounts. “Collection agency” does not include the following: attorneys; banks; abstract companies doing an escrow business; real estate brokers making collections arising out of real estate transactions; or merchant nonprofit credit associations.

        Collector: the director of administrative services/treasurer.

        Commission Merchant or Broker: a person who by authority acts as an intermediary, representative, or agent, on behalf of, or in the place of another person in the purchase or sale of commodities, insurance, real or personal property, stocks, bonds, securities, notes, negotiation of contracts for personal or professional services or appearances and receives compensation, either directly or indirectly, in the form of commission or otherwise, whether or not the operation of such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of the foregoing.

        Country Club Golf Course: a privately owned golf course. “Country club golf course” includes the operation of a restaurant, coffee shop, snack bar, cocktail lounge, pro shop, the offering and giving of golf lessons, the operation of a driving range open to the public and retail sales of articles normally associated with a golf course. “Country club golf course” does not include an entertainment café.

        Dancing Academy: a business that provides dancing lessons.

        Dog and Cat Hospital: a business that provides medical care for dogs, cats and other small animals.

        Electrical Contractor: a person engaged in the business of performing work requiring an electrical permit. The following do not constitute an “electrical contractor” and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed electrical contractor.

        2.     An owner of a building who personally works upon such building. This exemption shall not apply if the building is being erected for purposes of sale.

        Employment Bureau: a business that secures employment for any person or furnishes information regarding situations of employment.

        Engage in the Business: the conducting, managing or carrying on of any business.

        Entertainment Cafe: a business that provides instrumental music, singing, floor show, vaudeville, cabaret or similar entertainment. “Entertainment Cafe” includes a business that allows dancing by patrons.

        Fair: a business consisting of displays of produce, livestock or merchandise together with amusement attractions and concessions.

        Fixed Place of Business: a place actually occupied by a person engaged in a business and at which a large part of such business is transacted and the records of such business are kept.

        Fortune Teller/Psychic: a person that purports to have extra-sensory powers and that engages in the business of providing forecasting of future events.

        Grocery Bus: a motor vehicle that carries, and from which is sold at retail, foodstuffs for human consumption.

        Gross Receipts: the total amount actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, whether or not such act or service is done in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. “Gross receipts” includes all receipts, commissions, cash credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefor on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of material used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses.

        As to a business established outside the city but maintaining a local office within the city, “gross receipts” means the total sales or receipts attributable to the local office. In the event separate records are not maintained for such office, the business license tax shall be based upon an amount that bears the same proportion to the total gross receipts of the business as the cost of maintaining the local office bears to the total cost of maintaining the business. In the event the local office performs administrative or storage functions in connection with sales or services rendered elsewhere, the business license tax shall be based on an amount equivalent to the volume of business that shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining such office. The total cost of maintaining the local office includes without limitation: wages; salaries; commissions; bonuses; rent; telephone; postage; utilities; janitorial and other expenses allocated for maintenance.

        “Gross Receipts” does not include:

        1.     Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales.

        2.     Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold.

        3.     Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer.

        4.     Such part of the sale price of property returned by consumers upon rescission of the sale contract as is refunded either in cash or by credit.

        5.     Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. This exemption applies only if the agent or trustee has furnished the city with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them.

        6.     Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded.

        Itinerant Vendor: a person engaged in the business of selling goods for a period of not more than 90 days. An “itinerant vendor” shall not be relieved from the requirements of this chapter by reason of conducting such business in connection with a local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.

        Junk Collector: a person having no fixed place of business and engaged in the business of collection, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in old rags, sacks, bottles, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other articles commonly known as junk.

        Lathing Contractor: a person engaged in the business of installing, patching or repairing wood lath, metal lath, plaster board or any other similar materials. The following do not constitute a “lathing contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed lathing contractor.

        2.     A resident of a single-family dwelling who personally works upon such dwelling or an accessory building thereof.

        Laundry: a business that cleans wearing apparel. “Laundry” does not include an establishment where the work is performed by members of the family, or where not more than 2 persons are employed for compensation.

        Laundry Agency: a business that cleans goods of a textile nature.

        Length of Boat for Hire: the distance between the perpendiculars as registered in United States Custom House records or as determined by actual measurement for any boat not so registered.

        Location: an individual, contiguous site of a business. If a business is sited on multiple contiguous parcels, the combined parcels shall constitute one location. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.010 Definitions (M—Z).
        Masonry Contractor: a person engaged in the business of laying, setting, altering or repairing brick, stone, hollow tile, flue lining, pre-cast concrete units, gypsum partition tile units, structural glass or terra cotta in connection with a wall, partition, chimney or flue, boiler settings, veneering or furring or any other work requiring a masonry permit. The following do not constitute a “masonry contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed masonry contractor.

        2.     A resident of a single-family dwelling who personally works upon such dwelling or an accessory building thereof.

        Massage: any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes. “Massage” includes without limitation: acupuncture; acupressure; aromatherapy; reflexology; treatment by means of pressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping or pounding; treatment by means of stimulating the external parts of the body with a mechanical or electrical apparatus; treatment with rubbing alcohol, lineaments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations; and treatment by means of baths, vapor, shower, electricity or magnetism.

        Massage Establishment: any establishment where any person engages in, conducts, or carries on the business of giving massage.

        Medicine Show: the using of lecture or entertainment to attract an audience to which is sold or given medicine, a surgical or medical appliance, food, beverage or any other substance promoted as being healthful.

        Money Lender: a person engaged in the business of lending money. “Money lender” does not include any state or national bank exempt from local taxation pursuant to Article XIII, Section 27 of the California Constitution.

        Motor Scooter: a motor-propelled vehicle designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels, which wheels do not have an inside rim diameter in excess of 12”. “Motor scooter” does not include self-propelled wheel chairs or invalid tricycles.

        Newspaper of General Circulation: a newspaper meeting the definition of Government Code Section 6000.

        Oil Tool Exchange: the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in oil well equipment.

        Painting, Paperhanging and Decorating Contractor: a person engaged in the business of applying paint, wallpaper, or decorations upon a building or structure. The following do not constitute a “painting, paperhanging and decorating contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed painting, paperhanging and decorating contractor.

        2.     An owner of a building who personally works upon such building. This exemption shall not apply if the building is being erected for purposes of sale.

        Peddling: the business of going from place to place selling goods by the taking of an order and the making of a delivery concurrently. “Peddling” includes the transportation of goods that have not been sold to or ordered by a buyer prior to such transportation, and which goods are intended to be offered for sale and delivery to the public. “Peddling” does not include the delivery of goods by a person engaged in the business of selling such goods at a fixed place of business and which goods have been ordered to be so delivered prior to such delivery. Notwithstanding the preceding, “peddling” includes the delivery of goods at the time of or within a period of 2 hours from the time of obtaining such order for delivery, unless the order was placed by the buyer at a fixed place of business of the seller.

        Plastering Contractor: a person engaged in the business of applying, patching or repairing any plaster, stucco, ornamental plaster, run work or staff ornaments, or other work requiring a plastering permit. The following do not constitute a “plastering contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed plastering contractor.

        2.     An owner of a building who personally works upon such building. This exemption shall not apply if the building is being erected for purposes of sale.

        Plumbing Contractor: a person engaged in the business of work requiring a plumbing permit. The following do not constitute a “plumbing contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed plumbing contractor.

        2.     An owner of a building who personally works upon such building. This exemption shall not apply if the building is being erected for purposes of sale.

        3.     A person who constructs, alters, or repairs vitrified clay tile house sewers, cesspools, chimneys, septic tanks, or hot water vents.

        Public Dance Hall: a business where public dancing is held or carried on. “Public dance hall” does not include private residences.

        Public Garage: a business providing auto parking spaces to the public.

        Real Estate Broker: a person engaged in the business of selling, buying, soliciting purchasers of, or negotiating the purchase, sale, lease, exchange or financing of real estate. “Real estate broker” includes a person engaged in the business of collecting rent from real property for another.

        Refrigeration Contractor: a person engaged in the business of selling, installing, repairing or servicing commercial refrigeration or any equipment that is customarily used in or as a part of commercial refrigeration.

        Riding Academy: the business of teaching horseback riding. “Riding academy” includes the renting of horses, ponies or donkeys for riding purposes.

        Roofing Contractor: a person engaged in the business of applying, patching or repairing any roof covering a building or structure, which roof covering consists wholly or partially of either asphalt impregnated felt or composition roofing or shingles, asbestos-impregnated felt roofing or shingles, natural slate units or burned clay, or cement tile units. “Roofing contractor” includes a person who performs any other work requiring a roofing permit besides the installation, alteration or repair of wood shingle or shale roofs. The following do not constitute a “roofing contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed roofing contractor.

        2.     An owner of a building, or an employee of such owner, who furnishes no materials and does the following:

        a.     Applies cold coatings, paint coats or hot asphalt mopped coatings on the roof of any building of such owner.

        b.     Patches, repairs or re-roofs not in excess of 5 squares of the area of any building of such owner.

        c.     Roofs or re-roofs a single-family dwelling of such owner or an accessory building thereof located upon the same premises, when such premises are used solely as the place of residence of such owner and not for income purposes.

        Securities:

        1.     All shares or other interests or rights into which the capital, capital stock or property of companies or rights of stockholders or members thereof are divided, including all treasury shares and shares of their own capital stock purchased or otherwise acquired by companies upon delinquent assessment sales or in any other lawful manner, and all certificates and other instruments issued by them on their authority, evidencing or representing such shares, interests or rights.

        2.     All bonds, debentures and evidences of indebtedness issued by any company.

        3.     Any instrument issued or offered to the public by any company, evidencing or representing any right to participate or share in the profits or earnings or the distribution of assets of any business carried on for profit. This definition does not include the following: bills of exchange and promissory notes not offered to the public by the drawer, maker or underwriter thereof; or mortgages and deeds of trust of property situated in this state, executed to secure the payment thereof.

        Sewer Contractor: a person engaged in the business of performing any work requiring a sewer permit. The following do not constitute a “sewer contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed sewer contractor.

        2.     A person who installs, alters, or repairs a cast-iron house sewer leading from a point 2 feet outside of a building or structure to the lot line or a cesspool or septic tank.

        Signcraft: sign painting, lettering, inscribing letters or figures on the surface of any building, glass, metal, wood or composition material, or on the surface of any material of any description, or molding of letters of metal, or tile, or carving letters of wood, or manufacturing letters of paper or any other materials for sign purposes, or building, erecting or repairing signs upon the surface of the ground, or upon the surface or roof of any building or structure, or attaching letters to the surface of any such signs.

        Social Club: a non-profit philanthropic, eleemosynary or fraternal corporation, association or organization that promotes literature, science, politics, good fellowship, philanthropy or the social or physical welfare, benefit or amusement of the membership and that maintains a club room or club house.

        Soliciting: the business of traveling from house to house taking orders for goods or advertising for future delivery.

        Tile and Marble Contractor: a person engaged in the business of setting, altering or repairing composition tile, marble, granite or other finished stone materials when used for floors, walls, wainscots, ceilings, borders, bulkheads, counters, drain boards or mantels. The following do not constitute a “tile and marble contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed tile and marble contractor.

        2.     A resident of a single-family dwelling who personally works upon such dwelling or an accessory building thereof.

        3.     A person who installs rubber tiling, linoleum, cork, composition flooring or similar materials not ordinarily used by marble or tile contractors.

        Truck Transportation and Baggage Business: the business of driving trucks for the transportation of baggage, express, freight, household goods, merchandise, materials or other personal property.

        Weather Stripping Contractor: a person engaged in the business of installing material to cover the joint of a door, window or similar opening for the purpose of excluding rain, drafts or other undesirable aspects of the outside atmosphere. The following do not constitute a “weather stripping contractor” for purposes of this chapter and are exempt from the business license tax requirement:

        1.     A salaried employee of a duly licensed weather stripping contractor.

        2.     An owner of a building who personally works upon such building. This exemption shall not apply if the building is being erected for purposes of sale. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.015 Business License Tax Requirement.
        A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on any business in the city without first having procured a business license by paying the business license tax hereinafter prescribed.

        B.     Business license taxes shall be paid in advance in lawful money of the United States of America in accordance with the following due dates unless otherwise specifically provided herein:

        1.     Daily Taxes. Due on the effective date of the license.

        2.     Annual Taxes. Due on the first day of July.

        3.     New Businesses. Business license taxes for new businesses commenced after the first day of July are due within 30 days of the commencement date. The tax for a new business shall be the annual amount unless the business commences in the second half of a fiscal year, in which case the tax shall be half of the annual amount. In subsequent years taxes shall be due on the 1st day of July. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.020 Default Tax Amount.
        The business license tax for fiscal year 1988-89 shall be $100 for each business, or the amount computed in accordance with the tax rate schedules of this chapter, whichever is greater. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.025 Tax Rate Schedules.
        A.     The following businesses shall pay an annual flat rate business license tax in the amount of $100:

        1.     Aircraft repairs shop.

        2.     Arcade.

        3.     Auctioneer.

        4.     Auto repair shop and auto parts, service and equipment business unless licensed in conjunction with the sale of new and used vehicles.

        5.     Auto parking space for hire.

        6.     Barber shop.

        7.     Bathhouse (public).

        8.     Christmas tree and ornament sales at a fixed place of business except in conjunction with sales from a location in which a valid general merchandise business license certificate is in effect.

        9.     Christmas tree sales (temporary) for a period not to exceed 45 days between November 1st and January 1st.

        10.   Cleaning and pressing establishments. This includes without limitation laundries and dry cleaning, dyeing and blocking of wearing apparel and fabrics.

        11.   Cold storage plant storing food and dairy products.

        12.   Collection agency.

        13.   Commercial/industrial rental of 3 or more units.

        14.   Contractors. This includes without limitation: building contractor; cement contractor; electrical contractor; lathing contractor; masonry contractor; painting, paperhanging and decorating contractor; plastering contractor; plumbing contractor; refrigeration contractor; roofing contractor; sewer contractor; tile and marble contractor; and weather stripping contractor.

        15.   Cosmetology establishment and cosmetic treatments outside a fixed place of business.

        16.   Dancing academy.

        17.   Day nurseries, kindergartens and private school.

        18.   Directory publication.

        19.   Dog and cat hospital and boarding kennel.

        20.   Eating establishment.

        21.   Employment bureau.

        22.   Handbill distribution.

        23.   Ice sale, delivery of ice, and ice vending machine.

        24.   Junk dealer.

        25.   Laundry agency and laundry outside the city where laundry is placed, collected and delivered in the city.

        26.   Linen supply business except if in possession valid license for laundry.

        27.   Livery stable and riding academy.

        28.   Lockers and locker storage, excluding athletic, golf and country clubs, gymnasiums and bathhouses.

        29.   Massage establishment.

        30.   Miniature trains for hire ($100.00 for each train).

        31.   Motels, hotels and rooming houses in which the rental term is day to day or week to week.

        32.   Motion picture theater, live theater or vaudeville.

        33.   Municipal market sales.

        34.   Photographer.

        35.   Private patrol system.

        36.   Professional services. This includes without limitation: doctors; dentists; lawyers; accountants; veterinarians; engineers; architects; real estate brokers; sale of securities and consultants.

        37.   Public dance hall.

        38.   Public garage.

        39.   Repairing, processing, or servicing goods, wares, merchandise or articles for others if not specifically required to be licensed under other provisions of this chapter.

        40.   Residential rental of 6 or more units.

        41.   Repossession agency.

        42.   Retail sales establishment not specifically required to be licensed under any other provision of this chapter.

        43.   Sales representing or advertised as bankruptcy, liquidation or close-out sale.

        44.   Secondhand dealer.

        45.   Self-employed persons not specifically required to obtain a license under any other provision of this chapter.

        46.   Selling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale not specifically governed under any other provision of this chapter.

        47.   Shoeshine stand or parlor.

        48.   Shooting gallery.

        49.   Signcraft, except that no person in the regular employment of another holding a valid license pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain a license.

        50.   Social club.

        51.   Tailor shop.

        52.   Trade school and business college.

        53.   Truck transportation and baggage business.

        54.   Undertaker.

        55.   Warehouse.

        56.   Wedding chapel.

        B.     All persons engaged in the following businesses shall pay an annual flat rate business license tax of $200:

        1.     Advertising service (except handbill distribution).

        2.     Amusement park.

        3.     Entertainment café.

        4.     Animal, fish and reptile shows.

        5.     Commission merchants or broker.

        6.     Tattooing.

        C.    All persons engaged in the following businesses shall pay an annual flat rate business license tax as set forth below (in no event shall the annual tax be less than $100):

        1.     Aircraft for hire - $100 for the first aircraft and $20 for each additional aircraft.

        2.     Beach umbrella and equipment rental stands - $100 for the first stand and $20 for each additional stand.

        3.     Billiard parlor and bowling alley - $100 plus $10 for each table or alley over 10.

        4.     Boat rental - $100 for each boat less than 25 feet in length, plus $8.00 per foot for each boat exceeding 25 feet in length.

        5.     Bottled water sales (retail), excluding eating establishments, confectionery stores or similar businesses - $100 for the first vehicle used in carrying on such business plus $25 for each additional vehicle so used.

        6.     Boxing match (professional contest or exhibition) - $1,000.

        7.     Carnivals and fairs, excluding those operated by school organizations, churches, or other nonprofit organizations for charitable purposes - $6 per day for each game, exhibition, show recreational device, or concession booth.

        8.     Circus - $700 for the first day and $400 for each day thereafter.

        9.     Fire sale, excluding sales where the seller was the legal owner of the merchandise to be sold at the time of such fire - $1,200.

        10.   Fortune teller/psychic - $750.00 the first year and $500 thereafter.

        11.   Grocery bus - $1,000.

        12.   Herb doctors - $150 plus $20 for each additional partner.

        13.   Junk collector - $100, which includes the right to use one vehicle or boat; plus $20 for each additional vehicle or boat used.

        14.   Medicine show - $600.

        15.   Milk distribution - $100 plus $10 for each vehicle in excess of one.

        16.   Money lender - $150.

        17.   Motion picture or photoplay filming or production - $50 per day, except persons with a fixed place of business in the city - $150.

        18.   Oil business - as set forth in this title.

        19.   Peddler and itinerant vendor -

        a.     Foodstuffs not otherwise provided for - $100 plus $60.00 for each vehicle in excess of one.

        b.     Medicine - $600.

        c.     All others unless otherwise required to be licensed - $100 includes the use of one vehicle or boat, plus $100 for each additional vehicle or boat.

        20.   Sanitariums (including rest home, convalescent home or home for the aged) that provide care for more than 3 persons at a time - $100 plus $2 for each patient in excess of 3, based on the average number of patients per day, computed monthly.

        21.   Selling club plans, including sale of membership in any club or cooperative association and sale of discount coupon books - $400.

        22.   Soliciting, canvassing or taking orders for goods or advertising, excluding representatives of an established or fixed place of business in the city who submits an affidavit to the collector not less than 48 hours before such solicitation - $200 or $10 per day.

        23.   Vehicles for hire -

        a.     Vehicles that seat less than 16 people - $100 per vehicle.

        b.     Vehicles that seat more than 15 people - $120 per vehicle.

        c.     Vehicles that are designed or used primarily for transportation of property where available for lease or rental without the driver - $50 for the first vehicle plus $20 for each additional vehicle.

        d.     Ambulances or invalid coaches - $50 for 1st vehicle plus $20 for each additional vehicle.

        e.     Motor scooters - $100 plus $4 for each vehicle in excess of 5 vehicles.

        24.   New and used car sales, such license also authorizes the holder to repair such vehicles and sell motor vehicle parts and accessories - $150.

        25.   Vending machine -

        a.     Merchandise dispensing - $20 per machine.

        b.     Jukebox and amusement machines, including electronic games and pinball machines - $30 per machine.

        c.     Photographic and voice recording machines - $100 for the first 5 machines, plus $20 for each additional machine.

        26.   Wrestling - $600.

        D.    All persons engaged in the following businesses shall pay an annual business license tax based on gross receipts (in no event shall the business license tax be less than $100):

        1.     Country club golf course - 40¢ per $1,000 of total gross receipts.

        2.     Manufacturing - 40¢ per $1,000 of total gross receipts. This includes without limitation every person manufacturing, processing, fabricating, designing, engineering any product, commodity, airplane, or ship, selling any such product at wholesale or to jobbers; or selling any such product at retail; or selling any such product at both wholesale and at retail; or any and every person contracting for or agreeing to manufacture, process, fabricate, design or engineer any product, commodity, airplane, ship, machine, vehicle, instrumentality, tool or other thing for fee, charge, valuable consideration or otherwise agreed upon sum of money.

        E.     All persons engaged in the business of commercial/industrial rentals of no more than 2 units shall pay an annual business license tax that is ½ the amount of the annual business license tax for commercial/industrial rentals of 3 or more units.

        F.     The business license tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any business which has gross annual receipts of $25,000 or less in the one-year period immediately preceding the issuance of a business license. To establish eligibility for this exemption, the business shall provide such financial documentation as requested by the director of finance including, without limitation, tax returns, and financial documentation. The director of finance shall establish such policies and procedures as are necessary to implement the exemption granted herein. Any business operating in the city with gross receipts of more than $25,000 annually shall pay the full amount of the applicable business license tax.

        G.    All persons 65 and over engaged in any home occupation, as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance, shall pay an annual flat rate tax of $50, provided that the annual income derived from such home occupation does not exceed $10,000 in any calendar year. In order to qualify for this reduced rate, licensees shall submit a copy of their most recent tax return to substantiate that the annual income derived from the home occupation does not exceed $10,000 per year.

        H.    All persons who qualify as “disabled” under the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Social Security Act, or the California Fair Employment & Housing Act, who receive subsidies from government or nonprofit entities because of their disability, and who are engaged in any home occupation, as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance, shall pay an annual flat rate tax of $50, provided that the an-

nual income derived from such home occupation does not exceed $10,000 in any calendar year. In order to qualify for this reduced rate, licensees shall submit a copy of their most recent tax return to substantiate that the annual income derived from the home occupation does not exceed $10,000 per year, as well as a letter from a licensed physician certifying to their disabled status. (Ord. 1653; Ord. 1533; Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.030 Annual Adjustment.
        The business license tax amount set forth in this chapter, for all businesses other than those based on gross receipt taxes, may be adjusted annually on July 1st of each year in accordance with the increase in the Consumer Price Index, at the discretion of the city council. For purposes of this chapter, “Consumer Price Index” means the revised consumer price index for All Urban Consumers, Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, 1967 = 100, as prepared by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor, or if any such agency shall cease to prepare such an index, then any comparable index covering the Los Angeles and Orange County areas prepared by any other federal or state agency that is approved by the city council. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.035 Constitutional Apportionment.
        A.     The business license tax shall not be imposed in violation of the federal or state constitution. Any person subject to the business license tax may request that the prescribed tax amount be adjusted to comply with constitutional apportionment requirements. The adjustment application shall be filed before, concurrently with or within 6 months after payment of the prescribed tax amount. By sworn statement and supporting evidence, the adjustment applicant shall show the method of business, the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector deems necessary.

        B.     The collector shall investigate timely filed adjustment applications to determine whether adjustment of the prescribed tax amount is warranted to comply with constitutional apportionment requirements. When an adjustment is warranted, the collector shall fix as the business license tax for the adjustment applicant an amount that is reasonable and does not exceed the amount prescribed by this chapter. In fixing the business license tax, the collector may base the tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or other measure that will assure the tax shall be uniform with that assessed on similar businesses. If the adjustment applicant has paid the prescribed tax amount, the collector shall refund the amount paid in excess of the business license tax so fixed for the current year. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.040 Exemptions.
        A.     The business license tax shall not apply to any person exempt by federal or state law from payment of such tax. Without limiting the scope of the preceding, the following are exempt from payment of the business license tax:

        1.     Banks, pursuant to California Constitution Article XIII, Section 27.

        2.     Insurers, pursuant to California Constitution Article XIII, Section 28.

        3.     Alcoholic beverage licenses, pursuant to California Constitution Article XX, Section 22.

        4.     Disabled veterans, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Sections 16001 or 16001.5.

        5.     Community care facilities licensed by the state and serving 6 or fewer persons, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1523.1.

        6.     Nonprofit and charitable organizations that have the appropriate tax exemption designation from federal and state taxing authorities. This includes without limitation fraternal, educational, civic and religious organizations.

        7.     Natural persons 19 years of age, or under, engaged in the business of lawn mowing and yard maintenance work.

        B.     Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement, on a city-provided form, stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. The collector shall, upon a proper showing, issue a business license without payment of the business license tax.

        C.    The collector may revoke a business license granted pursuant to this section upon determining that the licensee is not entitled to an exemption. Prior to any such revocation, the collector shall give notice and a reasonable opportunity for a hearing to the licensee. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.045 Issuance of License.
        A.     Every person required to pay the business license tax shall submit an application on a city-provided form. In the application for the business license, the applicant shall specify an address within the city to which correspondence may be sent by the city to the licensee, and a local telephone number that the city may call to contact the licensee. The applicant must consent to such communications by the city at that address and phone number prior to issuance of the business license. In the event the licensee relocates or changes the phone number, the licensee shall notify the collector in writing, at least 10 business days prior to the change. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the licensee may not change the address to an address outside of the city, and the licensee may not change the telephone number to a non-local number.

        B.     The collector shall issue a business license upon payment of the applicable business license tax and presentation of all permits required for operation of the business. A first time applicant for a new business taxed on the basis of gross receipts shall be required to pay the minimum tax applicable to such business for the first year of operations in the city.

        C.    Business licenses shall contain the following and such other information deemed necessary or appropriate by the collector:

        1.     The name of the person to whom the license is issued.

        2.     The name of the business for which the license is issued.

        3.     The place where such business is to be carried on.

        4.     The expiration date of the license.

        D.    No business license shall be transferable.

        E.     Issuance of a business license does not authorize any unlawful business. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.050 Suspension or Revocation of License.
        The collector may suspend or revoke a business license whenever the licensee has violated this code or any other law. The licensee shall be afforded notice and opportunity for a hearing prior to any suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.055 Appeals.
        Decisions of the collector to issue, suspend or revoke a business license shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city council shall be the hearing officer for purposes of such procedure. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.060 Separate Licenses.
        A.     A separate business license shall be obtained for each branch establishment of a business in the city.

        B.     A separate business license shall be obtained for each person who operates a business as a concession or on rented floor space in premises of another person holding a business license.

        C.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person carrying on 2 or more businesses at the same location shall obtain a separate business license for each such business. Notwithstanding the preceding, where the business license tax for each business is based on gross receipts, a single business license tax may be paid on the basis of the combined total gross receipts of the several businesses and a single business license shall be issued. In the event the tax for each business is based on gross receipts under different tax rate schedules, the business license tax for the combined total gross receipts of the several businesses shall be based on the tax rate schedule applicable to the business activity producing the greatest amount of gross receipts.

        D.    A separate license is not required for an ice vending machine located at a place of ice manufacture.

        E.     A separate license is not required for coin-operated lockers in bowling alleys.

        F.     All funds derived from conducting a business in the city shall be deposited into a separate fund or bank account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.065 Determination of Tax Amount by City.
        A.     The collector may determine the amount of business license tax owed by a person carrying on business in the city in any of the following circumstances:

        1.     Such person fails to apply for a business license.

        2.     Such person fails to file a required statement in a timely manner.

        3.     Such person files an incorrect statement or incorrectly computes the amount of tax due.

        B.     The determination of the business license tax owed shall be based on information available to the collector. Written notice of the determination, and a reasonable opportunity for a hearing regarding its appropriateness, shall be given to the person liable for payment of the tax. If application for a hearing is not made within the designated time, the business license tax determined by the collector shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.070 Evidence of Doing Business.
        Any advertisement that a person is in business in the city shall constitute prima facie evidence of such fact unless a sworn statement denying such fact is submitted to the collector. The holding of an active license or permit indicating that a person is in business in the city shall constitute prima facie evidence of such fact unless a sworn statement denying such fact is submitted to the collector. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.075 Replacement License.
        A.     A business license holder may obtain a replacement license when the business associated with the license is relocated. The replacement license shall not be issued until the city has determined that the new location conforms to the zoning ordinance. The original business license shall be relinquished concurrently with the issuance of the replacement license.

        B.     A business license holder may obtain a replacement business license when the previously issued license has been lost or destroyed.

        C.    The fee for a replacement business license shall be in an amount set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.080 Display of License.
        Any person carrying on business at a fixed location in the city shall conspicuously post upon the premises the business license issued for such business. All other persons carrying on business in the city shall have their business license available for immediate inspection at any time such business is in operation. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.085 Delinquency.
        A.     All business license taxes are delinquent as follows:

        1.     Daily Taxes. Delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the due date.

        2.     Annual Taxes. Delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on July 30th except all annual business license taxes paid on a gross receipts basis are delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on August 31st.

        3.     New Businesses. Taxes for new businesses commencing after the first day of July are delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the 30th day from the commencement date.

        B.     A penalty of 25% of the tax amount shall be added to each business license tax remaining unpaid 30 days after it becomes due. A penalty of 50% of the tax amount shall be added to each tax remaining unpaid 60 days after it becomes due. A penalty of 100% of the tax amount shall be added to each tax remaining unpaid 90 days after it becomes due. Notwithstanding the preceding, unpaid taxes based on gross receipts, other than taxes on new businesses, shall have a penalty of 25% added on September 1st, 50% added on October 1st, and 100% added on November 1st. All penalties shall be cumulative.

        C.    The collector may, upon receipt of a written request before the delinquency date, extend for not more than 30 days the deadline for paying the business license tax. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.090 Refunds.
        A.     No refund of an overpayment of business license tax shall be allowed unless a claim for refund, on a city-provided form, is filed with the collector within one year from the due date of such tax. Upon the filing of such a claim and confirmation of an overpayment, the collector shall refund the amount overpaid.

        B.     No refund of a business license tax payment for an un-commenced business shall be allowed unless a claim for refund, on a city-provided form, is filed with the collector within 30 days from the date of such payment. Upon the filing of such a claim and confirmation that the business has not commenced, the collector shall refund 80% of the amount paid. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.095 Records.
        All persons subject to this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures. Such records shall be retained for examination by city representatives for a period of 3 years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow city representatives to examine such records at reasonable times and reasonable places.

        For purposes of this section, “reasonable places” shall mean locations within the city or within 35 miles of the city limits. In the event records are kept further than 35 miles from the city limits, the person required to keep the records shall be responsible for all reasonably necessary travel expenses of the city representatives, including but not limited to mileage, airfare, food, lodging, and time billed by consultants while traveling. The determination of whether expenses are reasonably necessary shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.100 License Verification.
        At any reasonable time city representatives may enter a business subject to this chapter for verification of receipt of a business license. It shall be the duty of the collector to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police and city attorney may render assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may be requested by the collector or the city council. (Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.105 Building Inspection Approvals.
        Final building inspection approvals shall not be issued until the building division confirms that all contractors working on the building have paid the business license tax. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.110 Coin Operated Machines.
        All coin operated machines for which a business license is required shall contain in a conspicuous place an identification stamp issued by the collector. This includes amusement games, vending machines and weighing machines. Such stamp shall indicate the owner, the owner’s principal place of business and the business license number of the machine. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.115 Contractors.
        A.     Each contractor in receipt of a business license shall give written notice to the collector of any change of principals, partners, executive officers or business address within 5 days of such change.

        B.     No business license shall be issued to any contractor who has not complied with applicable state licensing requirements. A business license shall be automatically suspended, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to do any work covered by such license, during any period in which the contractor’s state license is ineffective. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.120 Cosmetological Establishments.
        A business license for a cosmetological establishment includes the right to sell beauty supplies owned by the owner of such business. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.125 Laundry Agencies.
        Each laundry agency shall display in a conspicuous place a sign indicating the name and address of the establishment that launders goods of a textile nature on behalf of such agency. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.130 Peddling and Soliciting.
        Every application for a business license for peddling or soliciting shall include a photograph of the applicant. Applications filed by a corporate entity shall include a photograph of a manager of the entity. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.135 Photographic and Voice Recording Machines.
        All photographic machines and voice recording machines for which a business license is required shall contain in a conspicuous place an identification stamp issued by the collector. Such stamp shall indicate the owner, the owner’s principal place of business and the business license number of the machine. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.140 Public Garages.
        A business license for a public garage includes the right to sell oil, grease and automobile accessories. Such license does not include the right to operate a jitney or automobile for hire, to maintain any vehicle for transporting goods, wares or merchandise for hire, or to carry on the business of selling automobiles. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.145 Secondhand Dealers.
        A business license for secondhand dealers shall not be required for a person whose sales of secondhand goods are confined to the disposal of merchandise accepted in trade and as part payment for new goods sold by such person. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.10.150 Penalty.
        A.     Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

        B.     Any person knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to a city representative any material fact in procuring a business license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

        C.    The amount of any business license tax and penalty imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. The city may pursue any legal remedy available for the collection of any delinquent business license tax, and penalties and administrative costs incurred in connection therewith, including attorney fees. Neither the arrest, prosecution, conviction, imprisonment or payment of a fine for the violation of this chapter shall satisfy or diminish the indebtedness to the city created by this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.15 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
5.15.005 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to mitigate the adverse secondary effects that can be generated by the unregulated operation of adult entertainment businesses. Prior to enacting this chapter, the city council considered studies that persuasively demonstrate these adverse secondary effects include without limitation: depreciation of property values; increased criminal activity, litter, noise and vacancy rates; and interference with the enjoyment of property in the vicinity of such businesses. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Adult Entertainment Business:

        1.     Adult Arcade: is a commercial establishment that as a regular and substantial course of conduct shows, in one or more viewing rooms less than or equal to 150 square feet, movies or still images characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.

        2.     Adult Cabaret: is a commercial establishment that as a regular and substantial course of conduct emphasizes and seeks, through one or more erotic dancers, to arouse or excite the patrons’ sexual desires.

        3.     Adult Motion Picture Theater: is a commercial establishment that as a regular and substantial course of conduct shows, in one or more viewing rooms larger than 150 square feet, movies or still images characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.

        4.     Adult Retail Store: is a commercial establishment that as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or rents adult entertainment merchandise.

        Adult Entertainment Merchandise:

        1.     An audio tape, book, magazine, movie or still picture characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.

        2.     Paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genitals. “Adult entertainment merchandise” does not include birth control devices.

        Characterized by an Emphasis Upon: the dominant theme of the object described by such phrase.

        Director: director of administrative services.

        Directly Pay or Give: the placement of a gratuity by a patron on any portion of an erotic dancer’s person or clothing.

        Erotic Dancer: a person who dances or otherwise performs at an adult cabaret and who seeks to arouse or excite the patrons’ sexual desires.

        Nudity:

        1.     The showing of human genitals, pubic area, anus or cleft of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering.

        2.     The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.

        3.     The exposure of any device, costume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region.

        4.     The exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.

        Nuisance Activities: disturbance of the peace; littering; public drinking of alcoholic beverages or drunkenness; and public urination or defecation.

        Owner:

        1.     The sole proprietor of an adult entertainment business.

        2.     A general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult entertainment business.

        3.     A controlling shareholder in a corporation that owns and operates an adult entertainment business.

        4.     A person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult entertainment business owned and operated by the corporation.

        Regular and Substantial Course of Conduct: the existence of any of the following conditions:

        1.     At least 30% of the stock-in-trade is devoted to adult entertainment merchandise.

        2.     At least 30% of the total display area is devoted to adult entertainment merchandise.

        3.     At least 30% of the gross receipts of the business are derived from the sale or rental of adult entertainment merchandise.

        4.     On 4 or more days within a 30-day period, the establishment presents live entertainment by one or more erotic dancers.

        5.     On 4 or more days within a 30-day period, the establishment presents non-live entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.

        Religious Institution: a church, mosque, synagogue, temple or similar establishment operated by a religious organization as a place of worship or religious instruction.

        School: a public or private elementary, secondary, middle, junior high or high school.

        Specified Anatomical Areas:

        1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic region, buttocks and nipple of the female breast.

        2.     Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

        3.     Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in paragraphs 1 or 2 above.

        Specified Sexual Activities: The following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

        1.     The fondling of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast.

        2.     Sex acts, actual or simulated.

        3.     Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the other activities described in paragraphs 1 or 2 above.

        Substantially Enlarged: The increase in floor area occupied by an adult entertainment business by more than 10% of its floor area as it existed at the time an adult entertainment permit was issued for the business. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.015 Adult Entertainment Permit Requirement.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment business unless the owner of such business first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult entertainment permit for such business. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.020 Adult Entertainment Permit Application.
        A.     Eligibility. An owner of an adult entertainment business is the only person eligible to obtain an adult entertainment permit for such business. No person under 18 years of age shall be eligible for an adult entertainment permit.

        B.     Submission. An adult entertainment permit application shall be submitted to the director. The application consists of the application fee and the following:

        1.     A city-provided application form containing: (i) the applicant’s name, mailing address and phone number; (ii) the applicant’s status as a sole proprietor, general partner, controlling shareholder or designated representative of the proposed business; (iii) the address of the proposed business; (iv) a description of the proposed business; (v) the names and addresses of other adult entertainment businesses currently operated in the state by the owner; and (vi) a list of adult entertainment-related permits that the owner currently holds or has had suspended or revoked by another governmental entity.

        2.     Two passport-size color photographs that clearly show the applicant’s face.

        3.     The applicant’s fingerprints on a police department-provided form.

        4.     A site plan depicting how the proposed business will comply with the design standards of this chapter and the off-street parking requirements of the zoning ordinance.

        5.     A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that the information submitted in connection with the application is true and correct. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.025 Approval or Denial of Adult Entertainment Permit.
        A.     Director’s Decision. The director shall, within 30 city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue the adult entertainment permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        B.     Grounds for Denial. The director may deny an application for an adult entertainment permit upon any of the following grounds:

        1.     The applicant is under 18 years of age.

        2.     Failure to complete the application.

        3.     Knowing submission of a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact.

        4.     The applicant proposes to conduct more than one type of adult entertainment business within the establishment.

        5.     Failure to comply with the location standards of this chapter.

        6.     Failure to comply with the design standards of this chapter.

        7.     Failure to comply with the zoning ordinance.

        8.     The applicant, or a person affiliated with the applicant’s partnership or corporation, has had an adult entertainment permit revoked by the city within one year prior to the date of the application. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.030 Location Standards.
        A.     Adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the following location standards:

        1.     The business shall be located in a zone permitting such use and outside of the boundaries of any redevelopment area established by ordinance.

        2.     The business shall not be located within 400 feet of a residential zone or residential use, whether such zone or use is within or outside of the city.

        3.     The business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a public park, religious institution or school, whether such use is within or outside of the city.

        4.     The business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment business, whether such business is within or outside of the city.

        B.     The distances specified in this section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard for intervening structures, from the property line of the lot containing the adult entertainment business to the property line of the property so used at the time of submission of the permit application. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.035 Design Standards.
        Adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the following design standards:

        A.     Sufficient sound-absorbing insulation shall be provided to ensure that noise generated inside the establishment shall not be audible outside of the establishment.

        B.     The interior shall be configured in such a manner that from a manager’s station there is an unobstructed view of every area to which patrons are permitted access, excluding restrooms. If the premises has multiple manager’s stations, then the interior shall be configured in such a manner that from at least one of the manager’s stations there is an unobstructed view of every area of the premises to which patrons are permitted access, excluding restrooms. The view required by this paragraph must be direct line of sight from the designated manager’s station.

        C.    Adult arcades shall comply with the following additional standard:

        1.     The walls or partitions between viewing rooms shall not contain holes such as would allow either: (i) viewing from one room into another; or (ii) physical contact between the occupants of the rooms.

        D.    Adult cabarets shall comply with the following additional standards:

        1.     Each stage shall be elevated at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and separated at least 6 feet from the nearest patron area.

        2.     Dressing room facilities shall be provided for the exclusive use of erotic dancers. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.040 Operation Standards.
        Adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the following operation standards:

        A.     No more than one type of adult entertainment business shall be conducted within the establishment.

        B.     The adult entertainment permit issued for the business shall be conspicuously posted so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the establishment.

        C.    Adult entertainment merchandise, specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas shall not be visible from the exterior of the establishment.

        D.    Persons under the age of 18 years shall not be permitted within the establishment.

        E.     Security guards shall be employed in accordance with the following standards:

        1.     At least one security guard shall be on duty within the business at all times during open hours; provided, however, that at least 2 security guards shall be on duty if the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 50 persons.

        2.     Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public.

        3.     No security guard shall act as an admittance person, ticket person or sole occupant of a manager’s station.

        F.     The business shall not be operated between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.

        G.    The exterior grounds of the premises shall be kept free of adult entertainment merchandise.

        H.    Acupressure, acupuncture, gambling, massage and tattooing shall not be conducted on the premises.

        I.      At least one employee shall be on-duty and stationed at each manager’s station while a patron is in the establishment.

        J.     Adult arcades shall comply with the following additional standards:

        1.     No viewing room shall be occupied by more than one patron at a time.

        2.     The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of viewing rooms shall be maintained clean and free from bodily secretions and waste.

        K.     Adult cabarets shall comply with the following additional standards:

        1.     No erotic dancer shall dance on the premises unless such person is in possession of a valid erotic dancer permit.

        2.     No erotic dancer shall dance on the premises in a state of nudity.

        3.     No erotic dancer shall dance on the premises except upon a stage that complies with the design standards of this chapter.

        4.     No erotic dancer shall dance on the premises closer than 6 feet to any patron.

        5.     No erotic dancer shall fondle or caress a patron and no patron shall fondle or caress an erotic dancer.

        6.     No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to an erotic dancer, and no erotic dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from a patron. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.045 Non-transferability.
        A.     No person shall operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of an adult entertainment permit at any place other than the address stated in the application for such permit.

        B.     No adult entertainment permit shall be transferable. Any attempt to transfer an adult entertainment permit shall automatically render the permit void as of the date of such attempted transfer. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.050 Adult Entertainment Permit Conditions.
        The design standards and operation standards of this chapter are conditions of adult entertainment permit approvals. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, failure to comply with any such standard shall not constitute grounds for criminal prosecution. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.055 Adult Entertainment Permit Renewal.
        A.     Permit Term. Each adult entertainment permit shall be valid for 2 years from the date of issuance or renewal unless suspended or revoked.

        B.     Application Submission. An application for renewal of an adult entertainment permit shall be submitted to the director no sooner than 60, and no later than 45, days prior to the expiration of such permit. The application consists of the renewal application fee and the items required for an initial application, except as follows:

        1.     No additional fingerprints will be required if the applicant’s fingerprints are already on file with the city.

        2.     No additional site plan will be required if the applicant declares that the business continues to operate in accordance with the site plan submitted in conjunction with the initial application.

        C.    Director’s Decision. The director shall, within 30 city business days of the filing of a renewal application, renew the adult entertainment permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the application shall be denied. Notice of the renewal or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        D.    Grounds for Denial. The director may deny an application for renewal of an adult entertainment permit upon any of the grounds for denial of an initial application or if the business has failed to comply with the operating standards of this chapter at any time during the 6 months prior to the date of the application. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.060 Erotic Dancer Permit Requirement.
        It is unlawful for any person to work as an erotic dancer unless such person first obtains from the director, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an erotic dancer permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.065 Erotic Dancer Permit Application.
        A.     Eligibility. No person under 18 years of age shall be eligible for an erotic dancer permit.

        B.     Submission. An erotic dancer permit application shall be submitted to the director. The application consists of the application fee and the following:

        1.     A city-provided application form containing: (i) the applicant’s name, mailing address and phone number; (ii) the applicant’s birth date; (iii) any stage names or aliases used by the applicant; and (iv) the name and address of the adult cabaret at which the applicant intends to perform.

        2.     The applicant’s fingerprints on a city-provided form.

        3.     Two passport-size color photographs that clearly show the applicant’s face. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.070 Approval or Denial of Erotic Dancer Permit.
        A.     Director’s Decision. The director shall, within 4 city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue the erotic dancer permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        B.     Grounds For Denial. The director may deny an application for an erotic dancer permit upon any of the following grounds:

        1.     The applicant is under 18 years of age.

        2.     Failure to complete the application.

        3.     Knowing submission of a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact.

        4.     The applicant has had an erotic dancer permit revoked by the city within one year prior to the application date. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.075 Confidentiality of Erotic Dancer Information.
        Pursuant to Government Code Section 6254(f), information submitted in connection with an erotic dancer permit application is not a public record and shall not be disclosed by the city to the public. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.080 Presentation of Erotic Dancer Permit.
        Every erotic dancer shall have his or her erotic dancer permit available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult cabaret designated in the permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.085 Disciplinary Action.
        A.     Grounds for Discipline.

        1.     The director may suspend or revoke an adult entertainment permit if the permittee knowingly has done any of the following:

        a.     Submitted a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application.

        b.     Failed to comply with the design standards or operation standards of this chapter.

        c.     Failed to prevent criminal activity on the premises of the business.

        d.     Failed to prevent nuisance activities on the premises of the business.

        e.     Substantially enlarged the business without city approval.

        f.      Failed to abide by disciplinary action previously imposed by the director.

        2.     The director may suspend or revoke an erotic dancer permit if the permittee knowingly has done any of the following:

        a.     Submitted a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application.

        b.     Engaged in any of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult entertainment business:

        (1)    Sexual activity with a patron.

        (2)    Unlawful solicitation of sexual activity with a patron.

        (3)    Transfer of unlawful narcotics.

        (4)    Conduct prohibited by this chapter.

        c.     Failed to abide by disciplinary action previously imposed by the director.

        B.     Notice. The director shall furnish the permittee written notice and an opportunity for a hearing prior to imposing any disciplinary action. Such notice shall be provided at least 10 days in advance and shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground(s) upon which the proposed disciplinary action is based.

        C.    Hearing. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director. All parties involved shall have a right to: (1) offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; (2) be represented by counsel; and (3) confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

        D.    Penalty. Upon determining that there are grounds for disciplinary action, the director may take any of the following actions:

        1.     Issue a warning.

        2.     Impose such conditions on the adult entertainment permit or erotic dancer permit as deemed appropriate in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

        3.     Suspend the adult entertainment permit or erotic dancer permit for a specified period not to exceed 30 days.

        4.     Revoke the adult entertainment permit or erotic dancer permit.

        E.     Findings. The director shall issue written findings in conjunction with the imposition of any disciplinary action. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.090 Appeals.
        Decisions of the director to issue, deny issuance, renew, deny renewal, or impose disciplinary action in connection with an adult entertainment permit or erotic dancer permit shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager shall be the hearing officer for purposes of such procedure and may not delegate such responsibility. The city manager’s administrative review decision shall be final and shall not be subject to council review pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.15.095 Fees.
        Application fees for adult entertainment permits and erotic dancer permits shall not exceed the city’s reasonable administrative costs. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.20 ALARM SYSTEMS
5.20.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Alarm Agent: alarm business employee who: sells, leases, services, repairs, maintains, alters, replaces, monitors, relocates, or installs any alarm system for any premises; responds to alarms, investigates causes of alarms, or notifies the police or fire authority of alarms; or provides any similar related service. Persons who engage in the manufacture or sale of alarm systems exempt from this chapter are not alarm agents for the purposes of this chapter.

        Alarm Business: act of, or causing the act of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, monitoring, relocating or installing any alarm system for any premises; responding to, investigating the cause of, or notifying the police or fire authority of the alarm; or providing any similar related service.

        Alarm System: burglar alarm system, fire alarm system or both. “Alarm system” includes without limitation, indirect dial telephone devices, audible alarms and direct alarms.

        Alarm User: owner or lessee of an alarm system.

        Answering Service: service that receives signals from alarm systems for the purpose of relaying the message to the police or fire authority.

        Audible Alarm: device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry upon premises and that generates an audible sound on the premises when activated.

        Automatic Communication Device: electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device that transmits a prerecorded message to the police or fire authority.

        Burglar Alarm: device signaling entry, attempted entry or intrusion upon premises.

        Burglar Alarm System: system designed or used for the detection of unauthorized entry upon premises or for alerting of the possible commission of an unlawful act therein, or both; and that emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated.

        Central Station: centralized location controlled by an alarm business, in which the operations of electrical protection circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and supervised.

        Direct Alarm: alarm system connecting an authorized source to the police or fire authority by any direct line that terminates at an independent terminal monitor module at the police or fire authority.

        False Alarm: activation of any alarm system because of malfunction, mechanical or electrical defect, or improper activation where no emergency response by the police or the fire authority is required. False alarm shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, violent winds or external causes beyond the control of the alarm user.

        Fire Alarm: device transmitting signal that a fire or other emergency exists that requires the response of the fire authority.

        Fire Alarm System: system that emits a sound or transmits an alarm, message or signal warning of a threat to life or property from heat, smoke, fire or hazardous materials, or a medical emergency.

        Fire Authority: Orange County Fire Authority.

        Indirect Alarm: any device, other than a direct alarm, designed to transmit a signal to summon the police, fire authority or an alarm business to a location.

        Intrusion: unauthorized entry upon premises.

        Police: Seal Beach Police Department, its designee and any dispatch service used by the department.

        Premises: any structure, building or facility.

        Subscriber: person who contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor or service an alarm system.

        Telephone Provider: company that furnishes telephone services.

        Terminal Monitor Module: device installed at the governmental facility to which direct alarms are transmitted. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.010 Registration Requirement.
        No alarm business or alarm agent shall engage in an alarm business in the city unless it: has all necessary state licenses; and is registered with the police in the case of a burglar alarm system, or with the fire authority in the case of a fire alarm system. Further, each individual shall file a copy of his or her state identification card with the police. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.015 Direct Alarm Permit.
        No person shall connect a direct alarm to the police without first obtaining a permit. No person shall connect a direct alarm to the fire authority unless that person applies for and obtains a permit pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the fire authority. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.020 Direct Alarm Application.
        A.     Any person desiring to obtain a direct alarm permit shall file a written application therefor on a form supplied by the police, with the police or its designee. The application shall include:

        1.     The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

        2.     The address and telephone number of the premises.

        3.     Evidence showing that all necessary arrangements with a telephone provider have been made.

        4.     A complete set of written specifications adequately describing the equipment and placement of such alarm systems.

        5.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least 2 persons to be contacted in the event of an emergency.

        6.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least 2 persons authorized to respond to and open the premises. The applicant’s alarm business may be included as one of these persons.

        B.     The permit applicant shall pay an annual fee to the city or its designee. The annual fee for a direct alarm shall be set by city council resolution. The permit shall be effective from July 1st through June 30th of each calendar year. (Ord. 1515)

5.20.025 Direct Alarm Operation Standards.
        A.     All material and labor necessary to make the installation at the permittee’s premises shall be furnished by the permittee at the permittee’s sole expense. All materials and labor necessary to make the connection between the private system and the terminal monitor module at the police shall be furnished by the permittee or the police’s designee.

        B.     After installation, no change, modification or alteration of the equipment shall be made without written authorization from the police.

        C.    If malfunctions should develop in a direct alarm system connected to the police that could jeopardize the proper operation of any other terminal facilities or communication system, or, if excessive or chronic false alarms are transmitted by any such direct alarm system, service shall be disconnected and shall not be reactivated until the malfunction or the cause of the false alarms is corrected by the permittee at the permittee’s expense. The permittee shall defend, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its elected and appointed officers and its employees from any loss or damage resulting from the malfunction of such alarms or for failure to respond to the alarms for whatever reason.

        D.    The permittee shall keep current all information contained in the permittee’s application and shall notify the police of any changes to information contained in the application within 10 days of such change.

        E.     The permittee shall assure the responsiveness of persons listed as “authorized to respond” in the application.

        F.     The permittee shall keep alarm equipment in good order at all times. Such equipment, installations and repairs shall comply with rules and regulations promulgated by the police regulating the times and conditions under which such installations and repairs may be made.

        G.    The police may issue, conditionally issue or deny a direct alarm permit. A permit may be denied, inter alia, if the make or model of the device listed in the application has, in the experience of the police, proved to be deficient by reason of malfunction, false alarm, or failure to activate on a significant number of occasions, or if the application does not comply with the terms and conditions set forth herein. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.030 Indirect Alarm Permit.
        No person shall install or maintain an indirect burglar alarm system on such person’s premises without first having obtained a permit to do so as provided in this chapter. Any person desiring to obtain an indirect fire alarm permit shall file a written application therefor, on a form supplied by the fire authority, with the fire authority. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.035 Indirect Alarm Application.
        A.     Any person desiring to obtain a permit for an indirect burglar alarm system shall file a written application therefor, on a form supplied by the police, with the police. The application shall include:

        1.     The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

        2.     The address and telephone number of the premises.

        3.     The make, manufacturer and model number of the device.

        4.     The place of purchase, and the alarm business that will service it.

        5.     The exact location of the device(s).

        6.     The name, address and telephone number of a person to be notified in the event of an emergency.

        7.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers of 2 persons authorized to respond and open the premises. The applicant’s alarm business may be included as one of these persons.

        B.     The permit applicant shall pay an annual fee to the city or its designee. The annual fee for an indirect alarm shall be set by city council resolution. The permit shall be effective from July 1st through June 30th of each calendar year. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.040 Indirect Alarm Operation Standards.
        A.     The permittee shall furnish complete information and specifications when required, relating to the system to be provided. The information shall include specific data relating to the prevention of false alarms and testing procedures.

        B.     The permittee shall keep current all information contained in the application.

        C.    The permittee shall assure the responsiveness of persons listed as “authorized to respond” in the application.

        D.    The permittee shall maintain equipment in good condition and repair.

        E.     The permittee shall prevent excessive or chronic false alarms caused by faulty equipment, installation or human error.

        F.     The permittee shall defend, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its elected and appointed officers and its employees from any loss or damage resulting from the malfunction of such alarms or for failure to respond to the alarms for whatever reason.

        G.    The police may issue, conditionally issue, or deny an indirect alarm permit. A permit may be denied, inter alia, if the make or model of the device listed in the application has, in the experience of the police, proved to be deficient by reason of malfunction, false alarm, or failure to activate on a significant number of occasions, or if the application does not comply with the terms and conditions set forth herein. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.045 Central Station Permit Requirement.
        A.     Central stations shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the police prior to receiving signals from a burglar alarm system and transmitting that information to the police. Such permit shall have a one year term and may be renewed annually upon submittal of a proper application by the applicant.

        B.     Central stations shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the fire authority prior to receiving signals from a fire alarm system and transmitting that information to the fire authority. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.050 Automatic Communication Device.
        Any person owning or leasing an automatic communication device may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to a central station, the alarm user’s residence or secondary place of business, or a licensed answering service. The relaying of messages of intermediate services to the police or fire authority shall be over a public telephone, except that the central stations may relay messages over a direct line. Automatic communication devices shall not be programmed to the 911 emergency line. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.055 Automatic Communication Devices Minimum Standards.
        The contents of the recorded message to be transmitted by an automatic communication device must be intelligible and in a format approved by the police or fire authority as appropriate for the type of emergency being reported. The sensory apparatus and hardware comprising the device shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in a physical condition that will minimize false alarms. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.060 Audible Alarm Requirements.
        A.     Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall post a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render repairs and service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or night during which the alarm system is, or may be, activated. Notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building, structure, or other facility or premises where the alarm system is located.

        B.     The user of a fire alarm system that is not connected to an alarm business or central station shall designate a person to be available to respond to the protected property within one hour after being requested by the fire authority.

        C.    All audible fire alarm systems shall limit the audible sound generated upon activation to a maximum of 15 minutes when the system is protecting residential premises, and 30 minutes when the system is protecting any other premises. This limit shall be incorporated into the equipment at the protected premises. Audible systems may include an automatic resetting device causing the fire alarm system to rearm upon automatic shutoff. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.065 Alarm System Standards.
        A.     All alarm systems shall utilize equipment and methods of installation approved by Underwriters Laboratories or otherwise approved by the police in the case of burglar alarm systems, or the fire authority in the case of fire alarm systems.

        B.     In those instances where Underwriters Laboratories has not established standards for categories of equipment or where new equipment is undergoing field testing, the police in the case of a burglar alarm system, or the fire authority in the case of a fire alarm system, may require that the alarm system be inspected, at the expense of the alarm business or alarm user, by a professional electrical engineer who shall certify whether the alarm system appears to be safe and reliable.

        C.    The central control unit of the alarm system shall be protected by a key locking device and intrusion sensing mechanisms.

        D.    Reasonable precautions shall be taken to reduce power noises and alarm power supply surges that may cause false alarm activation.

        E.     Early warning devices shall be installed in those systems where the alarm user’s procedures or environment warrant such protection from indiscriminate alarm activations.

        F.     The alarm system shall be completely separate from all other alarm systems reporting any other hazard not authorized by this chapter.

        G.    All fire alarm systems shall at a minimum meet the standards established by the fire authority, including National Fire Protection Association Codes 72A and 72C, and any other regulations that may be adopted by the county. All fire alarm systems, equipment, installations and repairs, and all fire and other emergency tests or drills shall comply with rules and regulations promulgated by the fire authority with respect to the times and conditions under which such installations, repairs, tests or drills may be made. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.070 Inspections.
        The police chief shall have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any premises in or upon which a burglar alarm system or alarm business subject to this chapter is located, to inspect the installation or operation of the alarm systems or alarm businesses. The fire authority shall have the same authority with respect to fire alarm systems and alarm businesses. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.075 Customer Addresses.
        A.     Each alarm business shall provide the police, in the case of a burglar alarm system, or the fire authority in the case of a fire alarm system, with the address of each building, structure, place or premises within the city for which the permittee sells or installs an alarm system. This information shall include the name of the person at that location, the type of alarm system, and other general information that may be required by the police or fire authority to assist in responding to the location for an alarm activation.

        B.     Each alarm business providing or monitoring a fire alarm system shall provide to the fire alarm system user accurate and complete instructions as to the proper use and operation of the system. Instructions shall place specific emphasis on avoiding false alarms.

        C.    When a fire alarm system has been activated, a representative of the alarm business or central station shall be present at the location of an alarm within one hour after being requested by the fire authority. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.080 Records.
        Each alarm business shall maintain a complete record of inspection and service on each separate subscriber’s installed alarm system listing the nature of malfunctions found and corrective measures taken. Each business shall display to the police or fire authority, upon request, its record of inspection and repair for any subscriber’s alarm system. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.085 Violations.
        A.     If an inspection reveals any violations of this chapter, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to the alarm user and its alarm business. Such report shall require correction within 30 days after receipt of the notice of the violation, and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the revocation of the alarm user’s permit in accordance with this chapter.

        B.     In addition, any person who violates or willfully fails to comply with this chapter shall be subject to an administrative citation, except where expressly provided, and shall be punished by a fine in accordance with a schedule set by city council resolution.

        C.    Any person knowingly causing or creating a false alarm in a fire alarm system shall be subject to an administrative citation. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.090 Operation Standards.
        No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly or by relay to the police or fire authority shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining permission from the applicable permitting agency. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.095 False Alarms.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly cause or create a false alarm. This section does not apply to the testing of an alarm, if done with the permission of and in accordance with, applicable police or fire authority rules and regulations.

        A.     When any emergency message is received by the police or fire authority that evidences a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or a permit issued hereunder, the police or fire authority is authorized to require that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating the messages, or the alarm user’s representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with the requirements herein. The police or fire authority may require that the owner or lessee submit a written report within 15 days describing the actions taken or to be taken in order to comply. If, however, the alarm user, by reason of absence from the city or on any other reasonable basis requests an extension of time to file the report, the 15-day period may be extended.

        B.     The alarm user shall be assessed a fee for any false alarms based upon the following schedule:

        1.     The first 2 false alarms in a 12-month period shall be considered accidental and no penalty fees charged. The alarm user shall be notified in writing by the police after the occurrence of the second false alarm that any further false alarms may result in penalty assessments.

        2.     The alarm user shall be assessed penalty fees for any false alarms above the initial 2 false alarms in a 12-month period. The false alarm penalty fees shall be set forth by city council resolution.

        3.     After the police have recorded 5 false alarms within any consecutive 12-month period from any alarm system, it shall notify the alarm user in writing by first class mail, of such fact and require that the alarm user submit a report to the police within 15 days after receipt of such notice, describing efforts to discover and eliminate the causes of the false alarms. If, however, the alarm user by reason of absence from the city or on any other reasonable basis requests an extension of time to file the report, the police may extend the 15-day period for a reasonable period. If the alarm user fails to submit such a report within 15 days or within any such extended period, or if the efforts taken to discover and eliminate defects are deemed insufficient, the police may place the alarm system on “no emergency response status.” Under such circumstances, the police shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business in writing by first class mail, and the city manager of such action. Commencing 10 days after such action, the alarm system shall be disconnected, and if not disconnected, the police will not respond to the activation of the alarm system. This shall continue until corrective measures have been taken and certified by the police or its designee. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.100 Tampering.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, render inoperative or maliciously damage any alarm system. This section does not apply to any person performing approved maintenance or repair work on an alarm system. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.105 Rules and Regulations.
        The police in the case of burglar alarm systems, and the fire authority in the case of fire alarm systems, shall promulgate rules and procedures as may be necessary to implement this chapter and to determine grounds for clerical suspension, or revocation of any license or permit required by this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.110 Exemptions.
        The foregoing sections in this chapter are not applicable to:

        A.     Alarms affixed to motor vehicles.

        B.     Fire and police call boxes.

        C.    A public telephone utility whose only function is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

        D.    Devices installed by a telephone company to protect its own systems.

        E.     Alarm systems that protect property of the city and other public property.

        F.     Persons or firms engaged solely in the manufacture or sale of alarm system components from a fixed location and who do not install, maintain, service or plan the alarm system for a specific location.

        G.    Alarm systems that do not alert law enforcement agencies or others outside the protected facilities.

        H.    Fire alarm systems exempted by the director or other authorized designee of the fire authority if it is determined that the system does not create a substantial danger of generating false alarms. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.20.115 Appeals.
        Decisions involving permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager shall be the hearing officer for purposes of such procedure. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.25 AMBULANCE SERVICE
5.25.005 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Advanced Life Support (ALS) and Basic Life Support (BLS): as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Ambulance: a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this chapter.

        Ambulance Service: the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose.

        Ambulance Service Operator: any person who operates or owns an ambulance service.

        Attendant: a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients.

        Department: the Emergency Medical Services Agency of the county, or the Health Care Agency of the county, or such other agency as may be designated by the board of supervisors.

        Dispatcher: an individual employed by an ambulance service operator who is responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient.

        Driver: an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance.

        Emergency: a sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency.

        Exclusive Operating Area (EOA): as defined in Section 1797.85 of the Health and Safety Code, and which is established pursuant to Section 1797.224 of the Health and Safety Code.

        Emergency Service: ambulance service performed in response to an emergency.

        Fire Chief: fire chief of the Orange County Fire Authority.

        Health Officer: the county health officer or other official designated by the board of supervisors to perform the health officer’s functions.

        Licensee: an ambulance service operator that has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service.

        Medical Services: services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

        Paramedic: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Patient: a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person.

        Physician: a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such within the state pursuant to the Business and Professions Code.

        Public Safety Agency: any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the county. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.010 License Required.
        A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly, without obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter. A license may specify the geographical area within the city in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to EOAs, reference to EOA by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

        1.     Ambulance operated at the request of a public safety agency during any “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency” or “local emergency” as defined in the Government Code.

        2.     Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the county, regardless of destination.

        3.     Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed wing airplane. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

5.25.015 Transfer and Term of License.
        A.     No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section.

        1.     Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to:

        a.     A sole proprietorship.

        b.     A partnership, including any change in the partners.

        c.     A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise.

        2.     Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver.

        3.     A sale or transfer of 10% or more of the assets of a licensee.

        B.     A licensee may apply to the health officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.020 Applications.
        A.     Each application for a license shall be accompanied by such application fee as may be set by the board of supervisors, and shall be made upon forms prescribed by the health officer.

        B.     Each applicant shall submit the following:

        1.     The name and address of the applicant; the name and address of any person having any interest in the applicant’s business; and the name and address of the owner or owners of any ambulance proposed to be used.

        2.     The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation and care of patients.

        3.     The names under which the applicant has engaged, does, or proposes to engage in ambulance service.

        4.     A description of each ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicle, a description of the applicant’s program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of each vehicle’s radio.

        5.     Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by state or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made.

        6.     The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service.

        7.     Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application.

        8.     A description of the applicant’s training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers and dispatchers.

        9.     Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the health officer pursuant to regulations adopted by the county.

        10.   Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the department.

        11.   As to new applications or applications for transfer, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant issued by the county sheriff-coroner indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the county sheriff-coroner showing no conviction of crimes for which a license may be denied.

        12.   A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are, or will be based, including hours of operations.

        13.   A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support or advanced life support services, and, if so:

        a.     The number of basic life support or advanced life support service units to be deployed on each shift.

        b.     The emergency response area or areas to receive basic life support or advanced life support service.

        c.     The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants.

        14.   Such other information as the health officer may require in regulations adopted by the county.

        C.    Renewal applications shall be submitted on such forms as may be prescribed by the health officer. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.025 Investigations.
        Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the health officer shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the health officer deems necessary to determine if:

        A.     The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate or engage in the provision of ambulance services.

        B.     The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.030 Issuance or Denial of License.
        A.     The health officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the health officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines all requirements of this chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the board of supervisors, has been paid.

        B.     In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed in writing of the reasons therefor.

        C.    The licensee shall obtain and keep in force, during the term of a license, comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, acceptable to the health officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of any ambulance operated by licensee, or from violation of this chapter or any law of the state, or the federal government. The comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000 for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. The professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000 per person and $1,000,000 annual aggregate. Worker’s compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the licensee. Before the health officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the health officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a 30-day notice to be given to the department prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the health officer pursuant to regulations adopted by the county. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply.

        D.    Grounds for denial of a license application shall be:

        1.     Failure to meet the requirements of any provisions of this chapter.

        2.     Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290.

        3.     Habitual or excessive use of narcotics or dangerous drugs.

        4.     Conviction during the preceding 7 years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession or transportation of narcotics, or additive or dangerous drug.

        5.     Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages.

        6.     Conviction during the preceding 7 years of any crime punishable as a felony in the state.

        7.     Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain.

        E.     In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the health officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the persons involved. The health officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.035 License Suspension or Revocation.
        A.     The health officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of state law or regulation, of this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated by the county. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license.

        B.     Before suspension or revocation, the health officer shall give written notice to the licensee. The notice shall:

        1.     Specify the reasons for which the action is to be taken.

        2.     Set a hearing for not more than 15 days nor less than 7 days after the date of the notice.

        3.     Specify the date, time and place of the hearing.

        4.     Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for services of such notices, if any.

        C.    If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the health officer may rescind a notice of suspension or revocation at any time.

        D.    At the hearing, the health officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the license.

        E.     The health officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than 24 hours when the health officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceeding, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within 5 days of the licensee’s request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order.

        F.     Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the department. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the director of the department.

        G.    The director of the department shall issue a written decision within 30 days after receiving the hearing officer’s findings and conclusions. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.040 Appeal to Board of Supervisors.
        In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the board of supervisors, which hearing shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in Section 5-2-19 of the county code. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.045 Notification.
        The licensee shall notify the health officer within 24 hours after any change in ownership of more than 24 hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section the term “substantial change” shall be as defined by regulation adopted by the county. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.050 Personnel Standards.
        A.     A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this chapter who comply with the requirements of this section.

        B.     Attendants shall be at least 18 years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current Emergency Medical Technician-1A (“EMT-1A”) or state educational equivalent certification in compliance with all state laws, rules and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the health officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the health officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefor. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required by principals of ambulance companies no less than once every 4 years. Certificates may be denied, suspended, or revoked in the same manner as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this chapter. Licenses shall be valid for 2 years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as issuance of a new license.

        C.    Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensee shall have a dispatcher on a 24-hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher in radio operation and protocols and in the emergency response area served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, “adequate” training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets state standards, if any, or county requirements.

        D.    Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.055 Rates.
        No licensee shall charge more than the maximum BLS rates approved by the board of supervisors. No licensee shall charge more than the maximum ALS rates approved by the board of supervisors or the Orange County fire authority (“authority”). (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.060 Selection of Ambulance Service Licensees.
        A.     The authority shall administer the competitive process for the award of EOA contracts within the city. The authority shall select and enter into contracts with licensees for the provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each EOA. The contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per EOA, with such other back-up service by other emergency ambulance service providers as may be deemed necessary by the fire chief. In awarding these contracts, the authority shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case were the county evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other governmental activities, including consideration of:

        1.     The quality of service to be provided.

        2.     The level of service to be provided.

        3.     The rates charged for services to be provided.

        4.     The cost, if any, to the awarding agency.

        B.     The fire chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service. The fire chief shall also prepare and keep current EOA lists specifying contract providers for each EOA. The fire chief shall include on the list for each EOA the provider that has entered into an ambulance service agreement as the primary contractor as well as any other emergency ambulance service provider who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that area.

        C.    In the event no proposals acceptable to the authority are received for one or more EOAs, the authority shall designate one or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance service for that EOA. From the date of such designation until a contract is awarded for the affected area, provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of any emergency calls shall be a violation of this chapter.

        D.    No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency, unless that person is a licensee and is specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician or a public safety agency need not be a contractor selected by the city pursuant to this section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency designated by regulation of the request.

        E.     No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless at least one of the following is true:

        1.     A paramedic is present at the location of the patient.

        2.     A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic.

        3.     A safety qualified employee of the county fire authority, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency designated by county regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic.

        F.     Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted by the county. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.065 Rules and Regulations.
        A.     Rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter may be adopted by the health officer, the fire chief, or other officers designated by the county in accordance with procedures specified by the county, and all licensees shall be bound by such rules and regulations.

        B.     The health officer or the fire chief or their designees may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment and method of operations of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the health officer, at least annually. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.070 Complaints.
        The city, the department, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that it or another party has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services or that services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the department setting forth such allegations. The department shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within 15 days after receipt of notification. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

 

5.25.075 Variance.
        As to all but the selection of ambulance service licensees, the health officer may grant variances from the requirements of this chapter if such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. As to the selection of ambulance service licensees, the fire chief may grant variances from the terms thereof if such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. Variances granted by the health officer may include the issuance of a temporary license. No variance shall exceed 180 days in duration. (Ord. 1525; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.30 CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
5.30.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Captive Audience: a person who is sitting in an outdoor dining area, standing in line, waiting at a bus stop or is similarly stationary for a specific purpose that does not allow evasion of a charitable solicitation.

        Charitable Solicitation: a request for donation of money, food or property on the representation that all or a portion of the donation will be used for charitable purposes. A charitable solicitation shall be deemed complete when made regardless of whether a donation is received by the requestor.

        Director: director of administrative services.

        Permittee: a person who has been issued a charitable solicitation permit pursuant to this chapter.

        Solicitor: a person utilized by a permittee to conduct a charitable solicitation by means of in-person contact with prospective donors. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.010 Charitable Solicitation Permit Requirement.
        No person shall conduct a charitable solicitation without first obtaining, and maintaining in full force and effect, a charitable solicitation permit. When a charitable solicitation permit has been issued, solicitors utilized by the permittee need not obtain their own charitable solicitation permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.015 Exemptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to charitable solicitations conducted as follows:

        A.     Upon premises owned or occupied by the person or organization making the charitable solicitation.

        B.     For the relief of one or more specific individuals, provided that such beneficiaries are identified by name and the entire donation is tendered to them.

        C.    Of persons who are members of the organization making the charitable solicitation.

        D.    By mail. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.020 Charitable Solicitation Permit Application.
        A charitable solicitation permit application shall be submitted to the director. The application consists of the application fee and the following:

        A.     A city-provided application form containing: (1) the applicant’s name, mailing address and phone number; (2) the name, mailing address and phone number of each solicitor who will be utilized in connection with the proposed charitable solicitation; (3) a description of the location, time and method of the proposed charitable solicitation; and (4) a list of charitable solicitation-related permits that the applicant currently holds or has had suspended or revoked by another governmental entity.

        B.     Two passport-size color photographs that clearly show the applicant’s face.

        C.    Two passport-size color photographs of each solicitor, clearly showing the face of such person, who will be utilized in connection with the proposed solicitation.

        D.    The applicant’s fingerprints on a police department-provided form. If the applicant is a corporate entity, the official supervising the proposed charitable solicitation shall provide the fingerprints.

        E.     A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that the information submitted in connection with the application is true and correct. If the applicant is a corporate entity, the official supervising the proposed charitable solicitation shall sign the statement. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.025 Approval or Denial of Charitable Solicitation Permit.
        A.     Director’s Decision. The director shall, within 10 city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue the charitable solicitation permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        B.     Grounds for Denial. The director may deny an application for a charitable solicitation permit upon any of the following grounds:

        1.     Failure to complete the application.

        2.     Knowing submission of a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact.

        3.     Failure to file a post-solicitation report for a previous charitable solicitation conducted within one year prior to the date of the application.

        4.     The applicant, or a person affiliated with the applicant’s partnership or corporation, has had a charitable solicitation permit revoked by the city within one year prior to the date of the application.

        C.    Permit Term. Each charitable solicitation permit shall expire 60 days from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.030 Charitable Solicitation Permit Revocation.
        The director may revoke a charitable solicitation permit if the authorized charitable solicitation is being conducted in violation of this chapter. Revocation shall not be effective until written notice of the reasons therefor has been given to the permittee and until a hearing has been conducted if timely requested by the permittee. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.035 Non-transferability.
        No charitable solicitation permit shall be transferable. Any attempt to transfer a charitable solicitation permit shall automatically render the permit void as of the date of such attempted transfer. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.040 Identification Card.
        Each solicitor shall conspicuously display a city-provided identification card while conducting a charitable solicitation. Identification cards shall be issued free of charge and shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name and address of the permittee on whose behalf the solicitor is making the charitable solicitation.

        2.     The number, date of issuance and expiration date of the charitable solicitation permit authorizing the charitable solicitation.

        3.     A statement indicating that the city does not endorse the charitable solicitation. (Ord. 1515)

5.30.045 Post-Solicitation Report.
        Within 30 days of the expiration of a charitable solicitation permit, the permittee shall submit to the director a post-solicitation report. The report shall indicate the amount of funds raised through the charitable solicitation, the amount expended conducting the charitable solicitation (including any compensation paid to solicitors) and the disposition of the funds. The report shall contain a statement signed by the permittee certifying under penalty of perjury that the information set forth therein is true and correct. If the permittee is a corporate entity, the official supervising the charitable solicitation shall sign the statement. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.050 Operation Standards.
        Each permittee and solicitor shall conduct a charitable solicitation in accordance with the operation standards set forth below. Noncompliance with such standards shall constitute grounds for criminal citation and for revocation of a charitable solicitation permit.

        A.     No solicitor shall affix an object to a prospective donor without such person’s consent.

        B.     No solicitor shall conduct a charitable solicitation of a prospective donor after such person has refused to make a donation.

        C.    No solicitor shall disrupt the operation of a lawful business.

        D.    No solicitor shall obstruct the free movement of a prospective donor.

        E.     No solicitor shall place a table, chair, signboard or similar object upon any city street or sidewalk.

        F.     No solicitor shall conduct a charitable solicitation of a captive audience.

        G.    No solicitor shall conduct a charitable solicitation upon residential premises that contain a conspicuously posted sign stating “no solicitation” or “do not disturb.”

        H.    A solicitor shall provide a written receipt to each donor who tenders a contribution worth $5 or more.

        I.      No solicitor shall make a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in connection with a charitable solicitation. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.30.055 Appeals.
        Decisions of the director to issue, deny issuance or revoke a charitable solicitation permit shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager shall be the hearing officer for purposes of such procedure and may not delegate such responsibility. The city manager’s administrative review decision shall be final and shall not be subject to council review pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.35 FILMING ACTIVITIES
5.35.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Film Development Office: city personnel designated by the city manager to process film permit applications.

        Filming Activity: all activity attendant to the staging and recording of commercial advertisements, motion pictures or television programs. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.010 Film Permit Requirement.
        It is unlawful for any person to conduct filming activity on city property without first obtaining, and continuing to maintain in full force and effect, a film permit for such activity. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.015 Film Permit Application.
        A film permit application shall be submitted to the film development office. The application consists of the application fee and the following:

        A.     A city-provided application form.

        B.     A city-provided indemnification agreement.

        C.    Written proof of insurance. (Ord. 1515)

5.35.020 Approval or Denial of Film Permit.
        A.     Decision. The film development office shall, within 10 city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue the film permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the film development office shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        B.     Grounds for Denial. The film development office may deny an application for a film permit on any of the following grounds:

        1.     Failure to submit a complete application.

        2.     Knowing submission of a misleading or false statement of material fact.

        3.     The proposed filming activity will unduly interfere with governmental operations, pedestrian movement, vehicular traffic, or a previously scheduled activity. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.025 Film Permit Conditions.
        The film development office may approve a film permit subject to compliance with content neutral conditions regarding the time, place and manner of the filming activity as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.030 Security Deposit.
        Film permit recipients shall submit a cash or bond security deposit to guarantee prompt restoration of city property used in connection with the filming activity. The amount of such bond shall be determined by the film development office based solely on the city property involved and the size of the filming activity. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.035 Insurance.
        A.     Requirement. On or before commencement of any filming operations, the permittee shall submit to the city manager certificates confirming the procurement of liability and workers’ compensation insurance in accordance with this section from companies authorized to transact business in the state.

        B.     Liability Insurance. The policy of liability insurance shall:

        1.     Be issued by an insurer with a current rating A.M. Best’s rating of A:VII or better.

        2.     Name the city and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds.

        3.     Be primary and provide that any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess insurance.

        4.     Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted in connection with the filming operations.

        5.     Provide coverage for:

        a.     Negligent acts or omissions of the permittee and the agents, servants and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of filming operations.

        b.     Provide a combined single limit liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.

        C.    Workers’ Compensation Insurance. The policy of workers’ compensation insurance shall:

        1.     Be approved by the California Insurance Commissioner as to substance and form.

        2.     Cover all permittee employees who perform work on the filming operations. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.040 Disciplinary Action.
        A.     Suspension. Public safety personnel may summarily suspend a film permit if the activity poses an immediate hazard to persons or property. The filming development office may reinstate the permit upon elimination of the hazard.

        B.     Revocation. Following notice and, if requested, a hearing, the film development office may revoke a film permit for the following causes:

        1.     Knowing submission of a misleading or false statement of material fact in the application.

        2.     Failure to comply with a condition of the permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.045 Exemptions.
        This chapter shall not apply to filming activities conducted for news purposes or for use in a criminal investigation or court proceeding. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.35.050 Appeals.
        Decisions of the film development office or public safety personnel to issue, deny issuance or impose disciplinary action in connection with a film permit shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager shall be the hearing officer for purposes of such procedure and may not delegate such responsibility. The city manager’s administrative review decision is final and shall not be subject to council review pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.40 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES AND HEALTH SERVICES FEES
5.40.005 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below.

        Certified Farmers’ Market: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Commissary: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Food Establishment: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Food Facility: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Food Processing Establishment: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Health Department or Department: the Orange County Health Care Agency.

        Health Officer: the county health officer or his or her deputy.

        Inspector: an environmental health specialist, as defined in the Health and Safety Code, employed by the health department, or the health officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this chapter.

        Mobile Food Preparation Unit: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Open-Air Barbecue Facility: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Person: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Premises: includes land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises.

        Produce Stand: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Restricted Food Service Transient Occupancy Establishment: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Satellite Food Distribution Facility: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Temporary Food Facility: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Vehicle: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Vending Machine: as defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        Vending Machine Business: the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.010 Permit Required—Conditions and Terms.
        A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the health department under the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the health department a written application that shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this chapter and such other information as the health department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of 3 service stops that shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop.

        C.    A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated.

        D.    Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued.

        E.     Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.015 Construction, Conversion and Alteration.
        A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, shall submit 3 copies of the complete plans and specifications to the department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the Health and Safety Code. The health officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.020 Suspension of Permits.
        A permit issued under this chapter or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this chapter for any of the following reasons:

        A.     Violation of state law.

        B.     Violation of this chapter.

        C.    Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

        D.    Upon recommendation by the health officer. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.025 Notice of Violation.
        When any laws, this chapter, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled “Notice of Violation,” specifying:

        A.     The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged.

        B.     The provision or provisions violated thereby.

        C.    The corrective steps required.

        D.    The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor.

        E.     That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled.

        F.     That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the health department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date specified under subsection D of this section, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.030 Hearing.
        The hearing shall be held by the health officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified environmental health specialist as defined in the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in such code, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken.

        A.     The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within 15 days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within 15 days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this 15-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process.

        The hearing shall be held within 15 days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date if circumstances warrant such action.

        B.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within 5 working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or that the permit has been revoked.

        The health officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend, or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.035 Mobile Food Preparation Units Generally.
        In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this chapter, mobile food preparation units shall comply with the following safety requirements:

        A.     Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit.

        B.     All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.

        C.    All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges.

        D.    All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes, or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the health officer.

        E.     Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the health officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixtures shall be at least 188 centimeters (76 inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area.

        F.     High voltage (110-220v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet, or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding 183 centimeters (6 feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover.

        G.    Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least 35.5 centimeters by 35.5 centimeters (14 inches x 14 inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts and shall not cook or prepare food while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter 3 requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        H.    A first-aid kit approved by the health officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case.

        I.      All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum (LP) gas equipment shall be installed as follows:

        1.     The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use.

        2.     Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body.

        3.     Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition.

        4.     When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met:

        a.     All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the unit.

        b.     The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward.

        c.     The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment.

        d.     The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent accumulation of gas.

        5.     Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials.

        6.     Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing.

        7.     Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance.

        8.     ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout.

        9.     Protective “thread” caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves.

        10.   Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device that will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished.

        J.     A minimum 5 B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (Underwriters Laboratories or State Fire Marshall approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver’s door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.040 Additional Requirements for Mobile Food Preparation Units Operating in Multi-Locations in Any Day.
        In addition to other applicable requirements, mobile food preparation units that operate at more than one location in any calendar day shall comply with the following additional requirements:

        A.     Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision, or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges.

        B.     Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup that could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        C.    Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision, or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup that could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        D.    An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of 61 centimeters by 92 centimeters (24 inches by 36 inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled “Safety Exit” in contrasting colors with at least 2.54 centimeters (1 inch) high letters. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.045 Suspension for Refusal of Entry.
        It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deny or hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspection of any premises, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.050 Summary Suspension.
        A.     If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. “Immediate danger to the public health and safety” means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous condition, including but not limited to unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, non-potable water supply, or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease.

        B.     Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing.

        C.    At any time within 15 days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection B, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within 15 days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within 15 days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.055 Supervision of Closing Down Premises.
        When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the health department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.060 Rules and Regulations.
        The health officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this chapter including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to:

        A.     Forms for applications, permits and notices.

        B.     Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits.

        C.    Inspection of premises and reporting thereon. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.065 Preemption.
        This chapter shall not apply to any matter to which it concerns to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by state law. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.40.070 Health Services Fee.
        A.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Person: an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.

        2.     Receipt: a county public health services fee receipt.

        B.     Purpose and Authority. The purpose of this section is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the health officer in enforcing state statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of state offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the state. The authority for this article is contained in the Health and Safety Code.

        C.    Area of Application. This section shall be enforceable within the territory in which the health officer enforces any state statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any state office or department relating to public health within the city.

        D.    Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this chapter without a valid receipt.

        E.     Separate Activities. If a person shall conduct multiple activities for which a receipt is required, then a separate receipt shall be obtained for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein.

        F.     Applications. Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by the department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the health officer with any information requested by him or her.

        G.    Rules and Regulations. The health officer shall administer this section and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto.

        H.    Fees. The county shall, by annual board of supervisors’ resolution, adopt health services fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the county health officer and retained by the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.45 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.45.005 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Chief of Police: Seal Beach Chief of Police or his or her designee.

        Customer: any person on the premises of a massage establishment during operating hours who is not an owner, employee, independent contractor, or vendor of the massage establishment.

        Director: the Seal Beach Director of Community Development or his or her designee.

        Employee: any person who is employed by a massage establishment.

        Health Officer: The Orange County Health Department officer responsible for inspecting massage establishments in Seal Beach, or his or her designee.

        Massage: any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes. Massage includes, but is not limited to, massage by means of pressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding; massage by means of stimulating the external parts of the body with any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations; and massage by means of baths, including, but not limited to, Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric or magnetic massages, alcohol rubs, aromatherapy, reflexology, or any other type of system for treating or manipulating the human body with or without the character of a bath.

        Massage Establishment: any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, or carries on, or so permits, the commercial practice of massage.

        State Certified Massage Professional: any person certified as a massage practitioner or massage therapist pursuant to Section 4601 of the California Business & Professions Code or any successor statute. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.010 Applicability of Chapter.
        A.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following persons when engaged within the scope of their respective professional duties:

        1.     Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California.

        2.     Nurses registered under the laws of the State of California.

        3.     Barbers and beauticians duly licensed under the laws of the State of California. This provision shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of the customer or client.

        4.     The medical staff of hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California.

        5.     Athletic coaches and trainers for either accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to independent contractors of such persons if the independent contractor is engaged in, or purports to be engaged in, the commercial practice of massage. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.015 Certification Required.
        A.     It is unlawful for any person other than a state certified massage professional to engage in the commercial practice of massage.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or maintain a massage establishment unless each person engaging in massage at the establishment is a state certified massage professional.

        C.    It is unlawful for any owner or employee in charge or control of a massage establishment to employ or permit a person who is not currently a state certified massage professional to engage in the commercial practice of massage on the premises on the massage establishment. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.020 Permitted Locations for Massage.
        A.     It is unlawful to engage in the commercial practice of massage at any location other than a massage establishment established and operated in accordance with the requirements of federal, state, and local law, including but not limited to this code.

        B.     No massage establishment shall be established, expanded, or altered in a manner that requires a building permit without first obtaining a written determination by the director that the establishment complies with the requirements of this code. Upon request of the director, the owner or operator shall submit a site plan depicting how the establishment will comply with this code. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.025 Background Check Required.
        A.     Any person who operates massage establishment or owns 5% or more of a massage establishment and who is not a state certified massage professional must pass a background check.

        B.     It is unlawful to establish, operate, or maintain any massage establishment operated or owned by any person who does not pass the background check required by this section. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.030 Background Check Application.
        A.     All persons required to pass a background check must submit an application to the director on a form designated by the city, which shall include the following information:

        1.     The applicant’s full true name, any other names used; date of birth, any other date of birth used; sex, height, weight, color of hair, color of eyes; California driver’s license number, or California identification number; Social Security number, present residence address and telephone number.

        2.     Two photographs of the applicant, in a form acceptable to the chief of police, and, if required by the chief of police, the applicant’s fingerprints.

        3.     The addresses of applicant’s residences, and the dates of residency for each, during the prior 10 years.

        4.     The applicant’s business, occupation, and employment history, and the dates thereof, for the prior 10 years.

        5.     The applicant’s entire permit and license history, and the dates and types thereof, including any permit or license issued for a massage establishment, massage technician or adult business. The applicant must indicate whether any such permit or license was revoked or suspended and, if so, the reasons for the decision.

        6.     The applicant’s entire record of criminal convictions (except non-felony traffic offenses) and ordinance violations, and the dates and places thereof.

        7.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.

        8.     The name and address of any massage establishment or other like establishment owned or operated by the applicant.

        9.     The name and address of the owner of the real property where the massage establishment is to be located. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property must also be submitted.

        10.   A complete description of all services to be provided at the massage establishment and at any other business to be operated by the applicant on the same or adjoining premises.

        11.   If the applicant is a corporation, its name exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, its state and date of incorporation, and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers, directors, and any stockholders holding more than 5% of the corporation’s stock.

        12.   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of preceding paragraph pertaining to corporate applicants shall apply.

        13.   If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the name of one of its officers or general partners who shall be its responsible managing officer. Such person shall complete and sign all forms and submit the application fee on behalf of the applicant. The responsible managing officer must meet all requirements applicable to the applicant.

        14.   Such other identification and information as may be required by the director to verify the information included in the application.

        15.   A statement by the applicant made under the penalty of perjury that all information submitted as part of the application is true and correct.

        B.     The application must be accompanied by proof of payment of an application fee in an amount established by city council resolution. The application fee shall be in addition to any other fee or business license or tax required by this code.

        C.    The applicant must notify the director of any change of address or other application information occurring during or after the background check process. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.035 Background Check Review and Approval.
        A.     The director shall review all background check applications in consultation with the chief of police. The director will complete all background checks within 60 days of determining that the applicant has submitted all necessary information, unless the Department of Justice delays the process, in which case the director shall notify the applicant that additional time is needed.

        B.     The director shall approve the application if the results of the background check support all of the following findings:

        1.     The applicant is at least 18 years of age and possesses the requisite background and qualifications to operate or own a bona fide massage establishment.

        2.     The applicant has not violated or abetted the violation of any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of any other public agency regarding the operation of massage establishments.

        3.     The applicant has fully cooperated in the background check and has not made a material misrepresentation in the application.

        4.     The applicant does not have an adult entertainment permit issued by the city or similar permit in another jurisdiction.

        5.     The applicant has not within 5 years immediately preceding the date of filing the application:

        a.     Been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to:

        (1)    Any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment, whether as a massage establishment owner or operator, or as a massage technician; or

        (2)    Any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment.

        b.     Had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, or trainee license or permit revoked, denied or suspended.

        c.     Been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to:

        (1)    Any violation of Penal Code Sections 266(h), 266(i), 314, 315, 316, 318, or 647(a), (b), or (d), or any lesser included offense thereof or any other state law involving a crime of moral turpitude;

        (2)    Conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense;

        (3)    Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of California which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses;

        (4)    Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; or

        (5)    Any lesser-included offense of the above.

        d.     Been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California.

        e.     Been required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290.

        C.    The director shall notify the applicant in writing of the results of the background check. An approved background check shall be valid for the term of 2 years from the date of such notice. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.040 Background Check Renewal.
        A.     Any person required by this chapter to obtain background check approval shall submit an application for renewal to the director no sooner than 60 days and no later than 45 days prior to the expiration of the previous approval.

        B.     A renewal application must be accompanied by proof of payment of a renewal application fee established by council resolution and the information and items required for an original application, except no additional photographs or fingerprints will be required if current versions of these are already on file with the city.

        C.    Background check renewal applications shall be reviewed in the same manner and on the same terms as an original application. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.045 Background Check Revocation.
        A.     A previously approved or renewed background check may be revoked if either:

        1.     One or more of the findings required to approve or renew a background check can no longer be made; or

        2.     The background check was approved or renewed, in whole or in part, on the basis of a material misrepresentation or omission.

        B.     If the director determines that grounds for revocation exist, he or she shall post a notice of revocation at the location of all massage establishments owned or operated by the applicant and mail a copy of the notice by certified mail and regular mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address that appear on the latest application. The notice of revocation shall state the basis for revocation and include a copy of this section. The applicant may submit to the city clerk a request for a hearing not later than 10 days of the date of the notice of revocation. The request must be made in writing. If the applicant fails to request a hearing within 10 days of the date of the notice of revocation, the revocation shall be final.

        C.    If the applicant submits a timely request for a hearing, the director shall schedule the hearing to occur not later than 25 days after receiving the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by personal service or via certified mail and regular mail, postage prepaid, at least 15 days in advance of the date set for the hearing.

        D.    The director shall conduct the hearing and receive oral testimony and other evidence. The director shall not be bound by the statutory rules of evidence in the conduct of the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for not revoking background check approval.

        E.     The director shall make his or her determination based upon the evidence presented in the record of the hearing and within 15 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain written findings of fact and the director’s conclusions. The director’s decision shall be served upon the applicant by personal service or via certified and regular mail, postage prepaid sent to the address of the applicant contained in the application. The decision shall be effective upon personal service or, if service is by mail, then 2 business days following deposit with the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.050 Appeals.
        A.     Any decision by the director to deny or revoke background check approval or renewal may be appealed by the applicant in accordance with this section. The appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk not later than 10 days following the date of the notice of the determination. The written appeal must specify the basis for the appeal and the action requested. If no such appeal is timely filed, the decision of the director shall be final.

        B.     If the applicant submits a timely written appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal to occur not later than 25 days after receiving the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by personal service or via certified mail and regular mail, postage prepaid, at least 15 days in advance of the date set for the hearing.

        C.    The hearing on the appeal shall be de novo. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall act as the hearing officer and shall receive oral testimony and other evidence. The hearing officer shall not be bound by the statutory rules of evidence in the conduct of the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for revoking background check approval.

        D.    The hearing officer shall make his or her determination based upon the evidence presented in the record of the hearing and within 15 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain written findings of fact and his or her conclusions. The hearing officer’s decision shall be served upon the appellant by personal service or via certified and regular mail, postage prepaid sent to the address of the applicant contained in the application. The hearing officer’s decision shall be effective upon personal service or, if service is by mail, then 2 business days following deposit with the United States Postal Service. The decision shall be final and conclusive and shall not be appealable to the city council. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.055 Massage Establishment Operating Requirements.
        Each massage establishment must comply with the following operational requirements in addition to any other applicable rules or regulations under federal, state, or local law.

        A.     The California Massage Therapy Council Certificate and photographs for each person providing massage services at the massage establishment must be displayed prominently on the premises in a location that can be readily viewed by customers or city representatives.

        B.     A list of all persons providing massage services at the establishment, including each person’s full true name and other names used, photograph, and certificate from the California Massage Therapy Council must be provided to the director. Any changes to the persons providing massage services must be reported to the director within 10 working days of such change.

        C.    A list of the services provided to the public and the prices and minimum lengths for each must be available to the public in a conspicuous location on the premises.

        D.    Each massage establishment must keep a written record of the date and hour of each massage, the name and address of each customer, the name of the state certified massage professional administering the massage and the type of massage administered. The records must be maintained for a period of 2 years. Only those officials who are charged with enforcement of this chapter shall inspect these records and no information shall be used for any purpose other than enforcement of this chapter. No massage establishment owner or employee shall utilize the records in any manner unrelated to enforcement of this chapter.

        E.     Each massage establishment must be equipped at all times with an adequate supply of clean, sanitary towels, coverings, and linens. Clean towels, coverings, and linens must be stored in cabinets. Towels and linens must not be used on more than one customer or client, unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings must not be used on more than one customer or client. Soiled linens and paper towels must be deposited in separate, approved receptacles.

        F.     Adequate ventilation and lighting must be provided throughout the premises. Ventilation must be in accordance with Uniform Building Code Section 1105. Lighting must be in accordance with National Electric Code Article 220; and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts must be operative in each room or enclosure designated for massage.

        G.    At least one separate wash basin, providing soap or detergent and hot and cold running water, must be provided at all times for the use of employees. Such basin shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary towels shall be provided at each basin.

        H.    Each room or area in which massage is practiced must have a table designed and manufactured for medical or massage uses. No mattresses or beds are allowed. Massage tables must be covered with pads made of durable washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the health officer.

        I.      All wet heat rooms, dry heat rooms, steam rooms, vapor rooms, showers, bathrooms, cabinet rooms, and pools must be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department as often as needed, but not less than once each day the premises are open. Bathtubs must be thoroughly cleaned with disinfectant approved by the Health Department after each use.

        J.     The walls, ceilings, floors, and other physical facilities of the massage establishment must be maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.

        K.     Instruments utilized in performing massage must not be used on more than one customer unless they have been properly sterilized between uses. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage must be provided on the premises.

        L.     Two or more customers may be provided massage services in a single room only if a state certified massage professional is present in the room at all times with the customers. No persons other than those receiving a massage, parents or guardians of a minor who is receiving a massage, and those administering a massage shall enter or remain within a room where a massage is being given takes place.

        M.    No person shall engage in any of the following sexual activities on the premises of the massage establishment: fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas; sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or masturbation.

        N.    No owner, employee, or independent contractor of a massage establishment shall expose his or her specified anatomical areas in the presence of any customer or guest or make intentional physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer or guest.

        O.    Each customer’s genitals must be fully covered at all times. No person shall massage the genitals of any customer. No person shall massage any female customer whose breasts are not covered by a sheet or other opaque clothing. No person shall massage any female customer’s breasts.

        P.     All employees must be dressed in clean, opaque outer garments covering the body from knee to neck, excepting hands and arms, at all times while on the premises.

        Q.    Each employee must be provided individual lockers on the premises of the massage establishment.

        R.    No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in the possession of, consuming or using alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, except pursuant to a prescription for medication. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, or manager must not allow any person in violation of this subsection to enter or remain upon the premises.

        S.     No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage or use the same facilities as those of a school of massage.

        T.     No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute, or so direct or permit, any advertising matter that depicts any specified anatomical areas.

        U.    All exterior doors shall remain unlocked during business hours from the interior side except when no staff is available to ensure the security of clients and massage staff who are behind closed doors. (Ord. 1630)

 

5.45.060 Inspection of Massage Establishments.
        A.     Prior to first operating a massage establishment, the owner or operator must: (1) notify and cause the health officer to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with all applicable health laws and issue a report; and (2) submit a copy of the report to the director.

        B.     The health officer and every person authorized pursuant to this code to enforce this chapter shall each have the right to periodically enter and inspect any massage establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1630)

Chapter 5.50 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
5.50.005 Definition.
        Mobile X-ray Unit: X-ray generator that is or can be used for purposes of making medical diagnostic photofluorographic films of persons, and that is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.50.010 Permit Requirement.
        No person shall operate a mobile x-ray unit without first obtaining, and maintaining in full force and effect, a mobile x-ray operator permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.50.015 Investigation.
        The county health officer shall investigate mobile x-ray operator permit applicants to determine the following information:

        A.     Whether the applicant has been certified by the California Department of Health Services.

        B.     Whether the applicant is in compliance with applicable laws.

        C.    The qualifications of the applicant and its personnel.

        D.    The location of film storage files.

        E.     The adequacy of applicant’s equipment and proposed operation.

        F.     Such other information as deemed necessary. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.50.020 Approval or Denial of Permit.
        The county health official shall approve a mobile x-ray unit operator’s permit upon finding that operation of the mobile x-ray unit will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare; otherwise, the permit shall be denied. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.50.025 Permit Expiration.
        Each mobile x-ray operator permit shall expire at the end of each calendar year regardless of the date on which the permit was issued. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.50.030 Operation Standards.
        Mobile x-ray units shall be operated in accordance with the following standards:

        A.     No person under the age of 15 shall be x-rayed unless such person first presents a written prescription from a licensed physician.

        B.     No pregnant woman shall be x-rayed unless such person first presents a written prescription from a licensed physician.

        C.    Prior to being x-rayed, patients shall complete an information form showing the following:

        1.     Name, address and telephone number.

        2.     Physician’s name and address.

        3.     Pregnancy status, if female.

        4.     Date and result of tuberculin skin test, if under age 15.

        D.    Patients shall be given a written report of the x-ray results within 30 days of the procedure.

        E.     On a monthly basis the county health officer shall be given a written report indicating the number of x-ray films taken during the preceding month.

        F.     X-ray films shall be retained at least 10 years.

        G.    X-ray films shall be made available to a patient’s physician if the patient consents in writing.

        H.    The mobile x-ray unit shall contain conspicuously posted signs, in a format and location approved by the county health officer, containing the substance of the following statements:

        1.     Persons under the age of 15 are ineligible for an x-ray unless they have had a positive tuberculin skin test.

        2.     Pregnant women are ineligible for an x-ray without a doctor’s prescription.

        3.     A chest x-ray film is a useful aid to the physician for diagnosis of chest disease. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.55 OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION
5.55.005 Scope.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with state laws concerning drilling for oil on state-owned tide and submerged lands. Nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to drilling and production of oil where wells are located and bottomed on state-owned tide and submerged lands. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Controlled Drill Site: A surface location in the city upon which surface operations incident to oil well drilling or deepening and the production of oil and gas and other hydrocarbon substances from beneath the surface of the real property, within or outside the city, is permitted under the terms and conditions of this chapter and an oil/gas production permit. Controlled drill site boundaries shall be set by city council resolution.

        Controlled Drill Site No. 1: The real property in the city described as follows:

        Commencing at an 8-inch concrete monument which is the south quarter corner of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 12 West, SBB&M, Orange County, California; thence North 89° 46 feet West, a distance of 387.25 feet; thence North 0° 14 feet East, a distance of 40 feet to a point in the North line of Bolsa Avenue, as described in Book 560 at page 166 of Official Records of Orange County, which last mentioned point is the true point of beginning; thence North 0° 14 feet East, a distance of 1,020 feet; thence 89° 46 feet West, a distance of 136 feet; thence South 31° 27 feet 34 inches West, a distance of 121.90 feet; thence South 0° 14 feet West, a distance of 915.76 feet to the North line of the aforesaid Bolsa Avenue; thence South 89° 46 feet East, distance of 200 feet to the point of beginning; said land lying entirely within the boundaries of the U.S. Naval Ammunition and Net Depot, Seal Beach, California.

        Developed Area: That subsurface area under real property in the city in or under which there are proven oil and gas reserves and on which and from which real property there is a currently producing well being operated by virtue of an oil and gas lease executed and delivered prior to January 20, 1969, in which subsurface area the drilling for and production of oil and gas is permitted as provided in this chapter. Such area shall contain not less than one acre.

        Directional Drilling: The whipstocking or slant drilling of an oil and gas well more than 5º off vertical.

        Drilling Equipment: All temporary structures, tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for the drilling of a well or well hole. “Drilling equipment” includes without limitation: wood or steel derricks; portable masts; engines; pumps; temporary fuel and water tanks; and other like facilities ordinarily used in connection with the drilling of an oil and gas well.

        Exploratory Area: A city council designated area in which drilling and production for oil and gas is permitted pursuant to this chapter. Such area shall contain not less than 40 acres, the boundaries of which shall follow property lines, public streets, highways or alleys so far as practicable.

        Mine: All mineral bearing properties of whatever kind or character, whether underground, quarry, pit, well, spring, or other source from which any mineral substance is or may be obtained.

        Mineral: All mineral products, both metallic and nonmetallic, solid, liquid, or gaseous, and mineral waters of whatever kind or character.

        Oil Well: Any well or hole already drilled, being drilled, or to be drilled from the surface into the earth, which well or hole is used or intended to be used in connection with the drilling for, prospecting for, or production of oil, natural gas, or other hydrocarbon substances. “Oil well” shall also include a well or hole used for the subsurface injection into the earth of oil field waste, gases, water, or liquid substances, including any well or hole that has not been abandoned and is now in existence. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.015 License Tax.
        A.     In-City Production. Every person who engages in the business of producing crude oil, gas, petroleum, or other hydrocarbon substances from any well located in the city shall pay an annual license tax computed as follows:

        1.     $150 per producing well (“the base tax”); plus

        2.     $30 per producing well (“the annual oil permit well fee”); plus

        3.     20.5¢ per barrel of oil produced and shipped from the well during each fiscal quarter of the fiscal year (“the per-barrel tax”). Such amount shall be adjusted annually on July 1st of each year in accordance with the change in the producer price index during the previous fiscal year, but in no event shall the per barrel tax be adjusted to a rate below 12.5¢ per barrel of oil produced. Such adjustment shall be determined by the director of administrative services. For purposes of this section, “producer price index” means the producer price index for crude petroleum (domestic production), as prepared by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor, or if such agency shall cease to prepare such an index, then any comparable index covering the Los Angeles and Orange County areas prepared by any federal or state agency, which is approved by the city council.

        4.     The base tax and the annual oil permit well fee shall be paid by September 30th for each fiscal year. The base tax and the annual oil permit well fee shall be paid for each new well commencing production after such payment dates within 30 days after the commencement of production for such well.

        5.     The director of finance shall notify each person required to pay the per-barrel tax of the rate to be used for each fiscal year. Such payment shall be made during each quarter of every fiscal year in the manner provided herein, on or before each succeeding September 30th, December 31st, March 31st and June 30th, respectively. Production during the months of June, July and August shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before September 30th for the first quarter of a fiscal year; production during the months of September, October and November shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before December 31st; production during the months of December, January and February shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before March 31st; production during the months of March, April and May shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before June 30th.

        6.     For the purpose of determining the license tax in this subsection A:

        a.     A well is located in the city if the surface location of the well, the surface of the well itself, or if any portion of the well head is located in the city, irrespective of the subsurface location of the well, the producing interval thereof, or where the hold of the well may be bottomed.

        b.     A barrel of oil shall consist of 42 gallons (United States) of crude petroleum or hydrocarbon substances corrected for temperature variations in accordance with methods generally approved in the petroleum industry. Petroleum or hydrocarbon substances means crude oil remaining after the removal therefrom of water or other impurities by preliminary processing in the vicinity of the well site preparatory to the shipment thereof.

        c.     If oil produced from multiple wells shall be commingled without the production of the respective wells being separately measured, each well whose production has been so commingled shall be considered as having produced an equal part of the total.

        d.     Each oil producer in the city shall keep accurate records of any producer prices of such producer for oil produced in the city.

        7.     The person subject to the payment of the tax shall, before the business tax for each quarter becomes delinquent, file with the city a written statement setting forth the number of wells in operation and the number of barrels of oil produced by such well during the pertinent 3-month period of production upon which the tax due is to be calculated, and such person shall pay at such time the amount of the business tax computed upon the measure of the tax reported in the statement. The written statement shall include a declaration substantially as follows:

        “I declare under penalty of making a false declaration that I am authorized to make this statement, and that to the best of my knowledge and belief it is a true, correct, and complete statement made in good faith for the period stated, in compliance with the provisions of the Seal Beach Municipal Code.”

        Such statements shall not be conclusive against the city as to the information set forth therein, nor shall the filing of a statement preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action any additional tax that is determined to be due and payable.

        B.     Out-City Production. Every person conducting, managing, carrying on, or engaged in the business or activity of producing crude oil, gas, petroleum, or other hydrocarbon substances or products from any well or wells where such well, or any portion of such well passes through or is bottomed under any real property in the city and where portions of such well are located in one or more other jurisdictions and where such well head is not located in the city, shall pay the sum or sums in the manner and to the extent as hereinafter provided for a business license tax:

        1.     The sum or sums to be paid on a per fiscal year basis, payable quarterly.

        2.     For each fiscal year there shall be paid in the manner hereinafter provided, on or before September 30th, December 31st, March 31st, and June 30th, respectively, an amount equal to 01¢ per quarter for each barrel of oil produced by each well in excess of 300 barrels per quarter. Production during the months of June, July, and August shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before September 30th for the first quarter of the fiscal year; production during the months of September, October, and November shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before December 31st; production during the months of December, January, and February shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before March 31st; production during the months of March, April, and May shall constitute the measurement of the amount due on or before June 30th.

        3.     For the purpose of determining the per license tax in this subsection B:

        a.     A barrel of oil shall consist of 42 gallons (United States) of crude petroleum or hydrocarbon substances corrected for temperature variations in accordance with methods generally approved in the petroleum industry. Petroleum or hydrocarbon substances mean crude oil remaining after the removal therefrom of water or other impurities by preliminary processing in the vicinity of the well site preparatory to the shipment thereof.

        b.     If oil produced from multiple wells shall be commingled without the production of the respective wells being separately measured, each well whose production has been so commingled shall be considered as having produced an equal part of the total.

        C.    Nonproduction. Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaged in the business or activity of oil well, injection well or water source well drilling or servicing operations by refining oil or petroleum products and producing the byproducts, or marketing, selling, distributing at wholesale, oil or any petroleum products, or byproducts, or maintaining tankage or warehouse storage facilities where oil is kept for the purpose of whole distribution thereof shall pay the sum of $50.00 per year plus a sum equal to the total of the following respective amounts per year per employee, in excess of 2 for the average number of individuals employed by such person whose principal activities are within the city during the 12 months immediately preceding the 30 days next preceding the due date of the license:

 

For 3 to 100 employees, inclusive

$1.00 per employee

For the next 400 employees, inclusive

$0.50 per employee

For all employees over 500

$0.25 per employee

 

        A license issued pursuant to this subsection C shall include and permit the marketing, selling and distributing, at wholesale, of automobile tires, batteries, and accessories. The payment of a license as hereinabove provided in this subsection shall permit the engaging in any of the businesses or activities licensed without payment of an additional license tax; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection C shall be deemed to apply or relate to actual oil production operations or to the operation of automobile filling stations. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.020 Quarterly Statement.
        The person subject to the payment of the business license tax shall, before the business tax for each quarter becomes delinquent, file with the city a written statement setting forth the number of wells in operation and the number of barrels of oil produced by each well during the pertinent 3-month period of production upon which the tax due is to be calculated. Such person shall pay at such time the amount of the business tax computed upon the measure of the tax reported in the statement. The written statement shall include a declaration substantially as follows:

        “I declare under penalty of making a false declaration that I am authorized to make this statement, and that to the best of my knowledge and belief it is a true, correct, and complete statement made in good faith for the period stated, in compliance with the provisions of the Seal Beach Municipal Code.”

        Such statements shall not be conclusive against the city as to the information set forth therein, nor shall the filing of a statement preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action any additional tax that is later determined to be due and payable. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.025 Records.
        Every person required to have a license under this chapter shall keep accurate records as to the amount of oil produced and shipped or sold from wells located within the city and any other records required to be maintained by this chapter. All such records shall be kept for a minimum period of 3 years, and shall be made available for inspection at all reasonable times upon demand of the city manager, together with any shipping documents or sales invoices pertaining to such oil. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.030 Delinquency.
        If any fee herein required to be paid to the city is not paid at the time and in the manner provided, the same shall, 30 days thereafter, automatically be and become delinquent, and a penalty in an amount equal to 25% of such fee shall be added thereto for such delinquency, which penalty shall be and become a part of such fee and shall be enforced and collected as a part of such fee. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.035 Minerals.
        A.     Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no person shall open or operate any mine in the city, remove any minerals from any property in the city, or enter the subsurface of the city from any point for the purpose of removing any minerals from any property in the city.

        B.     A person who complies with the requirements of this chapter may remove oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances from property within the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.040 Existing Wells.
        The right to maintain and operate oil and gas wells lawfully drilled in or into the surface or the subsurface of the city prior to January 20, 1969, which wells are still being drilled or are producing oil or gas or other hydrocarbon substances as of January 20, 1969, shall not be prohibited; provided, however, any such wells shall be maintained and operated in accordance with law and in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the permits pursuant to which they were drilled. Any such well shall hereafter be referred to as an “existing well.” No existing well shall be drilled, re-drilled, or deepened below its present bottom without first complying with all the terms, conditions, and provisions of this chapter including without limitation the payment of fees, the securing of an oil/gas production permit and the approval of the exploratory area. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.045 Prohibited Conduct.
        A.     No person shall drill for or produce oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances from any surface location within the city, whether the subsurface operation from such well is within or outside the city, except as permitted by this chapter and this code.

        B.     No person shall drill or produce oil or gas or other hydrocarbon substances from the subsurface of the city from drill sites located either within or outside the city except as permitted by this chapter.

        C.    No person shall drill or re-drill or deepen below its present bottom any well for the production of or exploration for oil or gas or other hydrocarbon substances where any portion of the surface operation or the subsurface operation of such well is located within the city except as is authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.050 Nuisance Declaration.
        A.     The city council hereby finds and determines that it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person hereafter to erect any derrick or drilling equipment and hereafter to drill an oil and gas or oil or gas well from surface drill sites or locations within the city except in the manner provided in this chapter and this code.

        B.     The city council hereby finds and determines that it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person hereafter to drill or produce an oil and gas well or oil or gas well by directional or slant drilling methods from surface locations or sites outside the city such that the wells pass through or bottom in the subsurface of any property located within the city except in the manner provided in this chapter.

        C.    The city council hereby finds and determines that it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person hereafter to erect any derrick or drilling equipment and hereafter to drill an oil and gas or oil or gas well or to produce oil and gas or oil or gas by directional or slant drilling methods from surface locations or drill sites outside the city except in the manner authorized by this chapter and this code.

        D.    The city council hereby finds and determines that is unlawful and a public nuisance for any well to be drilled or produced, and for any building or structure to be erected, operated, or maintained, and for property to be used, contrary to the provisions of this chapter or this code. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.055 Drilling Regulations.
        A.     Subject to the approval of the exploratory area and the issuance of an oil/gas production permit, the drilling of an oil and gas or oil or gas well and the production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances may be carried on from drill sites located outside the city limits where such oil and gas wells are drilled into the subsurface of real property in the city by directional or slant drilling in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

        B.     Subject to the approval of the exploratory area and the issuance of an oil/gas production permit, the drilling of an oil and gas or oil or gas well and the production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances may be carried on from a controlled drill site. No drilling or production operations for oil and gas may be had on any other sites or surface real property within the city.

        C.    The use of a controlled drill site need not be exclusive to any single person, firm, or operator and may be used jointly by such applicant or permittee as may be granted an oil/gas production permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.060 Preliminary Exploratory Area.
        A.     No oil/gas production permit shall be considered by the city council until the city council has approved the boundaries of a preliminary exploratory area. An application for approval of the boundaries of a proposed preliminary exploratory area shall be required, and in such application the applicant shall set forth and describe the real property in the city that the applicant proposes to explore for oil and gas purposes. A map shall also be attached to the application, which map shall clearly show and outline the proposed preliminary exploratory area. The preliminary exploratory area may include property within and property outside the city.

        B.     Each application for approval of the boundaries of a preliminary exploratory area shall be accompanied by an application for a permit to drill a well for exploratory purposes and an application fee in an amount set by city council resolution. The application fee shall entitle applicant upon approval of the boundaries of a preliminary exploratory area to drill one exploratory well. Such exploratory well shall not be permitted by applicant to be placed into production except for testing purposes until applicant has applied for and received approval by the city council of the boundaries of the final exploratory area.

        C.    Each applicant requesting approval of a preliminary exploratory area shall have the contractual or proprietary right and authority to drill for oil and gas under the surface of at least 75% of the area of the real property in the city described and included in any preliminary exploratory area. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.065 Final Exploratory Area.
        A.     No oil/gas production permit shall be considered by the city council until the city council has approved the boundaries of the final exploratory area, hereinafter called exploratory area. An application for approval of the boundaries of the proposed exploratory area shall be required and in such application the applicant shall set forth and describe the real property in and outside the city that the applicant proposes to explore further for oil and gas purposes. A map shall also be attached to the application, which map shall clearly show and outline the exploratory area. Such exploratory area shall not contain less than 40 acres. Each such application shall have attached thereto geological information and the opinion of a geologist or petroleum engineer indicating the anticipated geological structure included within the proposed exploratory area.

        B.     Any person who has received approval of a preliminary exploratory area and a permit for an exploratory well shall apply for approval of a final exploratory area if the well is capable of producing an average of 5 or more barrels of oil or gas in commercial quantities or oil and gas in commercial quantities after a maximum of a 90 day test period. No further or additional exploratory wells shall be drilled until an application for an exploratory area has been filed with and approved by the city council.

        C.    Each application for approval of the boundaries of an exploratory area shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set by city council resolution. The application fee shall be used to defray the costs to the city of study, investigation, and hearing concerning the proposed exploratory area set forth in the application.

        D.    Each applicant requesting approval of an exploratory area shall have the contractual or proprietary right and authority to drill for oil and gas under the surface of at least 75% of the area of the real property in the city described and included in any exploratory area.

        E.     The city council, in consultation with the applicant, shall determine the nature and probable extent of the exploratory area. Having determined the probable extent of the exploratory area, the city council shall delineate and describe the approved exploratory area.

        F.     The city council, as a condition to granting its approval, may require each applicant or permittee to pool all real property that it controls within the approved exploratory area. The permittee shall immediately form one or more pools within the approved exploratory area, provided, however, that there shall not be more than 3 pools in an approved exploratory area. After such pool is created, the property included therein shall thereafter be referred to as the “pooled area.” The applicant shall not be required to obtain leases or contractual rights to explore all of the real property within such exploratory area, but the applicant shall agree, in writing, that the owners of any oil and gas rights within the exploratory area may join in any leasing arrangements covering the pooled area containing their property for the production of oil and gas from the area. The owners of oil and gas rights within the exploratory area shall have the right to join in any such lease and to share in the rental or royalty payments for oil and gas produced from the approved exploratory area or pooled area. The shares of royalty to be paid shall be computed on the same basis as that of the average of real property owners, by surface area, who have by lease or other document agreed to the drilling for and production of oil and gas by the applicant from the subsurface of the exploratory area.

        The owner of any oil and gas rights within the exploratory area shall be granted the right to join in any such pooled area on the basis set forth in this section. The permittee or lessee shall accept the owner of such rights into the pooled area as provided in this section upon receiving written notice that such owner will join in and become a part of such pooled area covering the exploratory area and upon the execution of the same form of lease executed by other owners; provided, however, the oil and gas rights are appurtenant to real property included in the exploratory area. The owner of oil and gas rights within the exploratory area may join such pooled area and be included in the right to receive a pro rata share of oil and gas royalty the same as if the owner had joined such lease by giving notice to the permittee at any time after the exploratory area is approved; provided, however, such owner waives any right to oil and gas royalties, rentals, or proceeds on or for any and all production from the exploratory area up to the first day of the following month after the time such notice is given to the permittee within 5 years of the effective date of the first oil/gas production permit issued in the exploratory area. The permittee shall be required to impound the oil and gas royalty for all property within the exploratory area (in which the permittee does not have a contractual or proprietary right to drill for oil and gas beneath the surface) for a period of 5 years from and after the effective date of such first oil/gas production permit and to, during such 5-year period, pay such royalty, as they are entitled, to the owners of oil and gas rights who give written notice and execute the same form of lease or agreement executed by other owners. Upon the expiration of 5 years from the effective date of the first oil/gas production permit, the permittee shall distribute the remainder of the funds impounded to the owners of oil and gas rights who have executed the lease in the same manner as shares of royalty are apportioned. No such owner of oil and gas rights shall be entitled to an oil/gas production permit or the right to drill an oil and gas well due to failure to join any pooled area or non-participation in oil and gas royalty from real property located within the exploratory area.

        The pooling or unitizing of oil and gas rights within the exploratory area as between owners, lessees, or others having rights therein may be made a condition to the approval of the exploratory area.

        The city council may modify the restriction and conditions required by this chapter and impose such other conditions as it may deem necessary to carry out the purpose and intention of these sections and to fairly and equitably protect the oil and gas rights of the owners in any exploratory area.

        G.    In its action upon the application, if the city council shall find that the boundaries of the proposed exploratory area include all of the subsurface portion of real property in which there is likely to be found deposits of oil and gas from a probably single pool, it shall approve the boundaries of the proposed exploratory area, or, if such boundaries can be modified to justify such a finding, it shall approve the boundaries of the exploratory area as modified. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.070 Production in Developed Areas.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter requiring that the exploratory or producing area contain not less than 40 acres, the holder of a valid oil/gas production permit may drill and produce an oil and gas well where such well is bottomed and produced from a developed area. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.075 Permit Requirement.
        It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person hereafter to conduct any drilling operations for a well hole or hereafter to drill and produce any oil and gas well or well hole in the surface or subsurface of the city from any drill site without first having applied for and obtained from the city council an oil/gas production permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.080 Permit Application.
        A.     Each oil/gas production permit application shall be made in writing and shall include:

        1.     The legal description of the proposed drill site.

        2.     A description of all properties, both within and outside the city, through which such well is proposed to pass.

        3.     A statement that the applicant has the right, by reason of ownership or the permission of the owner, to pass through and enter all property through which such well is proposed to pass.

        4.     The proposed location, the type, kind, size, and amount of equipment, and the method of operation of the proposed well, or an approved well plan.

        5.     The proposed method of handling and using any product proposed to be developed.

        6.     In all cases where the well is proposed to be bottomed in the city, a statement that the applicant has the contractual or proprietary right and authority to drill for oil and gas under the surface of at least 75% of the real property described and included in the approved exploratory area or a statement bringing the application within the requirements for production in developed areas.

        7.     In all cases where the well is proposed to be drilled from a controlled drill site within the city, a statement that the applicant has complied or will comply, before spudding in the well, with all requirements of the city (or in the case of unincorporated territory, the county) in which the well is to be bottomed.

        8.     A detailed written report of a geologist or other person experienced in the field of subsidence as a result of petroleum extraction. The report shall indicate the nature and extent of the subsidence, if any, that can reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the proposed drilling and production or drilling or production, as the case may be. The report also shall indicate the nature and extent of the damage to property, if any, that could reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the drilling and production or drilling or production, as the case may be.

        B.     The filing of an oil/gas production permit application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set by city council resolution. The application fee shall be used to defray the costs to the city of study and investigation by the city manager, other staff members, consultants, and the city council concerning the proposal set forth in the application. No fee for an application for an exploratory well shall be required. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.085 Approval or Denial of Permit.
        A.     Upon receipt of an oil/gas production permit application the city council shall refer such application to the city manager for study and investigation. The application shall be considered by the city council within one month after the city has complied with the California Environmental Quality Act.

        B.     In its action upon the application, if the city council finds that the terms and conditions of this chapter have been complied with and that the persons and property within the city will not be adversely affected by the granting of the application, and that there is no reasonable probability of danger or damage to any real or personal property or injury to any person within the city by reason of subsidence of the surface of the earth or other reason due to the extraction of oil or gas or oil and gas, and if, in a case where the proposed drill site is located within the city, the city council shall find that there is no reasonable probability of danger or damage to any real or personal property or injury to any person by reason of the production and extraction of oil or gas or oil and gas or other hydrocarbon substances, it shall grant the permit upon such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate to protect persons and property within the city from injury or damage or hazard of injury or damage, and when the drill site is in the city, such further conditions as deemed appropriate to eliminate or minimize the adverse affect of such drill site on persons and property in the vicinity. In all other cases, the city council shall deny the application.

        C.    When the city council has approved an oil/gas production permit, the permit shall not be effective until it is issued by the city manager. The city manager shall issue an oil/gas production permit approved by the city council upon receipt of written acceptance of the permit by the permittee and payment to the city of a permit fee in an amount set by city council resolution. Such permit fee shall be in addition to the application fee. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.090 Operation Standards.
        Drilling shall be conducted in accordance with the following operation standards:

        A.     Drilling operations for any well shall commence within 90 days from the effective date of the permit and thereafter be prosecuted diligently to completion. If a producing well is not secured within one year from the effective date of the permit, the well shall be abandoned. The city council, for good cause, may allow additional time for the commencement of the well.

        B.     The permittee shall comply with all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and of any other city through which the well or any part thereof is located or to be drilled, and the permittee shall comply with all ordinances of the county when the well or any part thereof is located or is to be drilled partly within the unincorporated territory of the county. The permittee shall comply with all rules and regulations of the South Coast Air Quality Management District.

        C.    A copy of the complete record of any such well furnished to the Division of Oil and Gas of the state shall be filed by the permittee with the city manager upon request. The permittee shall, within 30 days after any oil and gas or oil or gas well is placed on production, file with the city manager a plat showing the location of the producing interval and the drill site. All records submitted pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be confidential and privileged.

        D.    All well holes and oil and gas wells passing through or bottomed in or under any real property in the city, which wells are drilled from drilling sites outside the city, shall be below a depth of 200 feet upon entering any real property within the city.

        E.     All well holes, oil and gas wells, oil wells, and gas wells bottomed in the city shall be bottomed in a preliminary exploratory area, an exploratory area or a developed area.

        F.     City representatives shall be permitted at all reasonable times to review and inspect the drill site and any operations or methods used in the drilling for and production of oil and gas.

        G     The permittee shall hold the city and its officers and employees harmless from any claims by third parties arising out of or resulting from the permittee’s operation under any oil/gas production permit. The permittee upon request and after commercial production is established shall be insured for not less than $2,000,000 against liability in tort arising from the drilling or production activities or operations incident to the drilling and production of an oil and gas well. A certificate of such insurance shall be filed with the city clerk before drilling is commenced. As an alternative to the afore required liability insurance, the city council may approve a satisfactory bond in a minimum amount of $2,000,000 or the city council may approve a plan of self insurance by the permittee. Drilling and production shall be suspended at any time when the required insurance, bond, or self insurance plan is not in full force and effect.

        H.    The oil/gas production permit shall become null and void unless the permit is accepted by the applicant in its entirety in writing, filed with the city manager within 30 days from the effective date thereof, together with the payment of the permit fee and no work on such drill site shall be commenced until such permit is accepted and issued.

        I.      The operation of any oil and gas well and production therefrom drilled pursuant to an oil/gas production permit shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas of the state, or any successor agency or body thereto.

        J.     The oil and gas or oil or gas well drilled shall be drilled only within properties which the permittee set forth in its application as the properties through which such well was proposed to pass unless the permittee secures approval of the city council to cause such well to pass through other properties. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.095 Additional Standards.
        No oil/gas production permit shall be issued where all or any part of the proposed drill site is located within the city without the following additional standards being required and made a part and condition of such permit; provided, however, that the city council may in the event the proposed drill site is more than 1,000 feet from any current or proposed residential or commercial area, waive any or all of such following standards upon a finding that the standards would impose a hardship on the permittee and would not serve to protect the citizens of the city. The city council may require the following additional standards to be made a condition of any permit for wells drilled from a site outside the city, if such drill site is within 1,000 feet of any developed residential or commercial area.

        A.     All drilling shall be done by means of a steel derrick enclosed with fire proofed and soundproofed material, and operations shall be carried on diligently from the commencement of the drilling until the completion of the well or until such well is abandoned.

        B.     All drilling and production equipment shall be operated by either electric or muffled internal combustion engines. All engines shall be equipped with Maxim Silencers or such other types of mufflers as may be satisfactory to the city council.

        C.    No sump holes shall be permitted, and rotary mud, drill cuttings, and other waste material from drilling operations shall be discharged into a steel tank. Such tank, drill cuttings, rotary mud, and waste material shall be removed from the controlled drill site upon completion of drilling operations.

        D.    During all drilling or production operations, except in the case of emergency, all equipment or supplies to be delivered to the drill site shall be transported, trucked, or conveyed to the drill site and unloaded only on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. As soon as commercial production has been established in any new well, acquisition of a right-of-way or the construction of a pipeline shall be started within 10 days and work thereon diligently prosecuted until such pipeline is completed in order to eliminate the trucking of oil. Except in cases of emergency, all oil and gas shall be shipped and transported through pipelines when completed. All pipelines outside of such drill site shall be laid to a depth of at least 3 feet below the surface of the ground.

        E.     Private roads for ingress and egress to and from the drill site shall be surfaced with gravel and maintained in good condition at all times during drilling and production operations. No signs shall be erected on the drill site except those required by law or permitted by this code.

        F.     Within 90 days after the completion of drilling operations or abandonment of further drilling, the derrick and all drilling equipment, including temporary tanks, shall be removed from the drill site. Well abandonment shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Division of Oil and Gas of the state. Upon such well abandonment, the permittee shall restore the property as nearly as possible to its original condition and shall remove all concrete foundations, oil-soaked soil, and debris; all holes or depressions shall be filled to the natural surface.

        G.    The applicant or permittee shall designate a competent representative who shall be responsible for the supervision of drilling operations and the carrying out of conditions of any permit. Such representative shall be available at all times during drilling operations and shall be the responsible contact agent of the applicant or the permittee whom the city council may require to carry out the provisions of the permit.

        H.    Within 30 days after commercial production has been established, there shall be commenced and prosecuted diligently to completion on each controlled drill site adequate landscaping and screening, either with shrubbery, masonry, or concrete wall or their equal, so that the same shall not be unsightly nor hazardous. All tanks shall be depressed so that the top of any tank and other equipment and appurtenances shall not extend more than 5 feet above the surface of any controlled drill site unless otherwise permitted by the city council.

        I.      Oil produced from such wells may be stored in steel tanks on the site. Unless otherwise permitted by the city council, the total amount of storage for production, recycling, and all storage and operational purposes shall not exceed 2,000 barrels, and no tank shall exceed 1,000 barrel capacity.

        J.     All drilling and production equipment installed or operated upon any controlled drill site shall be so constructed, operated, and maintained that no noise, vibration, odor, or other harmful or annoying substances of effects therefrom which can be eliminated or diminished by the use of modern and approved types of equipment silencers or greater care shall ever be permitted to result from operations on any controlled drill site to the injury or annoyance of persons in the vicinity of such controlled drill site. Proven technological and mechanical improvements in methods of drilling and production and in the type of equipment used therefor shall be adopted from time to time, as the same become available if the use of such equipment, improvements, and methods will reduce noise, vibration, odors, or the harmful effects of annoying substances. The use of equipment in any controlled drill site, which equipment causes noise or vibration, shall at all times be subject to the approval of the city council, and the city council may amend any permit and require the permittee to abate any noise or vibration which constitutes a nuisance and is detrimental to persons or property in the vicinity where such equipment is being operated.

        K.     All of the operations at the drill site shall be conducted in a careful and orderly manner, and the premises shall at all times be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly manner.

        L.     All fire-fighting equipment as required and approved by the fire chief shall be installed and maintained on the controlled drill site at all times during the drilling and production operations.

        M.    No earthen sump shall be used or maintained on any controlled drill site, and all waste water, mud, oil, or other waste products from drilling and producing operations shall be accumulated in steel tanks, and such tanks shall not be permitted to overflow at any time.

        N.    The city council may restrict the use of certain streets, alleys, or roadways in connection with the permittee’s operations, which streets, alleys, or roadways shall be named in any permit granted. In the event any street, alley, or roadway is damaged by the permittee’s operations, such damage shall be paid for by the permittee upon demand by the city, and the failure to pay such damage, being the reasonable cost of the repair of any such damaged portions, shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit and the collection of such damage at law by the city.

        O.    No permanent derrick shall be installed or maintained on any controlled drill site or used for the drilling or production of any oil or gas well.

        P.     After an oil and gas well is placed on production, all equipment with moving parts in use at such well shall be securely enclosed in a building or by an adequate type of fence or approved wire screen or housing, sufficient to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons to such moving parts. Such protections shall be subject to the approval of the chief building inspector. Any gates thereto shall be securely fastened at all times except when authorized personnel are in attendance at such well. (Ord. 1515)

5.55.100 Permit Suspension or Revocation.
        An oil/gas production permit may be suspended or revoked by the city council for any material violation of the conditions of the permit by the permittee or for persistent violation of any law by the permittee in the operation of any such well. The city council shall not revoke a permit without first giving the permittee 10 days’ written notice of the nature of the violations and the city council’s intention to revoke such permit. If, within such period, the permittee requests a hearing, the city council shall grant such hearing within 15 days after the date of the request. At such hearing, evidence shall be presented to establish to the satisfaction of the city council the extent and nature of the violation that constitutes grounds for the revocation, and the permittee shall be given an opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying at such hearing. The permittee shall thereafter be permitted at that hearing, or at a continued hearing (if a continuance is requested by the permittee) to present evidence to disprove or explain such alleged violations. The city council shall thereupon, after hearing all the evidence, determine whether or not the permit should be revoked, and the city council determination thereon shall be final. If the city council determines that the permit should be revoked, it shall order the revocation, and the permittee shall thereafter abandon the well in strict conformity with the requirements of law. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.105 Subsidence.
        A.     The city engineer shall, from time to time make such tests and observations as deemed appropriate to determine if any adverse effect upon the surface of the city is occasioned or is in danger of being occasioned by reason of the removal of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances from the subsurface of the city pursuant to a well, no part of which is located within the city, but which drains a subterranean oil or gas pool, part of which is in the city. Upon determining the existence of such adverse effect or danger, the city engineer may order the immediate suspension of further production from such well or wells as may be located entirely or partly within the city, and, in the event of such an order, production on such well shall be suspended by the permittee or other operator immediately upon receiving notice of such order. The permittee or other person lawfully producing oil or gas, or oil and gas, or any other hydrocarbon substances from any such well may appeal to the city council. The city council may, upon good cause being shown by the permittee or such other person, vacate or modify the order of the city engineer, or if no part of the well is in the city, the city council may direct the city attorney to immediately commence such actions or proceedings as may be necessary for the abatement, removal, and enjoining of further drilling operations which adversely affect property within the city in the manner provided by law and to take such other action and to apply to any court having jurisdiction to grant such relief as will restrain or enjoin any person from drilling or producing any such well.

        B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city council may require an applicant for a final exploratory area or oil/gas production permit to submit a plan for water injection or other plan for secondary recovery and to eliminate any possibility of subsidence or other possible damage to property within the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.55.110 Oil Drilling.
        It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, whether as principal, agent, servant, employee or otherwise, to drill any well for oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances upon those portions of the territorial limits and boundaries of the city lying landward from the Pacific Ocean or to produce oil or gas or other hydrocarbon substances from any well so located, or to erect, construct or install, or cause to be erected, constructed or installed, or to work upon or assist in any way in the erection, construction or installation of any derrick, machinery or other apparatus or equipment designed or intended to be used for the purpose of drilling or producing any such well located landward from the Pacific Ocean, except that the provision hereof shall not apply to the land and territory lying within the area commonly known as the United States Naval Ammunition and Net Depot, and further, the foregoing shall not apply to any territory which may be annexed to the city from and after January 1, 1956. [Enacted by Ordinance No. 483 by initiative.] (Ord. 1515)

 
Chapter 5.60 PUBLIC AND CLUB DANCES
5.60.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Club Dance: dance, other than a public dance or dance given in a private residence, conducted by any club or association of persons for its members or bona fide guests more often than once in any 4-month period, attended by more than 200 persons, at which an admission fee is charged, a donation is solicited or dues are paid therefor.

        Dancing Academy: regularly established place maintained or conducted for the purpose of giving instructions in dancing, where the operator contracts specially with each person for a specified number of lessons.

        Nonprofit Club or Organization: association of persons operated solely for charitable purposes. “Nonprofit club or organization” includes the student body of a school.

        Public Dance: dance, other than a club dance, dance given in a private residence or the normal activities of a dancing academy, attended by more than 200 persons, at which an admission fee is charged or a donation is solicited, or any gathering of persons upon any premises where dancing takes place. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.010 Exemptions.
        This chapter shall not apply to the following:

        A.     Dances conducted by a nonprofit club or organization on property owned by a public entity with the co-sponsorship of such public entity.

        B.     Dances conducted at private residences. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.015 Permit Requirement.
        No person shall conduct a club dance or public dance without first obtaining, and maintaining in full force and effect, a dance permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.020 Permit Application.
        A.     Dance permit applications shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the city manager and shall be accompanied by an investigation fee.

        B.     No application may be filed for any premises for which an application has been denied for reasons pertaining to the premises unless one year has elapsed from the date of the denial. Notwithstanding the preceding, the city manager may accept the filing of an application for any premises that was originally denied if the conditions that caused such denial no longer exist. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.025 Approval or Denial of Permit.
        The city manager shall cause such investigation to be made as deemed necessary and shall thereafter approve the issuance of the dance permit unless a finding is made that the conducting of the proposed public or club dance will violate a law or be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 1515)

5.60.030 Public and Club Dance Fees.
        An applicant shall pay to the city an investigation fee and a permit fee set by city council resolution. The city council may reduce or waive the fees at its sole discretion. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.035 Nontransferability.
        No dance permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.040 Disciplinary Action.
        A dance permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager if the activity authorized by such permit is conducted, maintained or carried on in violation of this chapter or any law or is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. The city manager shall conduct a hearing prior to revoking or suspending a permit. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least 3 days prior to the date set for that hearing. Such notice shall also contain a statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending such license. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.045 Inspections.
        City representatives shall be admitted immediately without charge at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting the premises and the conduct of all persons present at premises used in connection with a dance permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.050 Age Restrictions.
        The permittee shall not permit persons under 18 years of age to be admitted or remain at any public or club dance unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, person having legal custody of such minor except when such dance shall be advertised and publicized as one conducted exclusively for minors between 14 and 18 years of age, in which event only persons of such specified age group shall be admitted as participants. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.055 Re-entry Prohibited.
        The permittee shall not issue or permit the use of any form of pass-out checks, stamps or other devices by which any person in attendance may be enabled or permitted to leave or depart from such dance and later return. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.060 Lighting, Food and Drink.
        The faces of persons shall be recognizable and identifiable by a person of normal vision at a distance of 30 feet at all times. The provisions of the Health and Safety Code shall be applicable where food or drink is prepared or sold. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.065 Operating Hours.
        Public dances and club dances shall not be conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day. Public dances and club dances held exclusively for persons between the ages of 14 and 18 inclusive shall not be conducted between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on any day. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.070 Parking Area.
        The parking area of any premises wherein any public or club dance is being conducted shall be lighted to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.075 Rules of Conduct.
        The following rules of conduct shall be enforced at all public dances and club dances. The permittee shall be responsible for complying with the rules and removal of all persons who fail to comply therewith, and shall cause the rules to be posted and continually maintained in places designated by the chief of police.

        A.     No disorderly person shall be permitted to enter or remain on such premises.

        B.     Boisterous and obscene conduct is prohibited.

        C.    The use of profanity is prohibited.

        D.    No person shall be permitted to smoke on the premises.

        E.     No person shall loiter or be permitted to loiter by the licensee in the parking lot and/or other areas adjacent to the building on the premises in which a public dance is being conducted.

        F.     The permittee shall not allow any intoxicated person to be admitted or remain at any public dance or club dance.

        G.    Conduct and activity that disturbs the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood shall be prevented and controlled. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.60.080 Security Guards.
        A.     The permittee shall provide licensed security guards, in accordance with the following formula:

        1.     Inside dance area:

 

0—100 patrons

2 male guards plus 1 female guard

100—200 patrons

3 male guards plus 1 female guard

over 200 patrons

4 male guards plus 1 female guard

 

        2.     Outside area and parking lot:

 

0—50 vehicles

1 male guard

50—100 vehicles

2 male guards

over 100 vehicles

3 male guards

 

        B.     All security guards employed by the licensee shall be not less than 21 years of age. The permittee shall not employ any person who has been convicted of any felony; convicted of any drug or narcotic violations or convicted of any crime constituting a sex offense. The permittee shall submit the name, address and date of birth of the prospective security guard to the chief of police no less than 10 days prior to the date of employment, on a form provided by the chief of police. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.65 TAXICABS
5.65.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        City Authorization: city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city.

        Company Permit: a valid company permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business.

        Driver: a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.

        Driver Permit: a valid driver permit issued by OCTAP authorizing person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab.

        OCTAP: the Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority.

        Operate a Taxicab: to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the city.

        Owner: the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.

        Taxicab: a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the city, capable of carrying not more than 8 persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the California Public Utilities Commission, or any vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the California Public Utilities Commission.

        Taxicab Permit: a valid taxicab permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.010 City Authorization Required.
        A.     A person shall operate a taxicab only if the owner of that taxicab is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business.

        B.     An owner shall allow a taxicab owned by or under the control of the owner to be operated only if the owner is authorized by OCTAP to operate a taxicab business.

        C.    City’s authorization to operate a taxicab and taxicab business in the city shall be deemed granted provided each driver and taxicab business possesses all required OCTAP permits and each business possesses a valid city business license. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.015 Driver Permit Required.
        A person shall operate a taxicab only if that person possesses a driver permit and city authorization has been granted. An owner shall allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by or under the control of the owner only if that driver possesses a driver permit and city authorization has been granted. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.020 Taxicab Permit Required.
        A person shall operate a taxicab only if that vehicle displays a taxicab permit and if city authorization has been granted. An owner shall allow a taxicab owned by or under the control of the owner to be operated in the city only if that vehicle displays a taxicab permit and if city authorization has been granted. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.025 Company Permit Required.
        A person shall operate a taxicab business in the city only if that person possesses a company permit and if city authorization has been granted. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.030 Application for Permits.
        Application for a driver permit, taxicab permit or company permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing the application as established by the Orange County Transportation Authority. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.035 Testing for Controlled Substances and Alcohol.
        A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by any and all applicable and federal statutes. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.040 Insurance Required.
        A driver operating a taxicab in the city shall at all times carry proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution. Such proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.045 Nontransferability.
        No permit issued under this chapter shall be used by or assigned to any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.050 Equipment.
        A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.055 Mechanical Condition.
        A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.060 Operational Requirements.
        A.     Each driver shall carry each passenger to his/her destination by only the most direct and accessible route.

        B.     Each taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution.

        C.    Each taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger’s compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution:

        1.     A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab;

        2.     The driver’s name and address;

        3.     The owner’s name, address and telephone number;

        4.     The taxicab identification number;

        5.     The driver permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

        6.     The taxicab permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and

        7.     Any other information required by the city.

        D.    A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying fare.

        E.     A taxicab shall be operated only if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

        F.     A driver shall not leave his or her taxicab to solicit passenger.

        G.    The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.065 Rates and Charges.
        No driver shall charge rates or charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.65.070 Separate from Business Licensing.
        The requirements of this chapter are separate from all other provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, those provisions related to business licensing. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.70 MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
5.70.005 Fortune Teller/Psychic.
        A.     No person shall carry on the business of a fortune teller/psychic without first obtaining a fortune telling permit.

        B.     For purposes of this section, “fortune teller/psychic” means a person that purports to have extra-sensory powers and that engages in the business of providing forecasting of future events.

        C.    A fortune telling permit application shall be submitted to the city manager. The application consists of the application fee and the following:

        1.     A city-provided application form containing: (i) the applicant’s name, mailing address and phone number; (ii) the address of the proposed business; (iii) the names and addresses of other fortune telling businesses currently operated in the state by the applicant; and (iv) a list of fortune telling related permits that the applicant currently holds or has had suspended or revoked by another governmental entity.

        2.     Two passport-size color photographs that clearly show the applicant’s face.

        3.     The applicant’s fingerprints on a police department-provided form.

        4.     A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that the information submitted in connection with the application is true and correct.

        D.    The city manager shall deny a fortune telling permit within 30 city business days of the filing of a complete application if the applicant has knowingly submitted a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact; otherwise the permit shall be approved. Written notice of the denial of a fortune telling permit, and the reasons therefor, shall be provided to the applicant.

        E.     A fortune telling permit shall not be effective until the permittee files with the city manager a bond in the principal sum of $10,000 executed by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state. The bond shall be given as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, injury, theft, or other unfair dealing suffered by any patron of the permittee.

        F.     Fortune telling permits shall be valid for a period of one year. Applications for renewal of a fortune telling permit shall consist of all of the elements of an initial application other than the applicant’s fingerprints, and shall be processed in the same manner as initial applications. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.70.010 Secondhand Aircraft Parts.
        No person shall engage in the business of selling secondhand aircraft parts or accessories without first obtaining a secondhand aircraft dealer permit from the chief of police of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.70.015 Collection Agencies.
        Each collection agency shall deliver to the city clerk a bond in the principal sum of $10,000 executed by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state. The bond shall be given as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, injury, theft, or other unfair dealing suffered by any patron of the permittee. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.70.020 Entertainment Cafés.
        Entertainment cafés shall be conducted in accordance with the following operation standards:

        A.     No minor under the age of 21 years shall be permitted in an entertainment café unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.

        B.     No entertainment café shall remain open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        C.    All portions of required parking lots shall be lighted with sufficient lighting to record a light intensity measurement of 1.5 foot candles. All required park lots shall be supervised by the permittee or its agents.

        D.    No patron shall engage in and no permittee shall conduct offensive to public decency or morals or any conduct or activity that disturbs the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighbors.

        E.     No drinking shall take place on the dance floor nor shall any beverage be transported thereon during the time that any such dance may be in progress.

        F.     City representatives shall be admitted without charge at any time for the purpose of inspection to verify compliance with this section. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.70.025 Marijuana activities.
        A.     Purpose and Findings.

        1.     The city council finds that in order to serve public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses within the city, the declared purpose of this section is to prohibit marijuana cultivation, marijuana dispensaries, marijuana deliveries, and all other marijuana activities, whether or not for profit, with limited exceptions for personal medical use by qualified patients or holders of identification cards for medical purposes or provision of medical marijuana by primary caregivers to less than 3 qualified patients and identification card holders for medical purposes as allowed by state law, and to allow indoor cultivation of marijuana at private residences subject to compliance with specified conditions, as set forth in this section. It is further the intent of the city for the State of California not to issue any state licenses for marijuana businesses or other commercial marijuana activities to operate in the city.

        2.     Nothing in this chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any provision of state or federal law.

        B.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     AUMA: the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act approved by the voters on November 8, 2016, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        2.     Commercial Marijuana Activity: shall include, but is not limited to, the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana and/or marijuana products, whether or not for profit. “Commercial marijuana activity” also includes the activities of any business or other activity licensed by the state or other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Divisions 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

        3.     Compassionate Use Act or CUA: the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, or Proposition 215, approved by the voters on November 5, 1996, and codified in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        4.     Concentrated Cannabis: shall have the same meaning as the phrase “cannabis concentrate” is defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        5.     Cultivation: any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

        6.     Delivery: shall mean and include the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under this division that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products. “Delivery” shall also include, but is not limited to, all “delivery” activities as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(m), as the same may be amended from time to time.

        7.     Distribution: the procurement, sale, and transport of marijuana, marijuana products, and marijuana accessories between entities licensed under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

        8.     Identification Card: a document issued by the State Department of Health Services which identifies a person authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana and the person’s designated primary caregiver, if any.

        9.     Indoor or Indoors: means within a fully enclosed and secure structure as defined in subsection E of this section.

        10.   Licensee: the holder of any state-issued license related to marijuana activities, including, but not limited to, licenses issued under Divisions 8 and 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

        11.   Manufacture: to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.

        12.   Marijuana: shall have the same meaning as “cannabis” as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(f), as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Marijuana” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. “Marijuana” also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code. For the purpose of this section, “marijuana” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 81000 of the Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. Marijuana also means “medical marijuana” as defined in this section.

        13.   Marijuana Accessories: any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the human body.

        14.   Marijuana Dispensary: any facility, location, vehicle, or activity, whereby marijuana, marijuana products, or marijuana devices for the use of marijuana are offered, either individually or in any combination for retail sale, whether mobile or stationary, including an establishment that delivers marijuana and marijuana products as part of a retail sale. The term “dispensary” shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, all “dispensary” and retail facilities as defined in Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time. The term “dispensary” also includes a mobile marijuana dispensary as defined in this section. The term “dispensary” shall be broadly and liberally interpreted to achieve the purpose of this section.

        15.   Marijuana Product: shall mean marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. “Marijuana product” shall include both non-medical marijuana products and medical marijuana products as defined in this section.

        16.   MCRSA: the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as contained, codified, enacted, and signed into law on October 9, 2015, as Assembly Bill No. 243, Assembly Bill No. 266, and Senate Bill 643, and as amended by Assembly Bill 21 in 2016, as the same may be amended from time to time. The MCRSA was formerly known as the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act.

        17.   Medical Marijuana: marijuana used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other serious medical condition for which marijuana is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as such section may be amended from time to time.

        18.   Medical Marijuana Product: shall have the same meaning as “cannabis product” or “medical cannabis product” as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(ag), as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include marijuana, as well as concentrates and extractions, intended to be sold for use by medical marijuana patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215).

        19.   Mobile Marijuana Dispensary: the use of a motor vehicle that in any way involves growing, distributing, delivering, selling or making available to persons, with or without financial payment or consideration and regardless of the number of persons served, marijuana or medical marijuana products, including marijuana for medical purposes as described in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5.

        20.   Outdoor or Outdoors: any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

        21.   Person: any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

        22.   Primary Caregiver: the individual, designated by a qualified patient or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person.

        23.   Physician: an individual who possesses a recognition in good standing to practice medicine or osteopathy issued by the Medical Board of California or the Osteopathic Medical Board of California and who has taken responsibility for an aspect of the medical care, treatment, diagnosis, counseling, or referral of a patient and who has conducted a medical examination of that patient before recording in the patient’s medical record the physician’s assessment of whether the patient has a serious medical condition and whether the medical use of marijuana is appropriate.

        24.   Private Residence: a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling lawfully used as a residence.

        25.   Qualified Patient: a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as such section may be amended from time to time, but who does not have an identification card issued by the State Department of Health Services.

 

        26.   Sale: shall include any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of marijuana or marijuana products by a licensee to the licensee from whom such marijuana or marijuana product was purchased.

        C.    Marijuana Activities Prohibited. Except as otherwise expressly allowed under subsection D or E of this section, all commercial marijuana activity is prohibited and unlawful in the City of Seal Beach, including, but not limited to, the following:

        1.     It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, or operate any marijuana dispensary, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, in any marijuana dispensary in the city. No marijuana dispensary shall locate, commence, or be maintained or allowed in any land use district, or on any parcel, or at any place, public or private, within the city.

        2.     It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, or operate any marijuana delivery service or other marijuana delivery business, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent, or volunteer, in any manner or capacity, in any marijuana delivery service or other marijuana delivery business in the city, whether or not the delivery commenced in the city. No marijuana delivery service or other marijuana delivery business shall locate, commence, or be maintained or allowed in any land use district, or on any parcel, or at any place, public or private, within the city.

        3.     It is unlawful for any person to make, arrange for, facilitate, or otherwise participate in marijuana deliveries to or from the city, whether or not the delivery commenced in the city.

        4.     It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, operate, or otherwise participate in any other commercial marijuana activity in the city. No commercial marijuana activity shall locate, commence, or be allowed in any land use district, or on any parcel, or at any place, public or private, within the city. The city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any commercial marijuana activity for which a state license is required under the MCRSA or the AUMA. The city shall also not issue any local license to a non-profit entity pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26070.5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        5.     A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial marijuana activity to occupy real property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial marijuana activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the city.

        D.    Limited Exceptions to Prohibitions. The following businesses or other activities shall not be prohibited by subsection C of this section.

        1.     Subsection C of this section shall not prohibit the indoor cultivation of 6 or fewer live marijuana plants within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured, to the extent such cultivation is authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, and further to the extent the indoor cultivation complies with subsection E of this section.

        2.     Subsection C of this section shall not prohibit a person 21 years of age or older from: (a) possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or older, without compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of marijuana not in the form of concentrated cannabis or up to 8 grams in the form of concentrated cannabis; (b) smoking or ingesting marijuana or marijuana products; or (c) possessing, transporting, purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away marijuana accessories to persons 21 years of age or older without compensation whatsoever, to the extent that such activities are authorized by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 et seq.

        3.     Subsection C of this section shall not prohibit the personal use or possession by a qualified patient or person with a duly issued identification card of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 11625.5 and Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(h), as such sections may be amended from time to time, or as otherwise defined by state law.

        4.     Subsection C of this section  shall not prohibit the provision, transportation, or delivery of medical marijuana by any primary caregiver for medical purposes to less than 3 qualified patients or persons holding a duly issued identification card to the extent allowed pursuant to state law.

        5.     Subsection C of this section shall not prohibit any person from transporting marijuana through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the city.

        6.     Subsection C of this section shall not apply to any conduct allowable pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1.

        E.     Indoor Cultivation of Marijuana.

        1.     It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel in the City of Seal Beach to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of marijuana plants except for indoor cultivation conducted in strict compliance with the requirements set forth below.

        2.     Marijuana cultivation shall only occur indoors in a private residence, or indoors in an accessory structure at a private residence, in conformance with the following standards:

        a.     Only a person who is at least 21 years old may cultivate marijuana.

        b.     Marijuana cultivation is permitted only within a fully enclosed and secure structure. As used herein, the phrase “fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure by lock and key or other security device which prevents unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors.

        c.     Marijuana cultivation areas in a structure shall not be accessible to persons under 21 years of age.

        d.     Marijuana cultivation shall be limited to 6 plants total, whether immature or mature, regardless of how many persons who are at least 21 years old reside at that private residence.

        e.     Marijuana cultivation shall only take place on impervious surfaces.

        f.      Marijuana cultivation shall utilize energy efficient lighting and ventilation systems compliant with California’s Building Energy Efficiency Standards, as may be amended from time to time.

        g.     The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) or CO2 and ozone generators for marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited.

        h.     The use of marijuana extraction and concentration techniques, including, but not limited to, butane, CO2 or ethanol, to manufacture concentrated cannabis is strictly prohibited.

        i.      Marijuana cultivation shall not be visible from any public right-of-way or neighboring property.

        j.      The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. The residence, and any rooms in the residence, shall not be used for marijuana cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping and bathing.

        k.     Any structure used for the cultivation of marijuana must have proper ventilation to prevent marijuana plant odors from becoming a public nuisance to surrounding properties or the public. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if the cultivation produces odors which are detectable to people of normal sensitivity residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or a public right-of-way.

        l.      No person shall cultivate marijuana in any manner that causes any of the following conditions: light, glare, heat, mold, odor, noise, or vibration that is or whose effect is either detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life or property.

        m.    A portable fire extinguisher that complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and applicable law shall be kept in same room as where cultivation occurs.

        n.     Cultivation of marijuana shall not displace required off-street parking, or violate any other provisions of the code.

        o.     All electrical equipment used in the cultivation of marijuana (e.g., lighting and ventilation) shall be plugged directly into a wall outlet or otherwise hardwired.

        p.     Prior to performing any work on electrical wiring/rewiring the applicant shall first obtain a building, mechanical and/or electrical permit, as required, from the building division.

        F.     Use or Activity Prohibited by State or Federal Law. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law.

        G.    Public Nuisance. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city.

        H.    Violations. In addition to any other enforcement permitted by Chapter 1.15 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this section. In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.15, this chapter does not authorize a criminal prosecution or arrest prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq., or Sections 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Chapter 1.15 and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. (Ord. 1663; Ord. 1652; Ord. 1580)

 

5.70.030 Miniature Trains.
        No person shall engage in the business of operating miniature trains without first obtaining a miniature train permit from the city council. No such permit shall be issued to carry on such business if any miniature train shall consist of more than one motorcar and 3 trailers, or of a total length, including such motor and trailers, of more than 50 feet. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.70.035 Peddling and Soliciting.
        It is unlawful to peddle any drug or medicine or to go from place to place or from house to house distributing, selling or giving away any drugs or medicines or any sample of any drug or medicine without first procuring a permit from the county health officer to do so and delivering a copy of such permit to the city finance department. The county health officer may issue such permit if upon determining that such drug or medicine is nonpoisonous, harmless and not dangerous to life or health. Such permit shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the issuance of a business license pursuant to this title. (Ord. 1515)

 

5.70.040 Shooting Galleries.
        No person shall engage in the business of a shooting gallery without first obtaining a shooting gallery permit from the city council. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 5.75 SMOKE SHOPS, ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES, AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
5.75.005 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Electronic Smoking Device: an electronic or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. The term includes nicotine or other substances used in any such device and includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, pipe, hookah or any other device or product name or descriptor. The term does not include any medical inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor.

        Smoking: possessing, using, or lighting of a lighted tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia (including, but not limited to, a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind), or using an electronic smoking device.

        Smoke Shop: an establishment where the primary use is the wholesale or retail sale, distribution, or exchange of electronic smoking devices, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or any combination of these.

        Smoking Lounge: an establishment where electronic smoking devices, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or any of these are used by persons on the premises. (Ord. 1636; Ord. 1632U)

 

5.75.010 Smoke Shops—Conditional Use Permit Required.
        It is unlawful for any person to establish or operate a smoke shop without first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20. (Ord. 1636; Ord. 1632U)

 

5.75.015 Smoking Lounges Prohibited.
        Smoking lounges are prohibited. (Ord. 1636; Ord. 1632U)

 

5.75.020 Electronic Smoking Devices—Additional Regulations.
        A.     No business, establishment, or owner or employee thereof shall sell, give, or furnish any electronic smoking device to any person without first examining that person’s official identification to confirm that the person is at least 18 years of age or older.

        B.     The sale or display of electronic smoking devices by means of a self-service display, countertop, or shelf that allows any self-service customer access is prohibited. For these purposes, “self-service display” means the open display or storage of electronic smoking devices in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of a retailer or employee of a retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

        C.    All electronic smoking devices shall only be offered for sale by means of seller assistance and shall be stored only in a locked case, behind counters out of reach of customers, or in a similar location that is inaccessible to customers, requiring seller assistance for the customer to obtain access.

        D.    No person shall use any electronic smoking device to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances while located in any place where smoking is prohibited by state law, including but not limited to California Labor Code Section 6404.5, California Government Code Sections 7596 through 7598, and California Health and Safety Code Sections 104495, 1596.795, and 1596.890. No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this subsection. (Ord. 1636; Ord. 1632U)

 

5.75.025 Drug Paraphernalia.
        A.     Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner, sold, furnished, transferred, or given away.

        B.     For purposes of this chapter, “drug paraphernalia” is defined by reference to California Health and Safety Code Section 11014.5, as it now exists or may be amended in the future. (Ord. 1636; Ord. 1632U)

Chapter 5.80 SIDEWALK VENDING
5.80.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall mean as follows:

        “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.

        “Director” means the director of community development of the City of Seal Beach.

        “Person” means 1 or more natural persons, groups, businesses, business trusts, companies, corporations, joint ventures, joint stock companies, partnership, entities, associations, clubs, or organizations composed of 2 or more individuals (or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them), whether engaged in business, nonprofit, or any other activity.

        “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

        “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who vends from a vending cart or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk, parkway, pedestrian path, or other public right-of-way available to pedestrians.

        “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

        “Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.

        “Temporary special permit” means a permit issued by the city for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or any other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes including, but not limited to, filming, parades, or outdoor concerns.

        “Vend” or “vending” means to sell, offer for sale, display for sale, or solicit offers to purchase, food, food products, beverages, goods, or merchandise.

        “Vending cart” means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for vending, that is not a vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.020 Permit Required.
        No person, either for themselves or any other person, shall conduct or engage in sidewalk vending within the city without first obtaining a sidewalk vending permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.030 Permit Application.
        To apply for a sidewalk vending permit, a person must file an application with the director, accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The application shall be in a form prescribed by the director and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

        A.     The legal name and current address and telephone number of the applicant;

        B.     If the applicant is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, corporation, or other entity, the name and business address of the principal;

        C.    A description of the food or merchandise offered for sale;

        D.    A description of the area(s) the sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

        E.     Whether the applicant intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

        F.     A copy of a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.10 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code;

        G.    A California seller’s permit number pursuant to Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

        H.    Certification by the applicant that the information contained in the application is true to his or her knowledge and belief;

        I.      If a vendor of food or food products, certification to completion of a food handler course, proof of all required approvals from the Orange County Environmental Health, in compliance with Chapter 5.40, of the Seal Beach Municipal Code, and any applicable discharge permits in compliance with Chapter 9.25 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code;

        J.     Proof of liability insurance; and

        K.     Any other reasonable information regarding the time, place, and manner of the proposed vending. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.040 Criteria for Approval or Denial of Permit.
        The director, or designee, shall approve the issuance of a permit unless he or she determines that:

        A.     Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail;

        B.     The applicant has failed to provide a complete application, after having been notified of the requirement to produce additional information or documents; or

        C.    The applicant has failed to demonstrate an ability to conform to the operating standards set forth in Section 5.80.090; or

        D.    The applicant has failed to pay any previous administrative fines, complete any community service, and/or complete any other alternative disposition associated with a previous violation of this chapter.

        If the permit is denied, written notice of such denial and the reasons therefor shall be provided to the applicant. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.050 Permit Expiration and Renewal.
        A sidewalk vending permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance, and shall expire and become null and void on the anniversary of its issuance. A person may apply for a permit renewal on a form provided by the city prior to the expiration of his or her active sidewalk vending permit. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.060 Permit Rescission.
        The director may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for a fourth violation or subsequent violation of this chapter. A sidewalk vendor whose permit is rescinded may apply for a new sidewalk vending permit upon the expiration of the term of the rescinded permit. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.070 Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director to issue, deny issuance, or rescind a sidewalk vending permit may appeal the decision to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 15 days following the date of the director’s decision. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.080 Permits Nontransferable.
        No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.090 Operating Requirements.
        Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the following:

        A.     No sidewalk vendor shall vend in the following locations:

        1.     Within 15 feet of any street intersection;

        2.     Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, or other emergency facility;

        3.     Within 10 feet of any driveway or driveway apron;

        4.     Upon or within any roadway, median strip, or dividing section;

        5.     Within 500 feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market, a swap meet, or an area designated for a temporary special permit. This prohibition shall be limited to the operating hours of the farmers’ market or swap meet, or the limited duration of the temporary special permit;

        6.     In any city parking lot;

        7.     On private property without the consent of the property owner.

        B.     No sidewalk vendor shall vend to customers in moving operating vehicles, or in a manner that blocks or obstructs the free movement of pedestrians or vehicles. Sidewalk vendors must at all times provide a clearance of not less than 3 feet on all sidewalks, piers, or other pedestrian areas so as to enable persons to freely pass while walking, running, or using mobility assistance devices;

        C.    Sidewalk vending only is permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., daily, except as follows:

        1.     In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending only shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.

        2.     In nonresidential areas, the limit on hours of vending shall not be more restrictive than the hours of operation of other businesses or uses on the same street.

        3.     In city parks, including the city’s public beach and pier area, sidewalk vending shall be permitted only during hours open to the public.

        4.     On the city’s public beach and pier, sidewalk vending shall not be conducted in a manner or location that interferes with the public’s and other licensees’ use of the beach and pier for recreational purposes, including, without limitation, fishing, swimming, bathing and the mooring of boats. Vendors shall not deposit or dump anything into the water or onto the beach. No vendor on the pier shall use, or block the public’s access to, sinks or drains. To protect the public health and safety, vendors shall not establish a fixed location on the sand, and shall not locate on the pier other than against the railing.

        D.    Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not vend in areas that are zoned exclusively residential.

        E.     Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not vend at any park, including the city’s public beach and pier area, where the city has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire.

        F.     Sidewalk vendors shall provide a trash receptacle for customers and shall ensure proper disposal of customer trash. Prior to leaving any vending location, the sidewalk vendor shall pick up, remove, and dispose of all trash generated by the vending operations or the vendor’s customers within a 15-foot radius of the vending location.

        G.    Vendors of food or food products shall possess and display in plain view on the vending cart, a valid food facility health permit from Orange County Environmental Health.

        H.    Sidewalk vendors shall possess at all times while vending, a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter, as well as any other permit or license required by the city and any other appropriate governmental agency.

        I.      Sidewalk vendors shall possess at all times while vending, current liability insurance.

        J.     Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all applicable state and local laws, including, without limitation, state food preparation, handling, and labeling requirements; fire codes and regulations; noise standards; and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and other disability access standards (both state and federal).

        K.     No vending cart shall become a permanent fixture on the vending site or be considered an improvement to real property. No vending cart or goods shall be stored on any public street, sidewalk or any other public property when not in use for vending. (Ord. 1675)

 

5.80.100 Administrative Citations.
        A.     A violation of this chapter by a sidewalk vendor who has a valid sidewalk vending permit from the city is punishable only by an administrative citation pursuant to Section 1.15.015, in amounts not to exceed the following:

        1.     $100 for a first violation.

        2.     $200 for a second violation within 1 year of the first violation.

        3.     $500 for each additional violation within 1 year of the first violation.

        B.     A person engaged in sidewalk vending without a valid city sidewalk vending permit is punishable by an administrative citation pursuant to Section 1.15.015, in amounts not to exceed the following, in lieu of the amounts set forth in subsection A:

        1.     $250 for a first violation.

        2.     $500 for a second violation within 1 year of the first violation.

        3.     $1,000 for each additional violation within 1 year of the first violation.

        4.     Upon proof of a valid sidewalk vending permit issued by the city, the administrative citations set forth in this subsection shall be reduced to amounts set forth in subsection A.

        C.    A violation of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. No person alleged to have violated the provisions herein shall be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted by law.

        D.    Failure to pay an administrative citation issued pursuant to this section shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized herein shall not be assessed.

        E.     When assessing administrative citations pursuant to this section, the hearing officer shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine. The city shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program.

        F.     If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, the city shall accept, in full satisfaction, 20% of an administrative citation imposed pursuant to this chapter.

        G.    The hearing officer may allow a person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative citation, may waive the administrative citation, or may offer an alternative disposition. (Ord. 1675)

Title 6 FRANCHISES
Chapter 6.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.10 CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 6.15 PIPELINES
Chapter 6.20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES

Chapter 6.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.05.005 Hearing Requirement.
        Before granting, amending or extending any franchise, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. The hearing shall be held not less than 3 days following publication of the notice therefor, and may be continued from time to time by the city council. Any protest to the grant, amendment or extension of a franchise shall be heard by the city council at the hearing before final action is taken. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.05.010 Bonds and Insurance.
        A.     Whenever any bond or insurance policy is required to be filed in connection with the issuance of a franchise pursuant to this title, such franchise shall not be effective until the bond or insurance policy has been approved by the city attorney as to sufficiency and form. If the bond or insurance policy becomes ineffective during the term of such franchise, then the franchise shall automatically be suspended until a new bond or insurance policy is furnished and approved by the city attorney as to sufficiency and form.

        B.     The city and its officers, employees and agents shall be named as additional insureds under any liability insurance policy required by this title, which policy shall not be subject to cancellation without 30 days’ written notice to the city. The liability on any surety bond deposited with the city pursuant to this title may be terminated upon the surety’s filing of 30-day advance written notice with the city clerk. In no case shall the termination of liability by the surety on any bond affect any liability incurred prior to the date of termination. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 6.10 CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
6.10.005 Purpose.
        A.     The city council finds and determines as follows:

        1.     The development of cable, video and telecommunications services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city.

        2.     Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable, video and telecommunications services and systems, the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by exercise of the city’s regulatory powers.

        3.     To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents in exchange for the private use of the public right-of-way and public property by entities that is not exempt from paying compensation for such use.

        4.     The cable, video and telecommunications services that are addressed in this chapter include without limitation services provided by the following: cable television systems; open video systems; master antenna television systems; satellite master antenna television systems; direct broadcast satellite systems; multi-channel multipoint distribution systems; and local multipoint distribution systems. This also includes voice and data services provided by telephone corporations.

        B.     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the attainment of the following objectives:

        1.     To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development.

        2.     To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city’s public rights-of-way and public property for cable, video and telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis.

        3.     To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents in exchange for the private use of the public rights-of-way and public property by entities that are not exempt from paying compensation for such use.

        4.     To promote competition in cable, video and telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable, video and telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive cable, video and telecommunications services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city.

        5.     To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable, video and telecommunications service providers.

        6.     To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video and telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers enhanced government services and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving cable, video and telecommunications marketplace. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words and phrases not defined in this chapter will be given their meaning as used in Title 47 of the United States Code and, if not defined in that code, their meaning as used in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

        Action or To Act: the approval authority’s grant of an application for a small wireless facility, eligible facility, or other wireless communications facility, or issuance of a written decision denying an application, pursuant to Section 6.10.070 or 6.10.075 of this chapter.

        Amateur Radio Antenna: any antenna used for transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

        Antenna: any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals, including devices with active elements extending in any direction, and directional parasitic arrays with elements attached to a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted on a vertical support structure.

        Antenna Equipment: equipment, switches, wiring, cabling, power sources, shelters or cabinets associated with an antenna, located at the same fixed location as the antenna, and, when collocated on a structure, is mounted or installed at the same time as such antenna.

        Antenna Facility: an antenna and associated antenna equipment.

        Applicant: any natural person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or other entity (or combination of entities), and the agents, employees, and contractors of such person or entity that seeks city permits or other authorizations under this chapter.

        Approval Authority: the director of public works designated to review and issue a decision on a proposed permit or other authorization under this chapter.

        Authorization: any approval that the approval authority must issue under applicable law prior to the installation, construction or other deployment of a small wireless facility, eligible facility, or any other wireless communications facility under Section 6.10.070 or 6.10.075 of this chapter, including, but not limited to, encroachment permit, excavation permit, zoning approval and/or building permit.

        Building- or Roof-Mounted: an antenna mounted on the side or top of a building or another structure (e.g., water tank, billboard, church steeple, freestanding sign, etc.), where the entire weight of the antenna is supported by the building, through the use of an approved framework or other structural system which is attached to 1 or more structural members of the roof or walls of the building.

        Cable Service: the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service.

        Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act: Government Code Section 53054 et seq.

        Cable Television System: a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. “Cable television system” does not include any of the following:

        1.     A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations.

        2.     A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way.

        3.     A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services.

        4.     An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Communications Act.

        5.     Facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system.

        Cable System Operator: any person or group of persons who either:

        1.     Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system.

        2.     Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.

        C.F.R: the Code of Federal Regulations.

        Collocation (also known as “colocation” or “co-location”):

        1.     For a small wireless facility subject to Section 6.10.070 of this chapter, “collocation” means: (a) mounting or installing an antenna facility on a pre-existing structure; and/or (b) modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure.

        2.     For an eligible facility subject to Section 6.10.075 of this chapter, “collocation” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.10.075.B of this chapter.

        3.     For any other wireless communication facility subject to Section 6.10.070 of this chapter, “collocation” means the location of 2 or more wireless, hard wire, or cable communication facilities on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location. Collocation shall also include the location of communication facilities with other facilities (e.g., water tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures).

        Communications Act: the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Section 153 et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

        Competitive Local Carrier (CLC): a telecommunications company that competes with local telephone companies in providing local exchange service, as defined and regulated by the CPUC pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 1001 as amended.

        CPUC: the California Public Utilities Commission.

        Decorative Lighting: any light fixture that incorporates ornamental design features while also meeting the specific spread and lumen requirements dictated by the location and purpose. Design features may include post top and pendant bulbs, posts, bases, cross-arms, bollards and signage. Height, density and placement relative to nearby architectural features are also relevant to the design and purpose. Some examples in the City of Seal Beach include the Electric Avenue greenbelt, Seal Beach Pier and Main Street Business District.

        Deployment: the installation, placement, construction, or modification of a small wireless facility, eligible facility or other wireless communications facility.

        Director: the public works director of the City of Seal Beach.

        Dish Antenna: a dish-like antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless transmissions of voice or data. Also called microwave dish antenna.

        Distributed Antenna System (DAS): a network of 1 or more antenna and fiber optic nodes connecting to a common base station or “hub.”

        Electromagnetic Field: the local electric and magnetic fields caused by voltage and the flow of electricity that envelop the space surrounding an electrical conductor.

        Eligible Facility: as defined in Section 6409(a). See Section 6.10.075 of this chapter.

        Equipment Cabinet: a cabinet or structure used to house equipment associated with a wireless, hard wire, or cable communication facility.

        FAA: the Federal Aviation Administration.

        FCC: Federal Communications Commission.

        Franchise: an initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, granted by the city council (whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise) that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system.

        Franchise Fee: a fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a franchisee as compensation in the nature of rent for the franchisee’s use of the public rights-of-way. “Franchise fee” does not include any of the following:

        1.     Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and franchisees or their services).

        2.     Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a franchisee for PEG access facilities.

        3.     Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages.

        4.     Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.

        Franchise Service Area: the entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.

        Franchisee: any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this chapter, and that person’s lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.

        Gross Annual Cable Service Revenues: the annual gross revenues derived from the franchisee’s operations of its cable television system to provide cable services within the city, excluding uncollected bad debt, refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and further excluding any sales, excise, or other taxes or charges that are required to be collected for direct pass-through to the local, state or federal government. Revenues identified and collected from subscribers as franchise fees may not be excluded from a franchisee’s gross annual cable service revenues.

        Ground-Mounted: any freestanding antenna, the entire weight of which is supported by an approved freestanding platform, framework, or other structural system which is attached to the ground by a foundation.

        JFTB Los Alamitos: the Joint Forces Training Base, Los Alamitos, California, also known as the Los Alamitos Army Airfield.

        Ministerial Permit: an excavation permit, encroachment permit, or building permit and any required ministerial permit application form and supporting documents required by the city.

        Monopole: a single freestanding pole, post, or similar structure, used to support equipment associated with a single communication facility.

        Multi-channel Video Programming Distributor: a person who makes available multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or customers. “Multi-channel video programming distributor” includes without limitation the following: a cable system operator; an open video system operator; a multi-channel multipoint distribution service; a direct broadcast satellite service; and a television receive-only satellite program distributor.

        Naval Weapons Station (NWS): the Naval Weapon Station, Seal Beach, California.

        NEPA: the National Environmental Policy Act.

        NHPA: the National Historical Preservation Act.

        Open Video System: a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC has certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et seq.

        Open Video System Operator: any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video system.

        Other Programming Service: information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally.

        Panel: an antenna or array of antennas that are flat and rectangular and are designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as a directional antenna.

        PEG Access Facilities: the total of the following:

        1.     Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational or government use; and

        2.     Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.

        Permittee: includes the applicant and all successors in interest to the wireless communications facility permit (WCFP) issued by the city pursuant to Section 6.10.070 or 6.10.075 of this chapter, and any related ministerial permit approved by the city.

        Person: an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including a governmental entity.

        Pole: a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this code.

 

        Public Right-of-Way (PROW): any public road, highway, sidewalk or other area described in and subject to California Public Utilities Code Section 7901 or 7901.1, as interpreted by applicable case law, and owned, licensed, leased or otherwise under the control of the city.

        RF: radio frequency.

        Rules and Guidelines: The policies, rules, guidelines, regulations and procedures adopted from time to time by the city council to administer and implement this chapter.

        Section 6409(a): Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) (the “Spectrum Act”), as may be amended.

        Small Wireless Facility(ies): a facility that meets each of the following conditions:

        1.     The facility:

        a.     Is mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including its antennas as defined in this section, or

        b.     Is mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other adjacent structures, or

        c.     Does not extend existing structures on which it is located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is greater;

        2.     Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment (as defined in this section), is no more than 3 cubic feet in volume;

        3.     All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume;

        4.     The facility does not require antenna structure registration under Part 17 of Subchapter A of Chapter 1 of Title 47 C.F.R., or its successor regulations;

        5.     The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36 C.F.R. Section 800.16(x), or its successor regulation; and

        6.     The facility does not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1307(b), or its successor regulation.

        Stealth Facility: a telecommunications facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally or aesthetically camouflaged or otherwise integrated into a structure. Also referred to as a concealed antenna.

        Structure: a pole, tower, base station, or other building, whether or not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the provision of wireless communications service (whether on its own or comingled with other types of services).

        Subscriber: any person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services.

        Telecommunications: the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

        Telecommunications Equipment: equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment.

        Telecommunications Service: the offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used.

        Telecommunications Service Provider: any provider of telecommunications service.

        Telephone Corporation: any person, company, firm or entity that qualifies as a “telephone corporation” pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 234 as amended from time to time.

        Temporary Wireless Communications Facilities: portable wireless facilities intended or used to provide wireless communications services on a temporary or emergency basis, such as a large-scale special event in which more users than usual gather in a confined location or when a disaster disables permanent wireless facilities. Temporary wireless communications facilities include, without limitation, cells-on-wheels (“COWs”), sites-on-wheels (“SOWs”), cells-on-light-trucks (“COLTs”) or other similarly portable wireless facilities not permanently affixed to the site on which it is located.

        Tower: any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus above grade.

        Video Customer Service Act: Government Code Section 53088 et seq.

        Video Programming: programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.

        Video Programming Provider: any person or group of persons who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video system.

        Video Provider: any person, company, or service that provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, multifamily dwelling complex, congregate-living complex, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming. “Video provider” includes without limitation providers of the following: cable television service; open video system service; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; direct broadcast satellite; and multipoint distribution services.

        Whip Antenna: an antenna consisting of a single, slender, rod-like element, which is supported only at or near its base. They are typically less than 6 inches in diameter and measure up to 18 feet in height. Also referred to as omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas.

        Wireless Communications Collocation Facility: the same as a “wireless telecommunications colocation facility” is defined in Government Code Section 65850.6, as may be amended, which defines a “wireless telecommunications colocation facility” as a wireless telecommunications facility that includes colocation facilities; a “colocation facility” as the placement or installation of wireless facilities, including antennas, and related equipment, on, or immediately adjacent to, a wireless telecommunications colocation facility; a “wireless telecommunications facility” as equipment and network components such as towers, utility poles, transmitters, base stations, and emergency power systems that are integral to providing wireless telecommunications services.

        Wireless Communications Facility(ies) (WCF or WCFs): public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network, and wireless telecommunications, including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications, whether such service is provided on a stand-alone basis or commingled with other wireless communications services. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas, and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections.

        Wireless Communications Facility Permit (WCFP): a permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, and including the following categories:

        1.     Small Wireless Facility Permit (SWFP): a permit issued by the director pursuant to the requirements of Section 6.10.070 of this chapter for: (a) the deployment of a new small wireless facility; or (b) the replacement of, collocation on, or modification of, an existing small wireless facility.

        2.     Eligible Facility Permit (EFP): a permit issued for an eligible facility as defined in and subject to the requirements of Section 6.10.075 of this chapter.

        3.     Maintenance Encroachment Permit: an encroachment permit issued by the director pursuant to Section 6.10.070 of this chapter to carry out minor modifications, minor emergency maintenance or repairs, or other routine maintenance or repairs to an existing WCF.

        Wireless Communications Services: the provision of services using a wireless communications facility, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following services: personal wireless services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C) or its successor statute, cellular service, personal communication service, and/or data radio telecommunications. (Ord. 1677; Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.015 Cable Television Franchise—General Provisions.
        A.     Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this section may authorize the franchisee to do the following:

        1.     Engage in the business of providing cable service and such other telecommunications services as may be authorized by law and that the franchisee elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service area.

        2.     Erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated franchise service area.

        3.     Maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be authorized by law.

        B.     Franchise Requirement. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any public right-of-way in the city without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this chapter.

        C.    Franchise Term.

        1.     A franchise granted under this chapter shall be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council that authorizes the franchise.

        2.     A franchise granted under this chapter may be renewed upon application by the franchisee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of state and federal law and this chapter.

        D.    Franchise Territory. A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement.

        E.     Federal or State Jurisdiction. This chapter will be construed in a manner consistent with applicable federal and state laws, and it applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.

        F.     Franchise Nontransferable.

        1.     A franchisee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the city council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the written consent of the city council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the franchisee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this paragraph.

        2.     The requirements of paragraph 1 of this subsection apply to any change in control of a franchisee. The word “control” as used herein is not limited to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If a franchisee is a partnership or a corporation, prior authorization of the city council is required where ownership or control of 25% or more of the partnership interests or of the voting stock of the franchisee, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the franchisee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or collectively, owns or controls those partnership interests or that voting stock of the franchisee, or of the franchisee’s upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of the franchise.

        3.     A franchisee must notify the city in writing of any foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchisee’s franchise property, or upon the termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a substantial part of that franchise property. That notification will be considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require the prior written consent of the city council to that change in control of ownership will apply.

        4.     For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer or change in control, the city may inquire as to the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the franchisee must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city’s consent to any change of ownership or control, the franchisee or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete FCC Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted to the city not less than 120 days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements during the remaining term of the franchise. If the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the proposed transferee are determined to be satisfactory, then the city will consent to the transfer of the franchise.

        5.     Any financial institution holding a pledge of the franchisee’s assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon the franchisee’s default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within 90 days after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding 18 months unless authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another franchisee.

        6.     A franchisee must reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These expenses may include without limitation costs of the following: administrative review; financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee; consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts); notice and publication; and document preparation. The total amount of these reimbursable expenses may be subject to maximum limits that are specified in the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise.

        G.    Geographical Coverage.

        1.     Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, a franchisee must design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in the franchise service area, subject to any service-area line extension requirements or territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement.

        2.     After service has been established within all or any part of the franchise service area by activating trunk or distribution cables, a franchisee must provide service to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area within 5 days from the date of request, provided that the franchisee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that 5-day period.

        H.    Non-exclusive Franchise. Every franchise granted is non-exclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system that it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. If an additional franchise is proposed to be granted to a subsequent franchisee, a noticed public hearing shall first be held if required by Government Code Section 53066.3.

        I.      Multiple Franchises.

        1.     The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable state and federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and the following specific local considerations:

        a.     The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage.

        b.     The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.

        c.     The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way.

        2.     The city may require that any new franchisee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the city’s opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.020 Cable Television Franchise—Applications and Renewal.
        A.     Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the city. A reasonable application fee deposit in an amount established by city council resolution must accompany the application. That application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the application including without limitation costs of the following: administrative review; financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant; consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by those experts); notice and publication; and document preparation. If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit, the applicant must pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs.

        B.     Applications Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable:

        1.     A statement describing the proposed franchise service area.

        2.     A resume of the applicant’s prior history, including the experience and expertise of the applicant in the cable television industry.

        3.     A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the applicant is a publicly-owned partnership or corporation, each owner of 10% or more of the partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be identified.

        4.     A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person.

        5.     The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant.

        6.     A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be accurate.

        7.     The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide PEG access facilities.

        8.     Any additional information that the city deems to be reasonably necessary.

        C.    Consideration of Initial Applications.

        1.     Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the city manager shall prepare a report and make recommendations to the city council concerning that application.

        2.     Within 30 days after the close of the public hearing on the application, the city council will make a decision, based upon the documents and testimony received at the hearing, as to whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.

        D.    Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise agreement. The city and the franchisee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. A renewal application fee deposit in an amount established by city council resolution must accompany the renewal application or the renewal request. That renewal application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the renewal application, including without limitation: the review of franchisee’s prior compliance with the franchise; the ascertainment of the community’s cable-related needs and interests; the engagement of technical and legal consultants; and expenses related to negotiations and document preparation. If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, the franchisee must pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.025 Cable Television Franchise—Agreement Contents.
        A.     The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable television system shall relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters:

        1.     The nature, scope, geographical area and duration of the franchise.

        2.     The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment.

        3.     Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable television system.

        4.     Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability and parental control devices.

        5.     Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance of the franchisee’s obligations under the franchise agreement.

        6.     Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers’ compensation insurance and indemnification.

        7.     Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards, which requirements may include, without limitation, those set forth in this chapter.

        8.     Requirements relating to the franchisee’s support of local cable usage, including the provision of PEG access facilities, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for the PEG access facilities.

        9.     Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the public rights-of-way, including compliance with applicable building codes and permit requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards.

        10.   Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits and performance reviews, the inspection of the franchisee’s books and records, and reimbursement for technical audits and franchise fee audits under specified circumstances.

        11.   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation and termination.

        12.   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment or other transfer or change in control of the franchise.

        13.   The franchisee’s obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city’s operation and management of the cable system.

        14.   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and that will, in the judgment of city staff and the city council, best protect the public health, welfare, and safety.

        B.     If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement and provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.030 Cable Television Franchise—Consumer Protection and Service Standards.
        A.     Operational Standards. Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the franchisee must maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions not less than 95% of the time, measured on a quarterly basis:

        1.     Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity shall be provided during normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered before the 4th ring. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, may not exceed 30 seconds. Callers who must be transferred may not be required to wait more than 30 seconds before being connected to a service representative.

        2.     A caller must receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time.

        3.     Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity shall be provided on a 24-hour-per-day basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by an answering service in accordance with the telephone answering standards set forth above. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day.

        4.     A conveniently-located local business and service or payment office shall be open during normal business hours at least 8 hours daily on weekdays, and at least 4 hours weekly on evenings or weekends. The office shall be adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries and complaints.

        5.     Emergency system maintenance and repair staff shall be available on a 24-hour-per-day basis for response to major system malfunctions.

        6.     A trained installation staff must provide service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within 5 days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. “Standard installations” are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in the franchise agreement.

        7.     The franchisee must schedule, within a specified 4-hour time period Monday through Saturday (holidays excluded), all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber’s location. The franchisee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the subscriber. The franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a franchisee representative is delayed in keeping an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. The franchisee must use its best efforts to contact the customer within 2 weeks after an installation or repair work is completed to ensure that the customer is satisfied with the work.

        8.     Subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment due to the fault of the franchisee will receive an installation free of charge if the appointment was for an installation. If an installation was to have been provided free of charge, and for all other appointments, the subscriber will receive one month of the subscribed-to service tier, free of charge. Subscribers also will be entitled to receive a free installation, or one month free service, as provided above if the franchisee fails to complete a standard installation within 5 days of receiving an installation request due to its fault, its failure to schedule an appointment within a specified 4-hour time period, or its failure to notify the subscriber that the franchisee’s representative will be late for an appointment. Subscribers who have experienced 2 missed appointments due to the fault of the franchisee will receive 2 months of the subscribed-to service tier, free of charge, in addition to the free installation or free month of service provided for the first missed appointment.

        9.     Upon a subscriber’s request, the franchisee will arrange for pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment provided by the franchisee at the subscriber’s address within 14 days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited.

        B.     Service Standards.

        1.     The franchisee will render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more than 2 hours and occurs between midnight and 6:00 a.m. (in which event 24 hours prior notice must be given to the city), 48 hours prior notice must be given to subscribers.

        2.     The franchisee will maintain a repair force of technicians who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames:

        a.     For a system outage: within 2 hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by number identify a system outage of sound or picture, affecting 5 or more subscribers.

        b.     For an isolated outage: within 24 hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture.

        c.     For inferior signal quality: no later than the following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

        3.     The franchisee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under this paragraph when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival.

        4.     The franchisee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the franchisee to subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber.

        5.     The franchisee must determine the nature of the problem within 24 hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related problems within 3 business days, unless technically infeasible.

 

        C.    Billing and Information Standards.

        1.     Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including without limitation basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.

        2.     The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or changed service commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the franchisee, including the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber.

        3.     In case of a billing dispute, the franchisee must respond in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within 10 days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint.

        4.     Credits or refunds must be provided by the franchisee to subscribers who experience an outage, interruption, or disconnection of service of 4 or more consecutive hours, provided that such loss of service is neither caused by the subscriber nor attributable to scheduled repairs, maintenance or construction in circumstances where the franchisee has provided advance written notice to subscriber, and the loss of service does not exceed the time period specified by the franchisee. Subject to these exceptions, credits or refunds must be provided under the following circumstances:

        a.     The outage, interruption or disconnection is isolated and involves the sound, picture or reception, and affects no more than 4 subscribers.

        b.     The outage, interruption, or disconnection is of a system-wide nature that involves the sound, picture or reception, and affects 5 or more subscribers.

        If the franchisee’s cable system is equipped with monitoring equipment that enables the franchisee to identify an isolated or system-wide loss of service, then the credit or refund referenced in this paragraph will be provided to subscribers without the necessity for any prior notice or request from the affected subscribers. If the franchisee’s cable system has no such monitoring equipment, then prior notice or request must be given by the affected subscribers, and the franchisee must maintain a record of such notices or requests. The existence of monitoring equipment for the franchisee’s cable system will be determined at the time of the grant or renewal of a cable television franchise agreement, or at such other times as may be agreed upon. For each day that an isolated or system-wide loss of service has continued for 4 consecutive hours or more, the credit or refund must equal a pro-rata share of the monthly billing for one full day. The credits or refunds for such loss of service must be issued no later than the subscriber’s next billing cycle following the franchisee’s determination that a credit or refund is due. For subscribers terminating service, credits or refunds must be issued promptly, but no later than 30 days after the return of any franchisee-supplied equipment.

        5.     Subject to prior review by the city, the franchisee must provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of the installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:

        a.     Products and services offered.

        b.     Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services.

        c.     Installation and service maintenance policies.

        d.     Instructions on the use of the cable service.

        e.     Channel positions of programming carried on the system.

        f.      Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city’s office designated for dealing with cable-related issues.

        g.     Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for noncompliance.

        6.     Subscribers must be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of those changes if the change is within the control of the franchisee. In addition, the franchisee must notify subscribers through announcements on the cable system and in writing 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in the preceding subparagraph.

        7.     The franchisee must maintain a public file containing all notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and service standards and all promotional offers made by the franchisee to subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of 4 years.

        D.    Verification of Compliance with Standards.

        1.     Upon 15 days’ prior written notice, the city may require the franchisee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with any of the consumer service standards specified in this section. The franchisee must provide sufficient documentation to enable the city to verify compliance.

        2.     A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the franchisee’s receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.

        E.     Subscriber Complaints and Disputes.

        1.     The franchisee must establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction. The franchisee must file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures must include a requirement that the franchisee respond in writing to any written complaint from a subscriber within 10 days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint.

        2.     The city has the right to review the franchisee’s response to subscriber complaints in order to determine the franchisee’s compliance with the franchise requirements.

        3.     All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are honored. If the franchisee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the system, or if the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the franchisee must act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service while the franchise remains in force.

        4.     Upon a change of control of the franchisee, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original franchisee must cooperate with the city, the new franchisee or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition period, the franchisee is entitled to the revenues derived from its operation of the cable system.

        F.     Disconnection/Downgrades.

        1.     A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time, and the franchisee must promptly comply with the subscriber’s request within 5 days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be required of subscribers. A franchisee will impose no charges for the voluntary termination or downgrade of service unless a visit to the subscriber’s premises is required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property owned by the franchisee.

        2.     The franchisee may disconnect a subscriber’s service if the subscriber fails to pay a monthly fee or charge, but such disconnection must not occur prior to 45 days after the fee or charge is due, plus 10 days prior written notice to the subscriber of the franchisee’s intent to disconnect service. If the subscriber pays all past due amounts, including late charges, before the scheduled disconnection date, the franchisee may not disconnect service. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, the franchisee must promptly reinstate service upon payment in full by the subscriber of all such fees and charges, including late charges.

        3.     Notwithstanding the requirements of the preceding subparagraph, the franchisee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging or destroying the franchisee’s cable system or equipment. In the event of disconnection on such grounds, the franchisee will resume service to the subscriber upon receiving adequate assurances that the subscriber has ceased the conduct that resulted in disconnection and has paid all proper fees and charges, including any amounts reasonably owed the franchisee for the damage caused by the subscriber.

        4.     The franchisee may also disconnect service to a subscriber when it causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits. If service is disconnected, the franchisee will immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem.

        5.     Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the franchisee will remove its equipment from the subscriber’s premises within 30 days. The equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within such time period unless the franchisee has been denied access to the subscriber’s premises.

        G.    Changes in Service. Except as otherwise provided by federal or state law, subscribers must not be required to pay any additional fee or charge, other than the regular service fee, in order to receive the services selected (such as upgrade or downgrade charges). No charge may be imposed for any service or product that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute an affirmative selection.

        H.    Deposits. The franchisee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits must be placed in an interest-bearing account. The deposit must be returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within 30 days after the equipment is returned to the franchisee.

        I.      Parental Control Option. The franchisee must provide parental control devices to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of any programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. Such devices will be provided at no charge to the subscriber, unless otherwise required by federal law or unless a converter box is required to be installed for the purpose of providing the parental control device.

        J.     Additional Requirements.

        1.     If the franchisee fails to operate the system for 7 consecutive days without the city’s prior approval or subsequent ratification, the city may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until the franchisee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city, or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city satisfies this obligation on behalf of the franchisee, then during that time period the city is entitled to collect all revenues derived from the system, and the franchisee will indemnify the city against any damages that the city may suffer as a result of the franchisee’s failure to operate the system.

        2.     All officers, agents, and employees of the franchisee, or of its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto subscribers’ premises, must carry a photo identification card in a form approved by the city. The franchisee must account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of the franchisee or its subcontractors must be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in providing services for the franchisee.

        3.     Additional standards relating to service, consumer protection and response by the franchisee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this section may be set forth in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance, and the franchisee must comply with those standards in the operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement, provided that the franchisee receives written notice and an opportunity to cure before any penalty or other remedy is imposed.

        K.     Penalties for Noncompliance.

        1.     Purpose. The purpose of this paragraph is to authorize the imposition of penalties for the violation of the customer service standards established by this section in accordance with the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code Section 53088 et seq.). These penalties are in addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the franchise agreement or any other law, and the city has the discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The imposition of penalties authorized by this paragraph will not prevent the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy.

        2.     Administration and Appeals.

        a.     The city manager is authorized to administer this chapter. Decisions by the city manager to assess penalties against the franchisee must be in writing and must contain supporting findings. Decisions by the city manager are final unless appealed to the city council.

        b.     If the franchisee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may, within 10 days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by city council resolution for processing the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city manager.

        c.     Schedule of Penalties. The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against the franchisee for the material breach of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this section, provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the franchisee:

        (1)    The maximum penalty is $200 for each day of material breach, but not to exceed $600 for each occurrence of the material breach.

        (2)    For a second material breach of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is $400 for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed $1,200 for each occurrence of the material breach.

        (3)    For a third material breach of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is $1,000 for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach.

        d.     Notification of Breach. The city must give the franchisee written notice of any alleged breach of the consumer service standards and allow the franchisee at least 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach. For the purpose of assessing penalties, a material breach is deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period for cure specified herein, that any breach has not been remedied by the franchisee, irrespective of the number of subscribers affected.

        L.     Free Service for Noncompliance. Notwithstanding any other penalties or remedies provided by this section, the franchise agreement or any other law, the franchisee must provide the following months of free service to subscribers affected by the franchisee’s failure to comply with the specified consumer protection and service standard:

        1.     One Month Free Service. The franchisee will provide one month of free service to each subscriber affected by the failure of the franchisee to timely and satisfactorily comply with any of the following requirements:

        a.     Pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment within 14 days after subscriber request.

        b.     48-hour notice of service interruption.

        c.     Response time for system outages and inferior signal quality as set forth in Section 6.10.030.B, Service Standards.

        d.     Resolution of cable system related problems within 3 business days. One additional month of free service will be provided for each 7-day period that the problem remains unresolved.

        e.     Written response to billing complaints.

        f.      Credits and refunds.

        g.     Provision of all required information to subscribers.

        h.     Notification of rate, service or channel changes.

        i.      Completion of termination or downgrade of service.

        j.      Provision of parental control devices.

        2.     Three Months Free Service. The franchisee will provide 3 months of free service to each subscriber affected by the franchisee’s disconnection of subscriber service without just cause, provided that the franchisee fails to restore service within 4 hours after the disconnection.

        3.     Definition of Free Service. The free service required by this subsection relates to the service tier subscribed to by the affected subscriber. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.035 Open Video System—Applicability.
        The open video system provisions of this chapter apply to an open video system operator that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the city over an open video system. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.040 Open Video System—Application Requirement.
        A.     Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator must file an application with the city. That application must include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:

        1.     The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

        2.     Copies of FCC Form 1275, all “Notices of Intent” filed under 47 CFR 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in the city in accordance with Section 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC’s rules.

        3.     The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires to serve.

        4.     A description of the open video system services that will be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.

        5.     A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services.

        6.     Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and operation of the open video system described in the application.

        7.     Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s financial ability to:

        a.     Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city.

        b.     Comply with the city’s PEG access facility requirements.

        c.     Comply with the city’s requirement that gross revenue fees be paid in the maximum amount authorized under federal law.

        8.     An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, purchase or lease.

        9.     If the applicant’s operation of the open video system will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the city, the following additional information must be provided:

        a.     A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.

        b.     Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to identify:

        (1)    The location and route requested for the applicant’s proposed facilities.

        (2)    The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers.

        (3)    The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to add, remove, or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis.

        c.     The applicant’s statement that, in constructing any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees.

        10.   The information and documentation that is required to be submitted to the city by a video provider.

        11.   Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager.

        12.   An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

        B.     If any item of information specified above is determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the city manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be included in the application. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.045 Open Video System—Application Review.
        Within 30 days after receipt of an application that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give written notice to the applicant of the city’s intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the city and to the applicant. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.050 Open Video System—Agreement Requirement.
        A.     No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city.

        B.     The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject matters are not preempted by federal law or regulations:

        1.     The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including provisions for its renewal or extension.

        2.     The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under Section 622 of the Communications Act, fees on the gross revenue received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in accordance with the following standards and procedures:

        a.     The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the maximum amount authorized by Section 653(c)(2)(B) of the Communications Act, which is the rate imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable operator.

        b.     The term “gross revenue” has the meaning set forth in 47 CFR 76.1511, and includes: (i) all gross revenue received by an open video system operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from subscribers and all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and (ii) all advertising revenue received by the operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where such revenue is included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the city by the franchised cable operator. The term “gross revenue” does not include revenue, such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers.

        3.     The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with requirements relating to information collection and recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits and inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenue that are required to be paid.

        4.     The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city’s requirements with respect to PEG access facilities, as provided for in 47 CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are applicable:

        a.     The open video system operator is subject to the same PEG access facilities requirements that apply within the cable television franchise service area with which its system overlaps.

        b.     The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the franchise service area in which the city’s subscribers are located.

        c.     The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to establish the operator’s obligations with respect to PEG access facilities. These negotiations may include the city’s franchised cable operator if the city, the open video system operator and the franchised cable operator so desire.

        d.     If the open video system operator and the city are unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator’s obligations with respect to PEG access facilities within the city’s jurisdiction, then the following obligations will be imposed:

        (1)    The open video system operator must satisfy the same PEG access facility obligations as the city’s franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the city’s franchised cable operator’s annual financial contributions in support of PEG access facilities that are actually used by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city’s franchised cable operator, so that public, educational, and governmental access services to the city are improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operator’s depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under Section 611 of the Communications Act.

        (2)    The city will impose upon the open video system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator’s use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental access use when that capacity is not being used for such purposes.

        e.     The city’s franchised cable operator is required under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator have not agreed on how to accomplish the connection after 15 days of negotiations, then the city has the right to decide. The city may require that the connection occur on city-owned property or on public rights-of-way.

        f.      All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator’s public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video system operator’s matching financial contributions set forth above in (d)(1).

        g.     The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any PEG access facility obligations that are greater than those imposed upon the franchised cable operator.

        h.     If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the obligations of the open video system operator.

        i.      The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply with new PEG access facility obligations imposed on the city’s franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels. The open video system operator must comply with such new public, educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity.

        5.     If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the application of the FCC’s rules regarding the open video system operator’s obligations to provide PEG access facilities, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved.

        6.     If the open video system operator intends to maintain an institutional network, as defined in Section 611(f) of the Communications Act, the city will require that educational and governmental access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels are designated on the institutional network of the city’s franchised cable operator.

        7.     The authority of an open video system operator to exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(f).

        8.     The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations relating to customer service standards and this chapter.

        9.     If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:

        a.     Compliance with applicable city codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment and construction permits and the payment of all required permit and inspection fees.

        b.     The coordination of construction activities.

        c.     Compliance with established standards and procedures for constructing lines across private property.

        d.     Compliance with applicable insurance and indemnification requirements.

        e.     The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets.

        f.      Compliance with all public safety requirements that are applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers using public property or public rights-of-way.

        10.   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of the agreement.

        11.   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment or transfer of the open video system.

        12.   Requirements relating to the open video system operator’s compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system.

        13.   Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.055 Miscellaneous Multi-channel Video Programming Distributors.
        The term “cable system,” as defined in federal law and in this chapter, does not include a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multi-channel video programming distributors identified below are not deemed to be “cable systems” and are therefore exempt from the city’s franchise requirements and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law, provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of public rights-of-way.

        A.     Multi-channel multipoint distribution service (“MMDS”), also known as “wireless cable,” which typically involves the transmission by a FCC licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-sight technology.

        B.     Local multipoint distribution service (“LMDS”), another form of over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data networking services.

        C.    Direct broadcast satellite (“DBS”), also referred to as “direct-to-home satellite services,” which involves the distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber’s premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.060 Video Providers—Registration—Customer Service Standards.
        A.     Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a video provider are specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with applicable provisions of the following state statutes:

        1.     The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act.

        2.     The Video Customer Service Act.

        B.     All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after the effective date of this chapter, must register with the city; provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following:

        1.     The video provider’s name, address and local telephone numbers.

        2.     The names of the officers of the video provider.

        3.     A copy of the video provider’s written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following:

        a.     Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification and service call response time and scheduling.

        b.     Customer telephone and office hours.

        c.     Procedures for billing, charges, refunds and credits.

        d.     Procedures for termination of service.

        e.     Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments or an increase in rates.

        f.      Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution.

        g.     The video provider’s written commitment to distribute annually to the city, and to its employees and customers, a notice describing the customer service standards specified above. This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards.

        4.     Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by city council resolution to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and processing the registration.

        5.     In addition to the registration fee, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers.

        C.    Pursuant to Government Code Sections 53088.2(a)—(n) and 53056(a), the city council hereby establishes the following schedule of monetary penalties for material breaches by a video provider and for the failure of a video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code Section 53055.1:

        1.     The maximum penalty is $200 for each day of material breach, but not to exceed $600 for each occurrence of the material breach.

        2.     For a second material breach of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is $400 for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed $1,200 for each occurrence of the material breach.

        3.     For a third material breach of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is $1,000 for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.065 Telecommunications Service Provided by Telephone Corporations.
        A.     The city council finds and determines as follows:

        1.     The Communications Act preempts and declares invalid all state rules that restrict entry or limit competition in both local and long-distance telephone service.

        2.     The California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) is primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and related communications service, whether using their own facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone corporations.

        3.     Public Utilities Code Section 234(a) defines a “telephone corporation” as “every corporation or person owning, controlling, operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this state.”

        4.     Public Utilities Code Section 616 provides that a telephone corporation “may condemn any property necessary for the construction and maintenance of its telephone line.”

        5.     Public Utilities Code Section 2902 authorizes municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public, including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on, under, or above any public streets.

        6.     Public Utilities Code Section 7901 authorizes telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines along and upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the waters or lands within this state, and to erect poles, posts, piers or abutments for supporting the insulators, wires and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.

        7.     Public Utilities Code Section 7901.1 confirms the right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner. Nothing in Section 7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that municipalities have with respect to the imposition of fees.

        8.     Government Code Section 50030 provides that any permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading of communications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide communications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes.

        B.     In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations and requirements set forth above, the following regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that desires to provide communications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be constructed, installed or otherwise deployed within public rights-of-way:

        1.     The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be applicable, a wireless communications facility permit in accordance with Section 6.10.070 or 6.10.075 of this chapter and any other ministerial permit required by this code.

        2.     In addition to the information required by this code in connection with an application for a ministerial permit or a wireless communications facility permit, a telephone corporation must submit to the city the following supplemental information:

        a.     A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the communications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the public rights-of-way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided communications service under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and necessity.

        b.     If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a “competitive local carrier,” the following additional requirements are applicable:

        i.      As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, so that the city can coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.

        ii.     If the applicant’s proposed construction project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.

        iii.     The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures specified in the Negative Declaration [“Competitive Local Carriers (CLCs) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California”] or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection with Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The city’s issuance of a ministerial permit, and/or wireless communications facility permit will be conditioned upon the applicant’s compliance with applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone corporations that are designated as “competitive local carriers.”

        C.    The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or communications service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with federal and state law that is applicable to cable or communications services provided by telephone corporations. (Ord. 1677; Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.070 Wireless Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way.
        A.     Purpose and Intent.

        1.     The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards and procedures to regulate the location, placement, installation, height, appearance, and operation of wireless telecommunications antennas and related facilities (“wireless communications facilities” or WCFs) in the PROW, consistent with city laws, applicable state and federal requirements, and changing technology. The regulations are intended to provide for the appropriate development of wireless communications facilities within the PROW to meet the needs of residents, business-owners, and visitors while protecting public health and safety and preventing visual blight and degradation of the community’s aesthetic character and scenic vistas.

        2.     The procedures set forth in this section are intended to permit wireless communications facilities in the PROW that blend with their existing surroundings and do not negatively impact the environment, historic properties, aesthetics or public safety. The procedures prescribed by this section are tailored to the type of wireless communication facility that is sought. Collocation of facilities are preferred and encouraged, subject to all other provisions of this section.

        3.     This section is not intended to, nor shall it be interpreted or applied to:

        a.     Prohibit or effectively prohibit any wireless service provider’s ability to provide wireless communications services;

        b.     Prohibit or effectively prohibit any entity’s ability to provide any interstate or intrastate wireless communications service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules, regulations or other legal requirements for rights-of-way management;

        c.     Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;

        d.     Deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify WCFs on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such WCFs comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such emissions;

        e.     Prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under federal or California State law; or

        f.      Otherwise authorize the city to preempt any applicable federal or state law.

        4.     Due to rapidly changing technology and regulatory requirements, and to further implement this section, the city council may adopt written policies, rules, regulations and/or guidelines (collectively “Rules and Guidelines”) by resolution governing WCFs in the PROW, which may include but are not limited to, requirements related to applications, notices, review procedures, development and design standards, conditions, and operation and maintenance requirements. The director may adopt policies, procedures and forms consistent with this section and any council-adopted Rules and Guidelines, which shall be posted on the city’s website and maintained at the department for review, inspection and copying by applicants and other interested members of the public. The city council and the director may update their rules, policies, procedures and forms in their discretion to adjust for new technologies, federal and/or state regulations, and/or to improve and adjust the city’s implementing regulatory procedures and requirements, and compliance therewith is a condition of approval in every wireless communications facility permit.

        B.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below. Words and phrases not specifically defined in this section will be given their meaning ascribed to them in Section 6.10.010 or as otherwise provided in Section 6409(a), the Communications Act, or any applicable federal or state law or regulation.

        Administrative Review: ministerial review of an application by the city relating to the review and issuance of a wireless communications facility permit (WCFP), including review by the director of public works to determine whether the issuance of a WCFP is in conformity with the applicable provisions of this section.

        Application: any written submission to the city for the installation, construction or other deployment of a WCFP and related ministerial permits to obtain final approval of the deployment of a WCF at a specified location.

        Day: a calendar day, except as otherwise provided in this section.

        Rules and Guidelines: The policies, rules, guidelines, regulations and procedures adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council to administer and implement this section.

        C.    Applicability.

        1.     This section applies to the siting, construction or modification of any and all WCFs located or proposed to be located within the PROW as follows:

        a.     All WCFs for which applications were not approved prior to the effective date of this section shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of this section.

        b.     All WCFs for which applications were approved and permits issued by the city prior to the effective date of this section shall not be required to obtain a new or amended WCFP until such time as this section so requires. If a WCF was lawfully constructed or installed within the PROW in accordance with applicable local, state or federal regulations prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section but does not comply with the current standards, regulations and/or requirements of this section, such WCF shall be deemed a legal nonconforming facility and shall also be subject to the provisions of subsection Y of this section.

        c.     Any WCF proposed to be installed, modified or otherwise deployed on any existing utility structure (e.g., Southern California Edison or Southern California Gas Company) in the PROW, except as otherwise required by state or federal pole attachments rules or any other provision of federal and/or state law, subject to submittal of documentation establishing the applicable exemption; and provided further that such WCF shall comply with all other standards set forth in this chapter and the rules and guidelines, and shall obtain any related ministerial permit(s) (encroachment permit, excavation permit, or building permit) required in order to access and/or use the PROW.

        d.     Any WCF proposed to be installed, modified or replaced on any city infrastructure located within the PROW, including, but not limited to, any city-owned, leased or licensed pole, tower, base station, cabinet, structure, building, or facility of any kind. The city and an applicant may enter into a license, lease or other agreement in a form acceptable to the city, which includes, but is not limited to, terms relating to rent, inspection, operations and maintenance requirements, defense and indemnification, insurance requirements, waiver of monetary damages against the city, removal, restoration and clean-up requirements, and requirement for payment of any possessory interest taxes. Any such agreement shall not substitute for any permit required by this section or any other provision of this code.

        e.     All WCFs, notwithstanding the date approved, shall be subject immediately to the provisions of this section governing operation and maintenance standards (subsection O), radio frequency emissions and other monitoring requirements (subsection P), the prohibition of dangerous conditions or obstructions (subsection Q), cessation of use and abandonment (subsection S), revocation or modification; removal (subsection T), effect on other ordinances (subsection V), and state or federal law (subsection W), and the rules and guidelines adopted by resolution of the city council. In the event a condition of approval conflicts with a provision of this section, the condition of approval shall control until the permit is amended or revoked.

        2.     Exemptions. This section does not apply to the following WCFs:

        a.     A WCF that qualifies as an amateur station as defined by the FCC, 47 C.F.R. Part 97, of the FCC’s Rules, or its successor regulation.

        b.     Any antenna facility that is subject to the FCC Over-the-Air-Receiving Devices rule, 47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000, or its successor regulation, including, but not limited to, direct-to-home satellite dishes that are less than 1 meter in diameter, TV antennas used to receive television broadcast signals and wireless cable antennas.

        c.     Portable radios and devices, including, but not limited to, hand-held, vehicular, or other portable receivers, transmitters or transceivers, cellular phones, CB radios, emergency services radio, and other similar portable devices as determined by the director.

        d.     Any WCF owned, leased and/or operated by the city or any other governmental agency.

        e.     Emergency medical care provider-owned and operated WCFs.

        f.      Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

        g.     Any other WCF exempted from this code by federal law or state law, subject to submittal of documentation establishing the applicable exemption.

        h.     Any WCF proposed to be installed, placed, modified or replaced on any city-owned or controlled infrastructure located outside the PROW, including, but not limited to, any city-owned, leased or licensed street lights, traffic light poles, wires, fiber-optic strands, conduit, and any other city-owned or controlled poles, towers, base stations, cabinets, structures, buildings, or facility of any kind located outside the PROW. Such WCFs shall require a license, lease or other agreement in the form and terms required by the city from time to time, which shall include, but not be limited to, terms relating to permit requirements, rent, inspection, operations and maintenance requirements, defense and indemnification, insurance requirements, waiver of monetary damages against the city, removal, restoration and clean-up requirements, and requirement for payment of any possessory interest taxes; and any and all other permits required by this code. Any such agreement shall be in addition to, and shall not substitute for, any permit required by any provision of this code.

        i.      Any WCF proposed to be installed, construed, modified, or replaced on any private property. (See Chapter 11.4.070.)

        j.      Request for Approval Pursuant to Section 6409(a). Any requests for approval to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted pursuant to Section 6409(a) will require an eligible facility permit under Section 6.10.072 of this chapter.

        D.    General Small Wireless Facility Permit Requirements.

        1.     Permit Required. A SWF shall not be constructed, installed, modified, or replaced in the PROW except upon approval of a SWFP in accordance with the requirements of this section, or an EFP in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.10.072, and all related ministerial permits.

        2.     Conflicting Provisions. An application for a SWFP shall be processed in compliance with this section and the Rules and Guidelines adopted by resolution of the city council, and any supplemental rules, regulations, procedures and forms adopted by the director. Ministerial permits shall meet all requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this code, the Rules and Guidelines, and any such director-adopted rules, regulations, policies and forms. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and any other provision of this code, the Rules and Guidelines, and/or the director-adopted provisions, the provisions of this section shall govern and control.

        3.     Permit Type. Table 6.10.070.D identifies the type of permit required for each WCF and the approval authority.

 

Table 6.10.070.D

Public Rights-of-Way Wireless Communications Facilities Required Permit Matrix

TYPE OF FACILITY

TYPE OF PERMIT

APPROVAL AUTHORITY

Small wireless facility (as defined in Section 6.10.010)

Small wireless facility permit (SWFP)1

Public works director or designee2

Eligible facility (as defined in Section 6.10.010 and 6.10.072.B)

Eligible facility permit (EFP)3

Public works director or designee2

Maintenance and repairs, including minor modifications and emergency maintenance and repairs4

Maintenance encroachment permit5

Public works director or designee

Encroachment or excavation within or on public rights-of-way

Encroachment permit, excavation permit and/or building permit5

Public works director or designee

1     For small wireless facility requests and permit procedures, see subsection D.4.

2     Subject to public notice and review by the director. See subsection F.

3     For eligible facility requests and procedures, see Section 6.10.072 of this chapter.

4     For definition of maintenance and repairs, and minor modifications, see subsection D.6.

5     For encroachment permits, see SBMC Sections 7.35.010.B.6 and 9.50.025; for excavation permits, see SBMC Chapter 9.15; and for building permits, see SBMC Chapter 9.60.

 

        4.     Small Wireless Facility Permit (SWFP). An SWFP, subject to the city’s determination of compliance with the applicable requirements of this section and the Rules and Guidelines may be issued by the director or designee following public notice and review under any of the following circumstances:

        a.     The application is for installation of a new small wireless facility within the PROW, or the replacement of, or collocations on or modifications to an existing small wireless facility, within the PROW, that meets all of the following criteria:

        i.      The proposal complies with all applicable provisions in this section without need for an exception pursuant to subsection J, and

        ii.     The proposal is not located in any prohibited location identified in subsection G.4 or J.5; or

        b.     The application is for a subsequent collocation to be located on an existing legally established small wireless communications collocation facility within the PROW provided that all of the following conditions are met:

        i.      The existing collocation facility was approved after January 1, 2007 by discretionary permit, and

        ii.     The existing collocation facility was approved subject to an environmental impact report, negative declaration, or mitigated negative declaration, and

        iii.     The existing collocation facility otherwise complies with the requirements of Government Code Section 65850.6(b), for wireless communication collocation facilities or its successor provision, for addition of a collocation facility to a wireless communication collocation facility, including, but not limited to, compliance with all performance and maintenance requirements, regulations and standards in this section and the conditions of approval in the wireless communications collocation facility permit,

        iv.    Provided, however, only those collocations that were specifically considered when the relevant environmental document was prepared are permitted uses,

        v.     The collocated facility does not increase the height or location of the existing permitted tower/structure, or otherwise change the bulk, size, or other physical attributes of the existing permitted small wireless facility, and

        vi.    Before collocation, the applicant seeking collocation shall obtain all other applicable non-discretionary permit(s), as required pursuant to this code;

        c.     The application shall meet the requirements of subsection E and the Rules and Guidelines. No public hearing shall be required. The director shall review the application, pertinent information and documentation and public comments in accordance with subsection F. An application for a SWFP shall be approved if the director makes all of the findings required by subsection I of this chapter. The director’s decision shall be issued in writing in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection F and the Rules and Guidelines. The director may impose additional conditions on the permit relating to time, place and manner pursuant to subsection H.

        5.     Maintenance Encroachment Permit. Minor modifications to an existing SWF, including replacement with the in-kind, number size or with smaller or less visible equipment, that: (a) meet the standards set forth in this section; (b) will have little or no change in the visual appearance of the SWF; and (c) do not increase the RF output of the SWF, are considered to be routine maintenance and repairs, and may be approved by an encroachment permit and without any public notice or public hearing, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this chapter and the Rules and Guidelines. Maintenance and repairs include, but are not limited to, those minor modifications that result from an emergency. The upgrade or any other replacement of existing facilities and all new antennas, structures, and other facilities, including, but not limited to, those resulting from an emergency, shall comply with the SWFP or EFP requirements of this chapter and the Rules and Guidelines.

        6.     Power Generators. An exception approved by the director pursuant to subsection H shall be required for any application for installation of a new small wireless facility within the PROW that includes a power generator, or the replacement of, or collocations on or modifications to an existing small wireless facility within the PROW that includes a power generator.

        7.     Eligible Facilities. Unless specifically exempt by federal or state law, any application for the installation or modification of a WCF that constitutes an “eligible facilities request” within the meaning of Section 6409(a) shall require the approval of an eligible facility permit (EFP) by the director in accordance with Section 6.10.072 of this chapter and the rules and guidelines prior to deployment of the eligible facility.

        8.     Other Permits Required. In addition to any permit that may be required under this subsection, the applicant must obtain all other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, or state or federal agencies. Any SWFP granted under this section shall also be subject to the conditions and/or requirements of all such other required city, state or federal prior permits or other approvals.

        9.     Eligible Applicants. Only applicants who have been granted the right to enter the PROW pursuant to state or federal law, or who have entered into a franchise or license agreement with the city permitting them to use the PROW, shall be eligible to construct, install, modify or otherwise deploy a SWF in the PROW.

        10.   Speculative Equipment or Facilities Prohibited. The city finds that the practice of “pre-approving” wireless communications equipment or other improvements that the applicant does not presently intend to install but may wish to install at some undetermined future time does not serve the public’s best interest. The city shall not approve any equipment or other improvements in connection with a SWFP when the applicant does not actually and presently intend to install such equipment or construct such improvements.

        11.   Prohibited Facilities. Any SWF that does not comply with the most current regulatory and operational standards and regulations (including, but not limited to, RF emission standards) adopted by the FCC is prohibited.

        E.     Application Requirements. An application for a SWF shall be filed and reviewed in accordance with the following provisions and the Rules and Guidelines, except as otherwise provided for eligible facilities in Section 6.10.072 (Wireless Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way—Eligible Facilities).

        1.     Complete Application Required. The applicant shall submit a SWFP application in writing to the public works department on a city-approved form as prescribed by the director, and shall submit all information, materials and documentation required by this section and the Rules and Guidelines and as otherwise determined to be necessary by the director to effectuate the purpose and intent of this section. The director may waive certain submittal requirements or require additional information based on specific project factors. Unless an exemption or waiver applies, all applications shall include all of the forms, information, materials and documentation required by the city. An application shall not be deemed complete by the city unless the completed city application form and all required information, materials and documentation have been submitted to the city. An application which does not include all required forms, information, materials and documentation required by this section and the Rules and Guidelines, shall be deemed incomplete, and a notice of incomplete application shall be provided to the applicant in accordance with subsection E.6.

        2.     Application Fees. Concurrent with submittal of the application, the applicant shall pay an application fee and processing fee, a deposit for an independent expert review as set forth in this section, and a deposit for review by the city attorney’s office, in a payment format accepted by the city finance department and in amounts set by resolution of the city council. The amounts of such fees shall be fair and reasonable compensation for the applicant’s use of the PROW, and shall be competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory. Fees shall not exceed any maximum fees set by federal or state law except to the extent that such fees are: (a) a reasonable approximation of costs; (b) those costs themselves are reasonable; and (c) are non-discriminatory. Failure to pay the fees in full at the time of application submittal shall result in the city deeming the application incomplete.

        3.     Voluntary Pre-Submittal Conference. Prior to application submittal, the applicant may schedule and attend a voluntary pre-submittal conference with the public works department and community development department staff for all proposed SWFs in the PROW, including all new or replacement WCFs, and all proposed collocations or modifications to any existing WCF. The purpose of the pre-submittal conference is to provide informal feedback on the proposed classification, review procedure, location, design and application materials, to identify potential concerns and to streamline the formal application review process after submittal. Participation in a voluntary pre-submittal conference shall not commence the shot clock (timeline for review) requirements under subsection E.6 of this section.

        4.     Appointments. The director may require that an application shall be submitted only at a pre-arranged appointment in accordance with the Rules and Guidelines. The director has the discretion to set the frequency and number of appointments that will be granted each day. The requirement for an appointment shall be published on the department’s website.

        5.     Independent Expert. The director is authorized to retain on behalf of the city an independent, qualified consultant to review any application for a SWFP to review the technical aspects of the application, including, but not limited to: the accuracy, adequacy, and completeness of submissions; compliance with applicable radio frequency emission standards; whether any requested exception is necessary; technical demonstration of the facility designs or configurations, technical feasibility; coverage analysis; the validity of conclusions reached or claims made by applicant; and other factors deemed appropriate by the director to effectuate the purposes of this section. The cost of this review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit pursuant to an adopted fee schedule resolution.

        6.     Shot Clocks—Timeline for Review and Action. The timeline for review of and action on a SWFP application shall begin to run when the application is submitted in writing to the department but may be reset or tolled by mutual agreement or upon the city’s issuance of a notice of incomplete application to the applicant pursuant to subsection E.7 of this section. Applications shall be processed in conformance with the time periods and procedures established by applicable state and federal law, and FCC regulations and orders. The following provisions shall apply:

        a.     Small Wireless Facilities Request. For review of an application for a SWFP, the city shall act upon the application in accordance with the following timing requirements:

        i.      60 Days. For an application to collocate a small wireless facility using an existing structure, the city will act upon the application within 60 days from the department’s receipt of the written application packet, unless the time period is re-set or tolled by mutual agreement or pursuant to subsection E.7.

        ii.     90 Days. For an application to deploy a small wireless facility using a new structure, the city will act upon the application within 90 days from the department’s receipt of the written application packet, unless the time period is re-set or tolled by mutual written agreement or pursuant to subsection E.7.

        b.     Eligible Facilities Request. For an eligible facilities request, the city will act on the application within 60 days of the department’s receipt of the written application packet, unless the time period is tolled by mutual written agreement or pursuant to Section 6.10.072.E.6 of this chapter.

        c.     Batching. An applicant may submit a single application for authorization of multiple deployments of WCFs pursuant to this section. An application containing multiple deployments shall comply with the following timing requirements.

        i.      The deadline for the city to act upon the application shall be that for a single deployment within that category,

        ii.     90 Days. If a single application seeks authorization for multiple deployments of small wireless facilities, the components of which are a mix of deployments that fall within subsection E.6.a.i and deployments that fall within subsection E.6.a.ii, then the city shall act upon the application as a whole within 90 days, unless tolled or reset by mutual written agreement or pursuant to subsection E.7.

        7.     Resetting or Tolling of Shot Clock—Incomplete Application Notices. Unless a written agreement between the city and the applicant provides otherwise, in the event that department staff determines that a permit application is incomplete because it does not contain all the information, materials and/or other documentation required by this section, department staff may issue a notice of incomplete application to the applicant, and the shot clocks set forth above shall be re-set or tolled as set forth in this subsection.

        a.     First Incomplete Notice—Small Wireless Facility Resetting of Shot Clock. Department staff shall determine whether an application for a SWF is complete or incomplete within 10 days of the city’s receipt of the initial application and shall notify the applicant in writing if the application is materially incomplete. The notice of incomplete application shall identify the specific missing information, materials and/or documents, and the ordinance, rule, statute or regulation creating the obligation to submit such information, materials and/or documents. The applicable shot clock date calculation set forth in subsection E.6.a.i or E.6.a.ii shall re-start at zero on the date that the applicant submits all the information, materials and documents identified in the notice of incomplete application to render the application complete.

        b.     Subsequent Incomplete Notices. For resubmitted applications following the initial notice of incomplete application under subsection E.7.a, department staff will notify the applicant within 10 days of the city’s receipt of the resubmitted application whether the supplemental submission is complete or incomplete, If the supplemental submission was incomplete, the notice shall specifically identify the missing information, materials, and/or documents that must be submitted based on the department’s initial incomplete notice. In the case of any such subsequent notices of incomplete application, the applicable timeframe for review set forth in subsection E.6.a or E.6.b shall be tolled from the day after the date the city issues the second or subsequent notice of incomplete application to the applicant until the applicant submits all the information, materials and documents identified by the city to render the application complete.

        c.     One Submittal. The applicant’s response and submission of supplemental materials and information in response to a notice of incomplete application must be given to the city in 1 submittal packet.

        d.     Determination of Shot Clock Date.

        i.      The shot clock date for a SWFP application is determined by counting forward, beginning on the day after the date when the application was submitted, by the number of days of the shot clock period identified pursuant to subsection E.6.a or E.6.b. and including any pre-application period asserted by the city; provided, that if the date calculated in this manner is a holiday, the shot clock date is the next business day after such date.

        ii.     For purposes of this subsection E.7.d, the term “holiday” means any of the following: Saturday, Sunday, any holiday recognized by the city; and any other day recognized as a holiday by the FCC pursuant to any applicable federal regulations, orders or rulings of the FCC for the subject SWFP.

        iii.     For purposes of this subsection E.7.d, the term “business day” means any day that is not a holiday, as defined in subparagraph ii.

        8.     Withdrawal—Extensions of Time. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, any application deemed incomplete must be resubmitted within 180 days after issuance of any notification of incompleteness, or the application shall be deemed automatically withdrawn. Following the applicant’s request, the director may, in his or her discretion, grant a one-time extension in processing time to resubmit, not to exceed 150 days. If the application is deemed automatically withdrawn (and any applicable extension period, if granted, has expired), a new application (including, fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials) shall be required in order to commence processing of the project. No refunds will be provided for withdrawn applications.

        9.     Leases, Licenses and Agreements for City Infrastructure or Property in the PROW. The city and an applicant may mutually agree to enter into a lease, license or other agreement for the applicant’s installation, modification or other deployment of a SWF on any city-owned infrastructure or other city property within the PROW. The proposed agreement may include multiple SWFs, as mutually agreed upon. The agreement shall be in addition to, and not a substitute, for any permit required by any provision of this code. An WCFP shall be required for all proposed facilities that are to be covered by an agreement between the city and the applicant. The agreement shall be fully executed by the city and applicant prior to the applicant’s submittal of any SWFP application under this section or any other provision of this code. In addition, all ministerial permits shall be obtained as a condition of the installation, construction or other deployment of any proposed SWF within the PROW. The shot clock provisions set forth in subsection E shall not apply during any negotiations for any such lease, license or other agreement. The shot clock provisions set forth in subsection E shall commence upon the date of submittal of an application for a SWFP for specific small wireless facility(ies) following the effective date of the lease, license or other agreement.

        F.     Notice and Decision. Procedures for public notice, approval authority review of and action on WCFP applications are set forth in this subsection and in the Rules and Guidelines.

        1.     Public Notice of Application. Upon submittal of a complete SWFP application to the city, the applicant shall send the city-approved public notice of the application to all businesses and residents within a 150-foot radius of the proposed SWF in accordance with the Rules and Guidelines. Concurrently with service on the businesses and residents, the applicant shall also send a copy of the approved public notice to the department along with proof of service of the public notice on all residents and businesses as required by this subsection.

        2.     Public Comment. Within 10 days from service of the notice, any interested person may submit comments on the proposed SWF to the city by U.S. mail or through the city’s website. Any timely public comments received will be considered during the director’s review of the application.

        3.     Director Decision on SWFP Applications.

        a.     Director Review, Decision and Notice. Upon receipt of a complete application for a SWFP pursuant to this section, the director or designee shall carry out administrative review of the application and all pertinent information, materials, documentation and public comments. The director may approve, or conditionally approve an application for a SWFP only after the director makes all of the findings required in subsection I. The director may impose conditions in accordance with subsection H. Within 5 days after the director approves or conditionally approves an application under this section, the director shall issue a written determination letter, and shall serve a copy of the determination letter on the applicant at the address shown in the application and shall cause the determination letter to be published on the city’s website.

        b.     Conditional Approvals. Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, and in addition to the standard conditions of approval required by subsection H, nothing in this section is intended to limit the city’s authority to conditionally approve an application for a SWFP to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with this section and the rules and guidelines.

        c.     Final Decision. The director’s decision on an application for a SWFP shall be final and conclusive and not be appealable to the city council.

        G.    Design, Aesthetic and Development Standards. In order to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses, protect public safety and natural, cultural, and scenic resources, preserve and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and promote attractive nonresidential areas, in addition to all other applicable requirements of this code, all SWFs in the PROW shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards set forth in this subsection and in the Rules and Guidelines, unless the director approves an exception subject to the findings required by subsection J: Exceptions.

        1.     General Requirements. All SWFs that are located within the PROW shall be designed and maintained as to minimize visual clutter, and reduce noise and other impacts on and conflicts with the surrounding community in accordance with the code and Rules and Guidelines.

        2.     Traffic Safety. All SWFs shall be designed and located in such a manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety, and shall comply with the most recent edition of the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and any other traffic control rules, regulations or ordinances of the city.

        3.     Space Occupied. Each SWF shall be designed to occupy the least amount of space in the right-of-way that is technically feasible.

        4.     Location.

        a.     The preferred location for a SWF shall be on existing infrastructure such as utility poles or street lights. The infrastructure selected shall be located at alleys, streets and/or near property line prolongations. If the SWF is not able to be placed on existing infrastructure, the applicant shall provide a map of existing infrastructure in the service area and describe why each such site was not technically feasible, in addition to all other application requirements of this section.

 

        b.     No SWF shall be located within 6 feet of the living area of any residential dwelling unit. As used herein, the term “living area” means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, bedrooms, windows, basements and attics but does not include a garage or any accessory structure. The 6-foot distance shall be measured from the dwelling unit’s outer wall located nearest to the proposed SWF.

        c.     No SWF shall be located within the PROW or any poles, infrastructure, buildings or other structures of any kind in the PROW, in any of the following locations or sites:

        i.      On the Seal Beach Pier, or any decorative lighting or poles on the Seal Beach Pier;

        ii.     On any decorative lighting or poles on Main Street from and including Pacific Coast Highway to the Seal Beach Pier; or

        iii.     On Electric Avenue between Marina to Ocean (including, but not limited to, within the parkway, greenbelt, bike path or any other PROW within Electric Avenue), except in the following locations:

        (A)   On the north side of the PROW adjacent to the westbound lanes of Electric Avenue; or

        (B)   On the south side of the PROW adjacent to the eastbound lanes of Electric Avenue.

        The permissible locations for SWFs on the PROW along Electric Avenue are shown on the Site Diagram contained in Figure 6.10.070.G.4.c. as follows:

 

 



Figure 6.10.070.G.4.c

Electric Avenue—Permissible Locations for WCFs

 

 

        iv.    On any decorative lighting or decorative poles located within any other PROW in the city.

        d.     Each component part of a SWF shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, inconvenience to the public’s use of the PROW, or safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists, or interference with any path of travel or other disability access requirements imposed under federal or state law.

        e.     A SWF shall not be located within any portion of the PROW in a manner that interferes with access to a fire hydrant, fire station, fire escape, water valve, underground vault, valve housing structure, or any other public health and safety facility.

        f.      Any SWFs mounted to a communications tower, above-ground accessory equipment, or walls, fences, landscaping or other screening methods shall have and maintain a minimum setback of 18 inches from the front of a curb.

        g.     To conceal the non-antenna equipment, applicants shall install all non-antenna equipment (including, but not limited to, all cables) underground to the extent technically feasible. If such non-antenna equipment is proposed in within an underground utility district and the type of non-antenna equipment has been exempted by the city council from undergrounding pursuant to Section 9.55.015.B.6 of Chapter 9.55 of the code, the non-antenna equipment shall comply with the requirements of this section if the director finds that such undergrounding is technically feasible and undergrounding is required for building, traffic, emergency, disability access, or other safety requirements. Additional expense to install and maintain an underground equipment enclosure does not exempt an applicant from this requirement, except where the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that this requirement will effectively prohibit the provision of wireless communications services.

        5.     Concealment or Stealth Elements. Stealth or concealment elements may include, but are not limited to:

        a.     Radio frequency transparent screening;

        b.     Approved, specific colors;

        c.     Minimizing the size of the site;

        d.     Integrating the installation into existing utility infrastructure;

        e.     Installing new infrastructure that matches existing infrastructure in the area surrounding the proposed site. The new infrastructure is then dedicated to the city and the installation is integrated into the new infrastructure; and

        f.      Controlling the installation location pursuant to subsection G.4 of this section.

        6.     Collocation. The applicant and owner of any site on which a SWF is located shall cooperate and exercise good faith in collocating SWFs on the same support structures or site. Good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of collocation, and may include negotiations for erection of a replacement support structure to accommodate collocation. A competitive conflict to collocation or financial burden caused by sharing information normally will not be considered as an excuse to the duty of good faith.

        a.     All SWFs shall make available unused space for collocation of other WCFs, including space for these entities providing similar, competing services. Collocation is not required if the host facility can demonstrate that the addition of the new service or facilities would impair existing service or cause the host to go offline for a significant period of time. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the director may require the applicant to obtain a third-party technical study at applicant’s expense. The director may review any information submitted by applicant and permittee(s) in determining whether good faith has been exercised.

        b.     All collocated and multiple-user SWFs shall be designed to promote facility and site sharing. Communication towers and necessary appurtenances, including, but not limited to, parking areas, access roads, utilities and equipment buildings, shall be shared by site users whenever possible.

        c.     No collocation may be required where it can be shown that the shared use would or does result in significant interference in the broadcast or reception capabilities of the existing WCFs or failure of the existing facilities to meet federal standards for emissions.

        d.     When antennas are co-located, the director may limit the number of antennas with related equipment to be located at any 1 site by any provider to prevent negative visual impacts.

        e.     Failure to comply with collocation requirements when feasible or cooperate in good faith as provided for in this section is grounds for denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit.

        7.     Radio Frequency Standards—Noise.

        a.     SWFs shall comply with federal standards for radio frequency (RF) emissions and interference. No SWF or combination of facilities shall at any time produce power densities that exceed the FCC’s limits for electric and magnetic field strength and power density for transmitters or operate in a manner that will degrade or interfere with existing communications systems as stipulated by federal law. Failure to meet federal standards may result in termination or modification of the permit.

        b.     SWFs and any related equipment, including backup generators and air conditioning units, shall not generate continuous noise in excess of 40 decibels (dBA) measured at the property line of any adjacent residential property, and shall not generate continuous noise in excess of 50 dBA during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 40 dBA during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. measured at the property line of any nonresidential adjacent property. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.

        8.     Additional Standards. Consistent with federal and state laws and regulations, the city council may further establish design and development standards pursuant to rules and guidelines, including, but not limited to, relating to antennas, new, existing and replacement poles, wind loads, obstructions, supporting structures, screening, accessory equipment, landscaping, signage, lighting, security and fire prevention.

        9.     Modification. To the extent authorized by state and federal laws and regulations, at the time of modification of a SWF, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise and other impacts, including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities.

        H.    Standard Conditions of Approval. All SWFP approvals, whether approved by the approval authority or deemed approved by the operation of law, shall be automatically subject to the conditions in this subsection, in addition to any conditions imposed by the approval authority pursuant to this section and the rules and guidelines. The approval authority shall have discretion to modify or amend these conditions on a case-by-case basis as may be necessary or appropriate under the circumstances to protect public health and safety or allow for the proper operation of the approved eligible facility consistent with the goals of this section.

        1.     Permit Term. A SWFP shall be valid for a period of 10 years, unless it is revoked sooner in accordance with this section or pursuant to any other provision of federal or state law that authorizes the city to issue a SWFP with a shorter term, or such SWFP is extended pursuant to subsection R. At the end of the term, the SWFP shall automatically expire. Any other permits or approvals issued in connection with any collocation, modification or other change to the SWF, which includes without limitation any permits or other approvals deemed-granted or deemed-approved under federal or state law, will not extend the 10-year term limit unless expressly provided otherwise in such permit or approval or required under federal or state law.

        2.     Strict Compliance with Approved Plans. Any application filed by the permittee for a ministerial permit to construct or install the SWF approved by a SWFP must incorporate the SWFP approval, all conditions associated with the SWFP approval and the approved photo simulations into the project plans (the “approved plans”). The permittee must construct, install and operate the WCF in strict compliance with the approved plans. Any alterations, modifications or other changes to the approved plans, whether requested by the permittee or required by other departments or public agencies with jurisdiction over the SWF, must be submitted in a written request subject to the director’s prior review and approval.

        3.     Build-Out Period. The SWFP approval will automatically expire one year from the SWFP approval or deemed-granted date unless the permittee obtains all other permits and approvals required to install, construct and/or operate the approved SWF under this code, and any other permits or approvals required by any federal, state or other local public agencies with jurisdiction over the subject property, the eligible facility or its use. The director may grant 1 written extension to a date certain when the permittee shows good cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension submitted at least 30 days prior to the automatic expiration date in this condition.

        4.     Maintenance Obligations—Vandalism. The permittee shall keep the site, which includes, without limitation, any and all improvements, equipment, structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean and safe condition in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions in the SWFP. The permittee shall keep the site area free from all litter and debris at all times. The permittee, at no cost to the city, shall remove and remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within 48 hours after the permittee receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or other vandalism occurred. Each year after the permittee installs the SWF, the permittee shall submit a written report to the director, in a form acceptable to the director, that documents the then-current site condition.

        5.     Property Maintenance. The permittee shall ensure that all equipment and other improvements to be constructed and/or installed in connection with the approved plans are maintained in a manner that is not detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare and that the aesthetic appearance is continuously preserved, and substantially the same as shown in the approved plans at all times relevant to the SWFP. The permittee further acknowledges that failure to maintain compliance with this condition may result in a code enforcement action.

        6.     Compliance With Laws. The permittee shall maintain compliance at all times with all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, orders or other rules that carry the force of law (“governing laws”) applicable to the permittee, the subject property, the SWF and any use or activities in connection with the use authorized in the WCFP, which includes, without limitation, any laws applicable to human exposure to RF emissions. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that this obligation is intended to be broadly construed and that no other specific requirements in these conditions are intended to reduce, relieve or otherwise lessen the permittee’s obligations to maintain compliance with all governing laws. In the event that the city fails to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance with any applicable provision in the Seal Beach Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition or any governing laws, the applicant or permittee will not be relieved from its obligation to comply in all respects with all applicable provisions in the code, any permit, any permit condition or any governing laws.

        7.     Adverse Impacts on Other Properties. The permittee shall use all reasonable efforts to avoid any and all undue or unnecessary adverse impacts on nearby properties that may arise from the permittee’s or its authorized personnel’s construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal and/or other activities at the site. Impacts of radio frequency emissions on the environment, to the extent that such emissions are compliant with all governing laws, are not “adverse impacts” for the purposes of this condition. The permittee shall not perform or cause others to perform any construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal or other work that involves heavy equipment or machines except during normal construction hours authorized by the code. The restricted work hours in this condition will not prohibit any work required to prevent an actual, immediate harm to property or persons, or any work during an emergency declared by the city. The director or the director’s designee may issue a stop work order for any activities that violate this condition.

        8.     Inspections—Emergencies. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city’s officers, officials, staff or other designee may enter onto the site and inspect the improvements and equipment upon reasonable prior notice to the permittee; provided, however, that the city’s officers, officials, staff or other designee may, but will not be obligated to, enter onto the site area without prior notice to support, repair, disable or remove any improvements or equipment in emergencies or when such improvements or equipment threatens actual, imminent harm to property or persons. The permittee will be permitted to supervise the city’s officers, officials, staff or other designee while any such inspection or emergency access occurs to the extent not inconsistent with city requirements.

        9.     Permittee’s Contact Information. The permittee shall furnish the director with accurate and up-to-date contact information for a person responsible for the SWF, which includes, without limitation, such person’s full name, title, direct telephone number, facsimile number, mailing address and email address. The permittee shall keep such contact information up-to-date at all times and immediately provide the director with updated contact information in the event that either the responsible person or such person’s contact information changes.

        10.   Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, pay for and maintain, in full force and effect until the SWF approved by the permit is removed in its entirety from the PROW, an insurance policy or policies of public liability insurance which shall be in the form and substance satisfactory to the city, and shall be maintained until the term of the permit ended and the WCF is removed from the PROW. The insurance shall comply with the minimum limits and coverages and provisions set forth in the rules and guidelines, and as otherwise established from time to time by the city, and which fully protect the city from claims and suits for bodily injury, death, and property damage.

        11.   Indemnification.

        a.     The permittee shall agree in writing to defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants, employees, volunteers and independent contractors serving as city officials (collectively “Indemnitees”), from and against any and all claims, actions, or proceeding against the Indemnitees or any of them, to attack, set aside, void or annul, an approval of the director or city council concerning the permit and the construction, operation, maintenance and/or repair of the SWF. Such indemnification shall include damages, judgments, settlements, penalties, fines, defensive costs or expenses, including, but not limited to, interest, reasonable attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, or liability of any kind related to or arising from such claim, action, or proceeding. The permittee shall also agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in connection with the grant of the permit and also agree to abide by the city’s ordinances and other laws. The city shall promptly notify the permittee of any claim, action, or proceeding. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit city from participating in a defense of any claim, action or proceeding. The city shall have the option of coordinating the defense, including, but not limited to, choosing counsel for the defense at the permittee’s expense.

        b.     Additionally, to the fullest extent permitted by law, the permittee, and every permittee and person in a shared permit, jointly and severally, shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers harmless from and against all claims, suits, demands, actions, losses, liabilities, judgments, settlements, costs (including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, interest and expert witness fees), or damages claimed by third parties against the city for any injury claim, and for property damage sustained by any person, arising out of, resulting from, or are in any way related to the SWF, or to any work done by or use of the PROW by the permittee, owner or operator of the SWF, or their agents, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers and independent contractors serving as city officials.

        12.   Performance Security. Prior to issuance of any SWFP, the permittee shall pay for and provide a performance bond or other form of security that complies with the following minimum requirements.

        a.     The security shall be in effect until the SWF is fully and completely removed and the site reasonably returned to its original condition, to cover the removal costs of the WCF in the event that use of the SWF is abandoned or the approval is otherwise terminated.

        b.     The security shall be in a format and amount approved by the director and city attorney’s office. The amount of security shall be as determined by the director to be necessary to ensure proper completion of the applicant’s removal obligations. In establishing the amount of the security, the director shall take into consideration information provided by the applicant regarding the cost of removal. The amount of the security instrument shall be calculated by the applicant as part of its application in an amount rationally related to the obligations covered by the security instrument. The permittee shall be required to submit the approved security instrument to the director prior to issuance of any SWFP for the proposed facility.

        c.     Security shall always be imposed if the SWF is located in a PROW adjacent to any residentially zoned property or residential uses.

        13.   Acceptance of Conditions. The SWFP shall not become effective for any purpose unless/until a city “Acceptance of Conditions” form, in a form approved by the city attorney’s office, has been signed and notarized by the applicant/permittee before being returned to the director within 10 days after the determination letter has been served on the applicant and published on the city’s website in accordance with subsection G.3.a. The permit shall be void and of no force or effect unless such written agreement is received by the city within said 10-day period.

        I.      Findings on Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications. No permit shall be granted for a SWFP unless all of the following findings are made by the director:

        1.     General Findings. The director may approve or approve with conditions any SWFP required under this section only after making all of the following findings:

        a.     All notices required for the proposed deployment have been given by the applicant.

        b.     The applicant has provided substantial written evidence supporting the applicant’s claim that it has the right to enter and use the PROW pursuant to state or federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise or other agreement with the city permitting them to enter and use the PROW.

        c.     The applicant has demonstrated that the SWF complies with all applicable design, aesthetic and development standards and will not interfere with access to or the use of the PROW, existing subterranean infrastructure, or the city’s plans for modification or use of such PROW location and infrastructure.

        d.     The applicant has demonstrated that the SWF will not cause any interference with emergency operations, as evidenced by competent evidence.

        e.     The proposed SWF’s impacts have been mitigated through the use of stealth and concealment elements in accordance with the requirements of this section and the rules and guidelines.

        f.      The proposed SWF complies with all federal RF emissions standards and all other requirements of any federal and/or state agency.

        g.     The proposed SWF conforms with all applicable provisions of this section and federal and state law.

        h.     The findings required by this subsection shall be in addition to any other findings required for approval of a ministerial permit under this code.

        2.     Additional Findings for SWFs Not Collocated. To approve a wireless telecommunications antenna that is not collocated with other existing or proposed WCFs or a new or replacement ground-mounted antenna, monopole, or lattice tower, the director shall be required to also find that collocation or siting on an existing structure is not feasible because of technical, aesthetic, or legal consideration including that such siting:

        a.     Would have more significant adverse effects on views or other environmental considerations;

        b.     Would impair the quality of service to the existing WCF; or

        c.     Would require existing WCFs at the same location to go off-line for a significant period of time.

        J.     Exceptions—Director Findings.

        1.     General Requirements. An exception from the strict locational, physical, or design, or development requirements of subsection G, or as provided in the Rules and Guidelines, may be granted by the director in his or her discretion, when it is shown to the director’s satisfaction, based on substantial evidence, any of the following:

        a.     Because of special, unique circumstances applicable to the proposed location and/or the proposed WCF, the strict application of the requirements of the section would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by other permittees in the vicinity operating a similar WCF; or

        b.     Denial of the SWF as proposed would violate federal law, state law, or both; or

        c.     A provision of this section, as applied to applicant, would deprive applicant of its rights under federal law, state law, or both.

        2.     Application Requirements. An applicant may only request an exception at the time of applying for a SWFP. The request must include both the specific provision(s) of this section from which the exception is sought and the basis of the request. Any request for an exception after the city has deemed an application complete shall be treated as a new application.

        3.     Burden. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing the basis for any requested exception.

        4.     Scope—Conditions. The director shall limit its exception to the extent to which the applicant demonstrates such an exception is necessary to reasonably achieve its reasonable technical service objectives. In addition to the standard conditions of approval pursuant to subsection H, the director may adopt other conditions of approval as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other wireless providers seeking to locate any WCF in the area where such property is situated and that are reasonably necessary to promote the purposes in this section and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

        5.     Prohibited Locations—No Exception. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, SWFs are prohibited in any of the following locations, and no exception shall be granted by the director:

        a.     Any location or site within a PROW for which approval cannot be obtained from the NWS.

        b.     Any location or site within a PROW for which approval cannot be obtained by any other federal or state agency with jurisdiction over the proposed SWF.

        K.     Reserved.

        L.     Nonexclusive Grant. No permit or approval granted under this section shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the PROW of the city for any purpose whatsoever. Further, no approval shall be construed as any warranty of title.

        M.    Business License. A SWFP issued pursuant to this section shall not be a substitute for any business license otherwise required under this code.

        N.    Temporary Small Wireless Facilities.

        1.     Emergency Deployment. In the event of a declared federal, state, or local emergency, or when otherwise warranted by conditions that the director deems to constitute an emergency, the director may approve the installation and operation of a temporary small wireless facility, subject to such reasonable conditions that the director deems necessary.

        2.     Exclusions—Removal. A temporary small wireless facility shall not be permitted for maintenance activities or while awaiting an expected entitlement or pending plan review, and the allowance of a temporary small wireless facility during an emergency shall not be considered to establish a permanent use of such a facility after the emergency has ended, as declared by the city manager or other appropriate federal, state, or local official. Any temporary small wireless facilities placed pursuant to this subsection N must be removed within 5 days after the date the emergency is lifted. Any person or entity that places temporary small wireless facilities pursuant to this subsection must send a written notice that identifies the site location and person responsible for its operation to the director as soon as reasonably practicable.

        O.    Operation and Maintenance Standards. All SWFs must comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards and other standards set forth in the rules and guidelines adopted by resolution of the city council.

        1.     Each SWF shall be operated and maintained to comply with all conditions of approval. Each owner or operator of a SWF shall routinely inspect each site to ensure compliance with the same and the standards set forth in this section.

        2.     No SWF shall be operated and maintained in any manner that causes any interference with any emergency operations of the city and any other public agency.

        3.     Each SWF shall be operated and maintained in compliance with all local, federal and state laws and regulations.

        P.     Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions and Other Monitoring Requirements.

        1.     The permittee, owner and operator of a SWF shall submit within 90 days of beginning operations under a new or amended permit, and every 5 years from the date the SWF began operations, a technically sufficient report (“monitoring report”) that demonstrates all of the following:

        a.     The SWF is in compliance with all applicable federal regulations, including the FCC’s RF emissions standards as certified by a qualified radio frequency emissions engineer; and

        b.     The SWF is in compliance with all provisions of this section and the city’s conditions of approval.

        Q.    No Dangerous Condition or Obstructions Allowed. No person shall install, use or maintain any SWF which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any PROW, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers or is reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such SWF unreasonably interferes with or unreasonably impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street furniture or other objects permitted at or near said location.

        R.    Permit Extension.

        1.     Time of Application. A permittee may apply for extensions of its SWFP in increments of no more than 10 years and no sooner than 180 days (6 months) prior to expiration of the permit. Any request for an extension that is filed less than 180 days (6 months) prior to expiration shall require a new permit in accordance with the application and procedural requirements of the then-current requirements of this code.

        2.     Application Requirements. In addition to all other requirements of this section and the Rules and Guidelines, the permittee’s application for extension shall include proof that the permittee continues to have the legal authority to occupy and use the PROW for the purpose set forth in its SWFP, that the SWF site as it exists at the time of the extension application is in full compliance with all applicable city permits issued for the site, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit and supporting documentation that the SWF is in compliance with all applicable FCC and NWS and other governmental regulations. At the director’s discretion, additional studies and information may be required of the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by the fee for renewal, as set by the city council from time to time. Grounds for non-renewal of the SWFP shall include, but are not limited to, the permittee’s failure to submit the affidavit or proof of legal authority to occupy or use the PROW. The burden is on the permittee to demonstrate that the SWF complies with all requirements for an extension.

        3.     Director Decision. If a SWFP has not expired at the time a timely application is made for an extension, the director may administratively extend the term of the SWFP for subsequent 10-year terms upon verification of continued compliance with the findings and conditions of approval under which the application was originally approved, all provisions set forth in subsection R.2 and any other applicable provisions of this code that are in effect at the time the permit extension is granted. The director’s decision shall be issued in the form of a written determination letter in accordance with subsection F.3. The director’s decision on an application for a SWFP shall be final and conclusive and not be appealable to the city council.

        S.     Cessation of Use or Abandonment.

        1.     A SWF or wireless communications collocation facility is considered abandoned and shall be promptly removed as provided herein if it ceases to provide wireless communications services for 90 or more consecutive days. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.

        2.     The operator of a facility shall notify the city in writing of its intent to abandon or cease use of a permitted site or a nonconforming site (including an unpermitted site) within 10 days of ceasing or abandoning use. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the operator of the SWF shall provide written notice to the director of any discontinuation of operations of 30 days or more.

        3.     Failure to inform the director of cessation or discontinuation of operations of any existing SWF as required by this subsection shall constitute a violation of any approvals and be grounds for enforcement pursuant to subsection T.

        T.     Revocation or Modification—Removal.

        1.     Revocation or Modification of SWFP. The director may modify or revoke any SWFP if the operation or maintenance of the SWF violates any of the permit’s terms or conditions, this section or any other ordinance or law in accordance with the following procedures.

        a.     When the director has reason to believe that grounds exist for the modification or revocation of a SWF, he or she shall give written notice by certified mail thereof to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds. The permittee shall have not less than 10 days to submit a written response and supporting documentation to the director prior to the director’s decision. The director’s decision shall be issued in writing, and shall be posted on the city’s website in accordance with the procedures set out in subsection F.3.a.

        b.     The director may revoke or modify the SWFP if he or she makes any of the following findings:

        i.      The SWFP has expired as provided for in subsection R: Permit Expiration.

        ii.     The SWF has been abandoned as provided in subsection S: Cessation of Use or Abandonment.

        iii.     The permittee has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of approval, this section or any other provision of this code.

        iv.    The SWF has been substantially changed in character or substantially expanded beyond the approval set forth in the permit.

        c.     If the director determines that modification of the SWFP is warranted, he or she may impose any revised or new conditions that he or she deems appropriate based on his or her other findings.

        d.     Decisions of the director to modify or revoke a SWF shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager shall be the hearing officer for purposes of such procedure and may not delegate such responsibility. The city manager’s administrative review decision shall be final and shall not be subject to city council review pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code.

        2.     Permittee’s Removal Obligation. Upon the expiration date of the SWFP, including any extensions, earlier termination or revocation of the SWFP or abandonment of the SWF, the SWFP shall become null and void, and the permittee, owner or operator shall completely remove its SWF or wireless communications collocation facility. Removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. The SWF or wireless communications collocation facility shall be removed from the property within 30 days, at no cost or expense to the city. If the SWF or wireless communications collocation facility is located on another SWF or other private property, the private property owner shall also be independently responsible for the expense of timely removal and restoration.

        3.     Failure to Remove. Failure of the permittee, owner, or operator to promptly remove its SWF wireless communications collocation facility and restore the property within 30 days after expiration, earlier termination, or revocation of the SWFP, or abandonment of the SWF or wireless communications collocation facility, shall be a violation of this code, and be grounds for:

        a.     Prosecution;

        b.     Calling of any bond or other assurance required by this section or conditions of approval of permit;

        c.     Removal of the SWF or wireless communications collocation facility by the city in accordance with the procedures established under this code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

        d.     Any other remedies permitted under this code.

        4.     Summary Removal. In the event the director determines that the condition or placement of a SWF or wireless communications collocation facility located in the PROW constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of the PROW, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively, “exigent circumstances”), the director may cause the SWF or wireless communications collocation facility to be removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing. Written notice of the removal shall be served upon the person who owns the SWF or wireless communications collocation facility within 5 business days of removal and all property removed shall be preserved for the owner’s pick-up as feasible. If the owner cannot be identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to pick-up the property within 60 days, the SWF or wireless communications collocation facility shall be treated as abandoned property.

        5.     Removal of Facilities by City. In the event the city removes a SWF or wireless communications collocation facility in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such removal shall be without any liability to the city for any damage to such WCF or wireless communications collocation facility that may result from reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the city may collect such costs from the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with this code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city has no obligation to store such SWF or wireless communications collocation facility. Neither the permittee nor the owner nor operator shall have any claim if the city destroys any such SWF or wireless communications collocation facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner, or operator after notice, or removed by the city due to exigent circumstances.

        6.     Non-Exclusive Remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this section shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies set forth in this code, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this section.

        U.    Deemed Granted. In the event that a SWFP application is deemed granted by rule of federal or state law, all conditions, development and design standards, and operations and maintenance requirements imposed by this section and any rules and guidelines are still applicable and required for the installation.

        V.     Effect on Other Ordinances—Conflicting Code Provisions Superseded.

        1.     Compliance with the provisions of this section shall not relieve a person from complying with any other applicable provision of this code.

        2.     The provisions of this section shall govern and supersede any conflicting provisions of the code with respect to the permitting and regulation of wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way.

        W.    State or Federal Law.

        1.     In the event it is determined by the city attorney that state or federal law prohibits discretionary permitting requirements for certain SWFs, such requirement shall be deemed severable and all remaining regulations shall remain in full force and effect. Such a determination by the city attorney shall be in writing with citations to legal authority and shall be a public record. For those WCFs, in lieu of a SWFP, a ministerial wireless facilities permit shall be required prior to installation or modification of a SWF, and all provisions of this section shall be applicable to any such facility with the exception that the required permit shall be reviewed and administered as a ministerial permit by the director rather than as a discretionary permit. Any conditions of approval set forth in this section or the rules and guidelines, or deemed necessary by the director, shall be imposed and administered as reasonable time, place and manner rules.

        2.     If subsequent to the issuance of the city attorney’s written determination pursuant to subsection W.1, the city attorney determines that the law has changed and that discretionary permitting is permissible, the city attorney shall issue such determination in writing with citations to legal authority and all discretionary permitting requirements shall be reinstated. The city attorney’s written determination shall be a public record.

        3.     All SWFs shall be built in compliance with all federal and state laws, including, but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

        4.     Changes in Law. All SWFs shall meet the current standards and regulations of the FCC, the CPUC and any other agency of the federal or state government with the authority to regulate wireless communications providers and/or WCFs. If such standards and/or regulations are changed, the permittee and/or wireless communications provider shall bring its SWF into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within 90 days of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. Failure to bring SWFs into compliance with any revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the immediate removal of such facilities at the permittee and/or wireless communications provider’s expense.

        X.     Nonconforming Small Wireless Communications Facilities.

        1.     A legal nonconforming SWF is a facility that was lawfully constructed, installed, or otherwise deployed in the PROW prior to the effective date of this section in compliance with all applicable city, state and federal laws and regulations, and which facility does not conform to the requirements of this section.

        2.     Legal nonconforming SWFs shall comply at all times with the city, state and federal laws, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time the application was deemed complete, and any applicable federal or state laws as they may be amended or enacted from time to time, and shall at all times comply with the conditions of approval. Any legal nonconforming facility which fails to comply with applicable laws, ordinances, regulations or the conditions of approval may be required to conform to the provisions of this section.

        3.     Modifications to legal nonconforming SWFs may be permitted under the following circumstances.

        a.     Ordinary maintenance may be performed on a legal nonconforming facility.

        b.     Modifications may be made to an eligible facility, to the extent expressly required by Section 6409(a).

        4.     Any nonconforming SWF that was not lawfully installed, constructed or otherwise deployed in the PROW in violation of any applicable ordinances, laws or regulations in effect at the time of its deployment is an illegal use and shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance in accordance with the code and/or any other applicable federal and/or state laws, and the owner thereof shall subject to all civil and criminal remedies provided by the code and law. (Ord. 1677)

 

6.10.072 Wireless Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way—Eligible Facilities Requests.
        A.     Purpose and Intent.

        1.     Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. 112-96, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) (“Section 6409(a)”), generally requires that state and local governments “may not deny, and shall approve” requests to collocate, remove or replace transmission equipment at an existing tower or base station. Federal Communication Commission (“FCC”) regulations interpret this statute and establish procedural rules for local review, which generally preempt certain subjective land-use regulations, limit permit application content requirements and provide the applicant with a potential “deemed-granted” remedy when the state or local government fails to approve or deny the request within 60 days after submittal (accounting for any tolling periods). Moreover, whereas Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-104, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 332, applies to only “personal wireless service facilities” (e.g., cellular telephone towers and equipment), Section 6409(a) applies to all “wireless” facilities licensed or authorized by the FCC (e.g., cellular, Wi-Fi, satellite, microwave backhaul, etc.).

        2.     The city council finds that the overlap between wireless deployments covered under Section 6409 and other wireless deployments, combined with the different substantive and procedural rules applicable to such deployments, creates a potential for confusion that harms the public interest in both efficient wireless facilities deployment and carefully planned community development in accordance with local values. The city council further finds that a separate permit application and review process specifically designed for compliance with Section 6409(a) contained in a section devoted to Section 6409(a) will mitigate such potential confusion, streamline local review and preserve the city’s land-use authority to maximum extent possible.

        3.     This section establishes reasonable and uniform standards and procedures in a manner that protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare, consistent with and subject to federal and California State law, for wireless facilities collocations and modifications pursuant to Section 6409(a), and related FCC regulations codified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100 et seq., or any successor regulation. This section is not intended to, nor shall it be interpreted or applied to:

        a.     Prohibit or effectively prohibit any wireless service provider’s ability to provide wireless communications services;

        b.     Prohibit or effectively prohibit any entity’s ability to provide any interstate or intrastate wireless communications service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules, regulations or other legal requirements for rights-of-way management;

        c.     Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;

        d.     Deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify WCFs on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such WCFs comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such emissions;

        e.     Prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under federal or California State law; or

        f.      Otherwise authorize the city to preempt any applicable federal or state law.

        4.     Due to rapidly changing technology and regulatory requirements, and to further implement this section, the city council may adopt written policies, rules, regulations and guidelines by resolution to further implement and administer this section, which may include, but are not limited to, provisions addressing applications and the application review process, notices, location, development and design standards, conditions, and operations and maintenance requirements for eligible facilities. The director may adopt policies, procedures and forms consistent with this section and any council-adopted Rules and Guidelines, which such director-adopted provisions shall be posted on the city’s website and maintained at the department for review, inspection and copying by applicants and other interested members of the public. The city council and the director may update their rules, policies, procedures and forms in their discretion to adjust for new technologies, federal and/or state regulations, and/or to improve and adjust the city’s implementing regulatory procedures and requirements, and compliance therewith is a condition of approval in every eligible facility permit.

        B.     Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below. Words and phrases not specifically defined in this section will be given their meaning ascribed to them in Section 6.10.070 of this chapter or as otherwise provided in Section 6409(a), the Communications Act or any applicable federal or state law or regulation.

        Application: a written submission to the city for the installation, construction or other deployment of an eligible facility and other related ministerial permits to obtain final approval of the deployment of an eligible facility at a specified location.

        Base Station: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(1), or any successor regulation, which defines that term as a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(9), or any successor regulation, or any equipment associated with a tower. The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks). The term includes: (1) any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100, or any successor regulation, supports or houses equipment described in 47 C.F.R. Sections 1.6100(b)(1)(i), or any successor regulation; and (2) that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, does not support or house equipment described in 47 C.F.R. Sections 1.6100(b)(1)(i) and (ii), or any successor regulation.

        Collocation: For purposes of an eligible facilities request, means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(2), or any successor regulation, which defines that term as the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes, or as otherwise defined by federal law with respect to eligible facilities. As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition effectively means “to add” and does not necessarily refer to more than one wireless facility installed at a single site.

        Day: a calendar day, except as otherwise provided in this section.

        Eligible Facility Permit (EFP): a permit for an eligible facilities request under Section 6409(a) that meets the criteria set forth in this section.

        Eligible Facilities Request: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(3), or any successor regulation, which defines that term as any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: (1) collocation of new transmission equipment; (2) removal of transmission equipment; or (3) replacement of transmission equipment.

        Eligible Support Structure: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(4), or any successor regulation, which defines that term as any tower or base station as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(1) or (9), or any successor regulation; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this definition.

        Existing: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(4), or any successor regulation, which provides that a constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of the FCC’s Section 6409(a) regulations if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

        Rules and Guidelines: The rules, guidelines, regulations and procedures adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council to administer and implement this section.

        Site: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(6), or any successor regulation, which provides that for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

        Substantial Change: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(7), or any successor regulation, which defines that term differently based on the type of eligible support structure (tower or base station) and location (in or outside the PROW). For clarity, this definition organizes the FCC’s criteria and thresholds for determining if a collocation or modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of a wireless tower or base station based on the type and location.

        1.     For towers outside the PROW, a substantial change occurs when:

        a.     The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height of the tower by more than 10% or the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet (whichever is greater); or

        b.     The proposed collocation or modification adds an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or

        c.     The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed 4; or

        d.     The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to the site.

        2.     For towers in the PROW and for all base stations, a substantial change occurs when:

        a.     The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height of the tower more than 10% or 10 feet (whichever is greater); or

        b.     The proposed collocation or modification involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the tower or base station by more than 6 feet; or

        c.     The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets when there are no pre-existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets associated with the structure; or

        d.     The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or

        e.     The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

        3.     In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a substantial change occurs when:

        a.     The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the existing concealment elements of the eligible support structure (wireless tower or base station) as reasonably determined by the director; or

        b.     The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval; provided, however, that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to height, width, equipment cabinets or excavation that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section.

        4.     For purposes of this definition, changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings’ rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.

        Tower: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(9), or any successor regulation, which defines that term as any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. Examples include, but are not limited to, monopoles, monotrees and lattice towers.

        Transmission Equipment: the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(8), or any successor regulation, which defines that term as equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

        C.    Applicability. This section applies to all requests for approval to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted pursuant to Section 6409(a). Even if the proposed project would otherwise require a SWFP under Section 6.10.070 of this chapter, and/or a ministerial permit, eligible facility requests submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) must be first reviewed under this section. If the approval authority finds that the project qualifies for approval under Section 6409(a), then no SWFP will be required. However, the applicant may voluntarily elect to seek a SWFP under Section 6.10.070 either in lieu of an EFP approval or after the approval authority finds that an application does not qualify for an EFP approval pursuant to Section 6409(a).

        D.    Approvals Required.

        1.     Eligible Facility Permit (EFP) Approval. Any request to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station shall require approval of an EFP subject to the director’s approval, conditional approval or denial without prejudice pursuant to the standards and procedures contained in this section and the rules and guidelines.

        2.     Other Permits and Regulatory Approvals. No collocation or modification approved pursuant to this section may occur unless the applicant also obtains all other permits and regulatory approvals as may be required by any other federal, state or local government agencies, which include without limitation any ministerial permits and/or regulatory approvals issued by other departments or divisions within the city. Furthermore, any EFP approval granted under this section shall remain subject to any and all lawful conditions and/or legal requirements associated with any other permits or regulatory approvals for the existing wireless tower or base station.

        E.     Application Requirements. An application for a EFP shall be filed and reviewed in accordance with the following provisions and the rules and guidelines.

        1.     Complete Application Required. The applicant shall submit an EFP application in writing to the public works department on a city-approved form as prescribed by the director, and shall contain all required notices, information, materials and documentation required by this section and the Rules and Guidelines, or as otherwise determined to be necessary by the director to effectuate the purpose and intent of this section. The director may waive certain submittal requirements or require additional information based on specific project factors. Unless an exemption or waiver applies, all applications shall include the completed form and all information, materials, and documentation required by the city. An application which does not include all of the required forms, information, materials and documentation shall be deemed incomplete, and a notice of incomplete application shall be provided to the applicant in accordance with subsection E.6 of this section.

        a.     Public Notice. In addition to all other requirements of this section and the rules and guidelines, the application shall include a notice that complies with the city-approved text and format, and contains all of the following information:

        i.      A general explanation of the proposed collocation or modification;

        ii.     The applicant’s identification and contact information as provided on the application submitted to the city;

        iii.     Contact information for the approval authority; and

        iv.    A statement substantially similar to the following: “Federal Communications Commission regulations may deem this application granted by the operation of law unless the city approves or denies the application within 60 days from the filing date, or the city and applicant reach a mutual tolling agreement.”

        2.     Application Fees. Concurrent with submittal of the application, the applicant shall pay an application fee and processing fee, a deposit for an independent expert review as set forth in this section, and a deposit for review by the city attorney’s office, in a payment format accepted by the city finance department and in amounts set by resolution of the city council. Failure to pay the fees in full at the time of application submittal shall result in the city deeming the application incomplete. Fees shall be set by resolution of the city council, and shall be determined in accordance with subsection E.3 of this chapter.

        3.     Voluntary Pre-Submittal Conference. Prior to application submittal, the applicant may schedule and attend a voluntary pre-submittal conference with the public works department and community development department staff for all proposed eligible facilities in the PROW. The purpose of the voluntary pre-submittal conference is to provide informal feedback on the proposed classification of the facility as an eligible facility under Section 6409(a), review procedure, location, design and application materials, to identify potential concerns and to streamline the formal application review process after submittal. Participation in a voluntary pre-submittal conference shall not trigger the shot clocks specified in subsection E.6.

        4.     Appointments. The director may require that an application shall be submitted only at a pre-arranged appointment in accordance with the Rules and Guidelines. The director has the discretion to set the frequency and number of appointments that will be granted each day. The requirement for an appointment shall be published on the department’s website.

        5.     Independent Expert. The director is authorized to retain on behalf of the city an independent, qualified consultant to review any application for an EFP to review the technical aspects of the application, including, but not limited to: the accuracy, adequacy, and completeness of submissions; compliance with applicable radio frequency emission standards; whether any requested exception is necessary, technical demonstration of the facility designs or configurations; technical feasibility; coverage analysis; the validity of conclusions reached or claims made by applicant or other factors as deemed appropriate by the director to determine whether the proposed facility qualifies as an eligible facility under Section 6409(a). The cost of this review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit pursuant to an adopted fee schedule resolution.

        6.     Shot Clock—Timeline for Review and Action. The timeline for review of and action on an EFP application shall begin to run when the application is submitted in writing to the department but may be tolled by mutual agreement or upon the city’s issuance of a notice of incomplete application to the applicant pursuant to subsection E.7 of this section. Applications shall be processed in conformance with the time periods and procedures established by applicable state and federal law, and FCC regulations and orders. The following provisions shall apply:

        a.     60 Days. Within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits a written request seeking approval of an eligible facilities request under this section, the city will approve the application unless the city determines that the application is not covered by this section or the 60-day deadline is tolled pursuant to mutual agreement or subsection E.6.b.

        b.     Tolling of Shot Clock. The 60-day timeframe for review of a proposed eligible facility shall begin to run when the application for the EFP is submitted in writing to the department but may be tolled by mutual agreement or upon the city’s issuance of a notice of incomplete application to the applicant pursuant to this subsection.

        i.      First Incomplete Notice. Within 30 days of the city’s receipt of the initial application for an EFP, Department staff shall provide written notice to the applicant that the application is complete or incomplete. If the application is incomplete, the notice shall clearly and specifically delineate all missing information and documents. The 30-day shot clock date shall be tolled until the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the city’s notice of incompleteness.

        ii.     Subsequent Incomplete Notices. Within 10 days of each supplemental submission, the city shall deem the application complete or incomplete. If the supplemental submission is incomplete, the notice shall clearly and specifically delineate all missing information and documents from the supplemental submission based on the information or documents identified in the first notice delineating missing information or documentation. The 10-day timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to this procedure. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

        iii.     One Submittal. The applicant’s response and submission of supplemental materials and information in response to a notice of incomplete application must be given to the city in 1 submittal packet.

        F.     Notice and Decision. Procedures for public notice, approval authority review of and action on EFP applications are set forth in this subsection and in the Rules and Guidelines.

        1.     Public Notice of Application. Upon submittal of a complete EFP application to the city, the applicant shall send the city-approved public notice of the application to all businesses and residents within a 150-foot radius of the proposed eligible facility in accordance with the rules and guidelines. Concurrently with service on the businesses and residents, the applicant shall also send a copy of the approved public notice to the department along with proof of service of the public notice on all residents and businesses as required by this subsection.

        2.     Public Comment. Within 10 days from service of the notice, any interested person may submit comments on the proposed eligible facility to the city by U.S. mail or through the city’s website. Any timely public comments received will be considered during the director’s review of the application.

        3.     Director Decision on EFP Applications.

        a.     Director Review, Decision and Notice. Upon receipt of a complete application for EFP pursuant to this section, the director shall undertake administrative review of the application and all pertinent information, materials, documentation and public comments. The director may approve, or conditionally approve an application for an EFP if the director makes all of the findings required in subsection F.4. The director may impose conditions in accordance with subsection F.6. Within 5 days after the director approves or conditionally approves an application under this section, or expiration of the shot clock period set forth in subsection E.6, whichever occurs sooner, the director shall issue a written determination letter, and shall serve a copy of the determination letter on the applicant at the address shown in the application and shall cause the determination letter to be published on the city’s website.

        4.     Required Findings for EFP Approval. The director shall approve or conditionally approve an application for an EFP pursuant to Section 6409(a) and this section if the director makes all of the following findings:

        a.     The applicant has provided all forms, information, materials, and documentation for the proposed project required by this section;

        b.     The proposed project is for the collocation, removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless tower or base station;

        c.     The proposed project does not constitute a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the existing wireless tower or base station, as defined in subsection B; and

        d.     The proposed project otherwise qualifies as an eligible facility under then-existing provisions of Section 6409(a).

        5.     Criteria for Denial Without Prejudice. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, and consistent with all applicable federal laws and regulations, the director may deny without prejudice an application for approval of an EFP when the director finds that the proposed project:

        a.     Does not satisfy the findings for approval as an eligible facility under subsection E.3 of this section;

        b.     Involves the replacement of the entire support structure;

        c.     Violates any legally enforceable standard or permit condition related to compliance with generally applicable disability access, building, structural, electrical and/or safety codes;

        d.     Violates any legally enforceable standard or permit condition reasonably related to public health and safety then in effect; or

        e.     Does not qualify for mandatory approval under Section 6409(a) for any lawful reason.

        6.     Conditional Approvals. Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, and in addition to the standard conditions of approval required by subsection F.6, nothing in this section is intended to limit the city’s authority to conditionally approve an application for an EFP under Section 6409(a) to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with this section and the Rules and Guidelines, including, but not limited to, building code standards and health and safety conditions, and such other reasonable time, place and manner conditions authorized under applicable federal and state laws and regulations. The standard conditions set forth in of subsection G shall apply to all eligible facilities.

        7.     Written Decision. The director’s decision shall be issued in writing in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection F.3.a. and the Rules and Guidelines. The director’s decision on an application for an EFP shall be final and conclusive and shall not be appealable to the city council.

        8.     Deemed Approved.

        a.     If the city fails to act on an EFP application within the 60-day review period referenced in subsection E.6.a. (subject to any tolling pursuant to written agreement or subsection E.6.b.), the applicant may provide the city written notice that the time period for acting has lapsed.

        b.     The applicant shall provide written notice to the city at least 7 days prior to beginning construction or collocation pursuant to an EFP issued pursuant to a deemed approved application.

        c.     An EFP deemed approved pursuant to Section 6409(a) shall comply with all applicable building code standards and traffic, health and safety requirements of the code deemed applicable by the director.

        d.     Effect of Changes to Federal Law. This subsection does not and shall not be construed to grant any rights beyond those granted by Section 6409(a) and its implementing federal regulations. In the event Section 6409(a) or applicable regulations are stayed, amended, revised or otherwise not in effect, no modifications to an eligible facility shall be processed or approved under this subsection E.9 or any other provision of this code.

        G.    Standard Conditions of Approval Applicable to All Applications. All EFP approvals, whether approved by the approval authority or deemed approved by the operation of law, shall be automatically subject to the conditions in this subsection, in addition to any conditions imposed pursuant to subsection F and the rules and guidelines. The director (or the city council on appeal) shall have discretion to modify or amend these conditions on a case-by-case basis as may be necessary or appropriate under the circumstances to protect public health and safety or allow for the proper operation of the approved eligible facility consistent with the goals of this section.

        1.     Permit Term. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an EFP constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit, approval or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base station pursuant to Section 6409(a), for 10 years, subject to the following provisions. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an EFP will not extend the term, if any, for any ministerial permit or other underlying prior regulatory permit, approval or other authorization. Accordingly, the term for an EFP approval shall be coterminous with the ministerial permit and other underlying permit, approval or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base station. This condition shall not be applied or interpreted in any way that would cause the term of the underlying permit for the modified facility to be less than 10 years in total length, unless such underlying permit is abandoned or revoked pursuant to this code or any other provision of federal or state law.

        2.     Accelerated Approval Terms Due to Invalidation. In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any portion of Section 6409(a) or any FCC rule that interprets Section 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate approval for any eligible facilities request pursuant to Section 6409(a), such EFP approval shall automatically expire 1 year from the effective date of the judicial order, unless the decision would not authorize accelerated termination of any previously approved EFP or the director grants an extension upon written request from the permittee that shows good cause for the extension, which includes without limitation extreme financial hardship. Notwithstanding anything in the previous sentence to the contrary, the director may not grant a permanent exemption or indefinite extension. A permittee shall not be required to remove any equipment, components, structures and improvements approved under the invalidated EFP approval when it has submitted an application for either a SWFP under Section 6.10.070 for those WCFs before the 1-year period ends. If the SWFP is denied, the permittee shall remove all its equipment, components, structures and improvements before the 1-year period ends.

        3.     No Waiver of Standing. The approval of an EFP (either by express approval or by operation of law) does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409(a), any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) and/or any eligible facilities approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) (whether by the approval authority or by operation of law).

        4.     Strict Compliance with Approved Plans. Any application filed by the permittee for a ministerial permit to construct or install the eligible facility approved by an EFP must incorporate the EFP approval, all conditions associated with the EFP approval and the approved photo simulations into the project plans (the “approved plans”). The permittee must construct, install and operate the eligible facility in strict compliance with the approved plans. Any alterations, modifications or other changes to the approved plans, whether requested by the permittee or required by other departments or public agencies with jurisdiction over the eligible facility, must be submitted in a written request subject to the director’s prior review and approval, who may revoke the EFP approval if the director finds that the requested alteration, modification or other change may cause a substantial change as that term is defined by Section 6409(a) or the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(7), as may be renumbered or amended.

        5.     Build-Out Period. The EFP approval will automatically expire 1 year from the EFP approval or deemed-granted date unless the permittee obtains all other permits and approvals required to install, construct and/or operate the approved eligible facility, which include, without limitation, any city ministerial permit, and any other permits or approvals required by any federal, state or other local public agencies with jurisdiction over the subject property, the eligible facility or its use. The director may grant one written extension to a date certain when the permittee shows good cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension submitted at least 30 days prior to the automatic expiration date in this condition.

        6.     Maintenance Obligations—Vandalism. The permittee shall keep the site, which includes, without limitation, any and all improvements, equipment, structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean and safe condition in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions in the EFP approval. The permittee shall keep the site area free from all litter and debris at all times. The permittee, at no cost to the city, shall remove and remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within 48 hours after the permittee receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or other vandalism occurred. Each year after the permittee installs the wireless facility, the permittee shall submit a written report to the director, in a form acceptable to the director, that documents the then-current site condition.

        7.     Property Maintenance. The permittee shall ensure that all equipment and other improvements to be constructed and/or installed in connection with the approved plans are maintained in a manner that is not detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare and that the aesthetic appearance is continuously preserved, and substantially the same as shown in the approved plans at all times relevant to the EFP. The permittee further acknowledges that failure to maintain compliance with this condition may result in a code enforcement action.

        8.     Compliance with Laws. The permittee shall maintain compliance at all times with all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, orders or other rules that carry the force of law (“laws”) applicable to the permittee, the subject property, the eligible facility or any use or activities in connection with the use authorized in the EFP approval. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that this obligation is intended to be broadly construed and that no other specific requirements in these conditions are intended to reduce, relieve or otherwise lessen the permittee’s obligations to maintain compliance with all laws. In the event that the city fails to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance with any applicable provision in the code, any permit, any permit condition or any governing laws, the applicant or permittee will not be relieved from its obligation to comply in all respects with all applicable provisions in the code, any permit, any permit condition or any governing laws.

        9.     Adverse Impacts on Other Properties. The permittee shall use all reasonable efforts to avoid any and all undue or unnecessary adverse impacts on nearby properties that may arise from the permittee’s or its authorized personnel’s construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal and/or other activities at the site. Impacts of radio frequency emissions on the environment, to the extent that such emissions are compliant with all governing laws, are not “adverse impacts” for the purposes of this condition. The permittee shall not perform or cause others to perform any construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal or other work that involves heavy equipment or machines except during normal construction hours authorized by the code. The restricted work hours in this condition will not prohibit any work required to prevent an actual, immediate harm to property or persons, or any work during an emergency declared by the city. The director or the director’s designee may issue a stop work order for any activities that violate this condition.

        10.   Inspections—Emergencies. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city’s officers, officials, staff or other designee may enter onto the site and inspect the improvements and equipment upon reasonable prior notice to the permittee; provided, however, that the city’s officers, officials, staff or other designee may, but will not be obligated to, enter onto the site area without prior notice to support, repair, disable or remove any improvements or equipment in emergencies or when such improvements or equipment threatens actual, imminent harm to property or persons. The permittee will be permitted to supervise the city’s officers, officials, staff or other designee while any such inspection or emergency access occurs.

        11.   Permittee’s Contact Information. The permittee shall furnish the department with accurate and up-to-date contact information for a person responsible for the eligible facility, which includes without limitation such person’s full name, title, direct telephone number, facsimile number, mailing address and email address. The permittee shall keep such contact information up-to-date at all times and immediately provide the director with updated contact information in the event that either the responsible person or such person’s contact information changes.

        12.   Indemnification.

        a.     The permittee, and if applicable, the property owner of the property upon which the eligible facility is installed in the PROW, shall agree in writing to defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants, employees, volunteers and independent contractors serving as city officials (collectively “Indemnitees”), from and against any and all claims, actions, or proceeding against the Indemnitees or any of them, to attack, set aside, void or annul, an approval of the director or city council concerning the EFP and the construction, operation, maintenance and/or repair of the eligible facility. Such indemnification shall include damages, judgments, settlements, penalties, fines, defensive costs or expenses, including, but not limited to, interest, reasonable attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, or liability of any kind related to or arising from such claim, action, or proceeding. The permittee, and if applicable, the property owner of the property upon which the eligible facility is installed in the PROW, shall also agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in connection with the grant of the permit and also agree to abide by the city’s ordinances and other laws. The city shall promptly notify the permittee and property owner (if any) of any claim, action, or proceeding. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit city from participating in a defense of any claim, action or proceeding. The city shall have the option of coordinating the defense, including, but not limited to, choosing counsel for the defense at the permittee’s expense.

        b.     Additionally, to the fullest extent permitted by law, the permittee, and every permittee and person in a shared permit, jointly and severally, shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers harmless from and against all claims, suits, demands, actions, losses, liabilities, judgments, settlements, costs (including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, interest and expert witness fees), or damages claimed by third parties against the city for any injury claim, and for property damage sustained by any person, arising out of, resulting from, or are in any way related to the EFP, or to any work done by or use of the PROW by the permittee, owner or operator of the EFP, or their agents, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers and independent contractors serving as city officials.

        13.   Performance Security. Prior to issuance of any ministerial permit, the permittee shall pay for and provide a performance bond or other form of security that complies with the following minimum requirements and the Rules and Guidelines.

        a.     The security shall be in effect until the eligible facility is fully and completely removed and the site reasonably returned to its original condition, to cover the removal costs of the eligible facility in the event that its use is abandoned or the approval is otherwise terminated.

        b.     The security shall be in a format and amount approved by the director and city attorney’s office. The amount of security shall be as determined by the director to be necessary to ensure proper completion of the removal of the eligible facility. In establishing the amount of the security, the director shall take into consideration information provided by the applicant regarding the cost of removal. The amount of the security instrument shall be calculated by the applicant as part of its application in an amount rationally related to the obligations covered by the security instrument. The permittee shall be required to submit the approved security instrument to the director prior to issuance of any ministerial for the proposed eligible facility.

        c.     Security shall always be imposed if the eligible facility is located in a PROW adjacent to any residentially zoned property or residential uses.

        14.   Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, pay for and maintain, in full force and effect until the eligible facility approved by the permit is removed in its entirety from the PROW, an insurance policy or policies of public liability insurance which shall be in the form and substance satisfactory to the city in accordance with the Rules and Guidelines, and shall be maintained until the term of the permit ended and the eligible facility is removed from the PROW. The insurance shall comply with the minimum limits and coverages and provisions set forth in the Rules and Guidelines, and as otherwise established from time to time by the city, and which fully protect the city from claims and suits for bodily injury, death, and property damage.

        15.   Acceptance of Conditions. The EFP shall not become effective for any purpose unless/until a city “Acceptance of Conditions” form, in a form approved by the city attorney’s office, has been signed and notarized by the applicant/permittee before being returned to the director; within 10 days after the determination letter has been served on the applicant and published on the city’s website in accordance with Section 6.10.070.F.3.a. The permit shall be void and of no force or effect unless such written agreement is received by the city within said 10-day period.

        H.    Operation and Maintenance Standards. The permittee shall comply with all operations and maintenance standards set forth in Section 6.10.070.0 of this chapter and the Rules and Guidelines.

        I.      Additional Requirements. All eligible facilities (including eligible facilities granted by the city and eligible facilities requests granted by operation of law) shall comply with and be subject to all of the following provisions of Section 6.10.070 of this chapter.

        1.     Section 6.10.070.G.4(b), (c) and (d) (locational restrictions).

        2.     Section 6.10.070.J: Exceptions; Director’s Findings.

        3.     Section 6.10.070.L: Nonexclusive Grant.

        4.     Section 6.10.070.M: Business License.

        5.     Section 6.10.070.P: Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions and Other Monitoring Requirements.

        6.     Section 6.10.070.Q: No Dangerous Condition or Obstructions Allowed.

        7.     Section 6.10.070.R: Permit Extension.

        8.     Section 6.10.070.S: Cessation of Use or Abandonment.

        9.     Section 6.10.070.T: Revocation or Modification; Removal.

        10.   Section 6.10.070.V: Effect on Other Ordinances.

        11.   Section 6.10.070.W: State or Federal Law.

        12.   Section 6.10.070.X: Nonconforming Wireless Communications Facilities.

        J.     Effect on Other Ordinances—Conflicting Code Provisions Superseded.

        1.     Compliance with the provisions of this section shall not relieve a person from complying with any other applicable provision of this code.

        2.     The provisions of this section shall govern and supersede any conflicting provisions of the code with respect to the permitting and regulation of eligible facilities in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1677)

 

6.10.075 Violations.
        A.     Unless precluded by law, any person who violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        B.     The misdemeanor penalty specified above is not applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement between the city and a multi-channel video programming distributor or telecommunications service provider. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.080 Existing Cable Television Franchisee.
        Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 23A (entitled “Franchises for Cable Television Systems and Telecommunications Systems”) of the previous city code will continue in full force and effect as an uncodified ordinance of the city. This uncodified ordinance will continue to be applicable to the existing cable television franchise agreement between the city and its franchised cable operator, Adelphia Communications Corporation, or its duly authorized assignee. This uncodified ordinance is subject to repeal by the city council at such time as the franchised cable operator executes an amendment to the existing cable television agreement or executes a new cable television franchise agreement, the terms of which subject the franchised cable operator to this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.10.085 Special Provisions Applicable to Holders of State Video Franchises.
        A.     Fee for Support of PEG Access Facilities and Activities.

        1.     The city council has determined that the public interest will best be served by imposing, to the extent authorized by applicable law, comparable financial obligations upon similarly-situated multi-channel video programming providers that are franchised to provide video services within the city. Consistent with the city’s policy of requiring franchisees to provide financial support for public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access channel facilities and activities, a fee is established as set forth below in paragraph 3 of this subsection.

        2.     On December 31, 2006, the city’s incumbent cable operator was contractually obligated to pay an annual fee of $75,000 to support PEG channel facilities and activities. This fee is in excess of 1% of the cable operator’s reported gross revenues, and it is approximately equivalent to 1.20% of the reported gross revenues. The term “gross revenues” shall be defined as set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

        3.     The city hereby establishes and imposes upon any state video franchise holder operating in the city a fee, separate from the 5% franchise fee, to support PEG access channel facilities and activities. This separate fee is in the amount of 1.20% of a video service provider’s gross revenues. The restrictions and limitations set forth below in paragraph 4 of this subsection apply to this PEG access support fee.

        4.     The fee in support of PEG access channel facilities and activities specified above in paragraph 3 of this subsection, as applied to a state video franchise holder, is subject to the following provisions:

        a.     The fee must not exceed 3% of the holder’s gross revenues, as the term “gross revenues” is defined in the Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

        b.     The fee will terminate upon expiration of the state video franchise, but it may be reauthorized by ordinance adopted by the city council.

        c.     If the imposition of this fee, or any component thereof, is determined to be contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of Public Utilities Code Section 5870 by subsequent legislative action, judicial decision, or administrative interpretation, then an alternative fee for PEG support obligations may be imposed by ordinance adopted by the city council.

        d.     The fee established by this subsection A shall be remitted quarterly to the city treasurer and must be received not later than 45 days after the end of the preceding calendar quarter. The fee payment shall be accompanied by a summary that describes all sources of the gross revenues upon which the fee is based, which summary must be verified by a responsible financial officer or employee of the video service provider.

        e.     A late payment charge equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency plus 1% of the amount due and delinquent shall be applied to any amount due from a state-franchised video service provider for PEG support fees not received by the city when due pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Franchise Fee. A state video franchise holder operating in the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to 5% of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term “gross revenues” shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

        C.    Audit Authority. Not more than once annually, the city may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees.

        D.    Customer Service Penalties Under State Video Franchises.

        1.     The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

        2.     The city shall monitor a state video franchise holder’s compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the city in accordance with state law:

        a.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of $500 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500 for each violation.

        b.     For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a monetary penalty of $1,000 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.

        c.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a monetary penalty of $2,500 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation.

        3.     A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty assessed by the city within 60 days. After relevant evidence and testimony is received, and staff reports are submitted, the city council will vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final.

        E.     City Response to State Video Franchise Applications.

        1.     Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager.

        2.     The city will provide any appropriate comments to the California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise.

        F.     PEG Access Channel Capacity.

        1.     A state video franchise holder that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least 3 public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access channels.

        2.     Additional requirements relating to PEG access channels are as follows:

        a.     A state video franchise holder is subject to payment of the PEG support fee specified above in subsection A of this section.

        b.     PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.

        c.     Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities.

        d.     The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier.

        e.     To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.

        f.      After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law.

        g.     Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal.

        G.    Interconnection. Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent’s network at a technically feasible point on the holder’s network as identified by the holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.

        H.    Emergency Alert System and Emergency Overrides. A state video franchise holder must comply with the Emergency Alert System requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder’s network. Provisions in city-issued franchises authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the city for the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 5840 of the California Public Utilities Code, or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.

        I.      Encroachment Permit Applications.

        1.     As used in this section, the term “encroachment permit” means any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities by the holder of a state video franchise.

        2.     The city shall either approve or deny an application from a holder of a state video franchise for an encroachment permit within 60 days of receiving a completed application.

        3.     If the city denies an application for an encroachment permit, the city shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. An applicant may appeal the city’s denial of an encroachment permit application to the city council. A written notice of appeal stating the facts of the matter and the grounds for appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 10 days of the denial. The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing at a regular meeting of the city council and shall give the appellant written notice of the time and place of hearing at least five days before the hearing. The decision of the city council taken after the appellant has had an opportunity to be heard will be final. (Ord. 1668; Ord. 1563; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 6.15 PIPELINES
6.15.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning set forth below. The city and a franchisee may incorporate into a franchise agreement definitions that differ from or augment those set forth in this section.

        Director: director of public works/city engineer.

        Facilities: all property of the franchisee that is erected or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any street pursuant to a pipeline franchise. “Facilities” includes without limitation appurtenances, pipelines, pump stations and service connections with the franchisee’s facilities.

        Franchisee: the person to whom a pipeline franchise is awarded, and any person to whom such franchise is lawfully assigned.

        Franchise Payment Period: (1) the period between the effective date of the ordinance awarding the pipeline franchise and December 31st of that calendar year; and (2) each calendar year thereafter during the term of the pipeline franchise.

        Franchise Report Period: (1) the period between the effective date of the ordinance awarding the pipeline franchise and December 31st of that calendar year; and (2) each calendar year thereafter during the term of the pipeline franchise.

        Main: any pipeline or conduit laid in, along, or approximately parallel with any street for the collection, transmission or distribution of any substance or commodity.

        Major Street: any street or portion thereof designated as a major or primary arterial highway in the circulation element of the Seal Beach General Plan.

        Minor Street: all streets in the city other that are not a major street.

        Pipeline Franchise: a franchise to lay or construct from time to time, and to maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of, remove or abandon in place pipes and pipelines for the collection, transportation or distribution of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, mud, steam and other liquid substances not more hazardous than the aforesaid substances, together with all manholes, valves, appurtenances and service connections necessary or convenient for the operation of such pipes or pipelines including conduits, cathodic protection devices, wires, cables and other appurtenances necessary or convenient for the exercise of the franchisee’s business, in, under, along or across any and all streets within the city as approved from time to time by city council resolution.

        Service Connection: the wire, pipes or conduits connecting a main located in a street to the building or place on private property.

        Street: any street, road, highway, alley, lane or other public easement in which the city may grant a pipeline franchise. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.010 General Conditions.
        Every pipeline franchise awarded by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly provided in the ordinance awarding the franchise. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.015 Above-Ground Facilities.
        Nothing in this chapter, or in any ordinance awarding a pipeline franchise, shall be construed to permit the franchisee to construct new facilities above ground. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.020 Franchise Acceptance.
        Within 30 days after enactment of the ordinance awarding the pipeline franchise, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk and the director a written acceptance of the terms of the franchise. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.025 Non-exclusive Franchise.
        The award of a pipeline franchise shall not preclude the city council from awarding an identical or similar pipeline franchise to any other person. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.030 Change in Status.
        If any non-public utility franchisee should qualify before the California Public Utilities Commission as a common carrier during the term of the franchise, then the franchisee shall have no right to continue to operate under the franchise after the qualification date except as approved by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.035 Maps.
        Within 90 days after any facilities have been laid, removed or abandoned under a franchise, the franchisee shall file maps with the director showing the accurate “as built” location, depth and size of such facilities. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.040 Insurance.
        A.     Requirement. On or before commencement of any franchise operations, the franchisee shall submit to the city manager certificates confirming the procurement of liability and workers’ compensation insurance in accordance with this section from companies authorized to transact business in the state. Franchise operations shall cease during any period that the franchisee fails to maintain such insurance in full force and effect. The insurance policies shall be noncancellable without 30 days advance written notice to the city manager.

        B.     Liability Insurance. The policy of liability insurance shall:

        1.     Be issued by an insurer with a current rating A.M. Best’s rating of A:VII or better.

        2.     Name the city and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds.

        3.     Be primary and provide that any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess insurance.

        4.     Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted in connection with the franchise.

        5.     Provide coverage for:

        a.     Negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee and the agents, servants and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of franchise operations.

        b.     Provide a combined single limit liability insurance of at least $10,000,000.

        C.    Workers’ Compensation Insurance. The policy of workers’ compensation insurance shall:

        1.     Be approved by the California Insurance Commissioner as to substance and form.

        2.     Cover all franchisee employees who perform work on the franchise operations. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.045 Faithful Performance Bond.
        On or before the effective date of the ordinance awarding the franchise, the franchisee shall file with the city manager and shall thereafter maintain a faithful performance bond in the amount of $10,000. Such bond shall be subject to the city attorney’s approval as to form and shall be with a surety approved by the director. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.050 Length.
        Whenever the length of any wire, pipe or conduit is a factor in calculating any payment due under a franchise, all service connections shall be excluded in determining such lengths. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.055 Forfeiture.
        The terms and conditions of franchises shall be strictly construed against the franchisee. Any neglect, failure or refusal to comply with such terms and conditions shall constitute grounds for suspension or forfeiture of the franchise. Prior to suspending or deeming a franchise forfeited, the city council shall afford the franchisee no less than 30 days written notice of default. If the franchisee does not commence compliance within such period, or does not prosecute the work to completion with due diligence, the city council may thereafter suspend the franchise or deem it forfeited. Prior to taking such action, the city council shall hold a hearing, written notice of which shall be given to the franchisee at least 5 days in advance. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.060 State Highways.
        Except for such rights as by law remain with the city, if any street or portion thereof becomes a state highway during the franchise term, then the state shall succeed to all rights reserved to the city by the franchise. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.065 Processing Costs.
        Franchisees shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city in processing the franchise including without limitation: staff costs; attorney’s fees; and publication costs. Payment shall be tendered within 30 days of receipt of an invoice from the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.070 Franchise Assignment.
        Franchisees shall not sell, transfer, assign or lease their franchise or any part thereof without the prior approval of the city council. As a condition of approving a franchise sale, assignment or lease, the city council may impose such additional terms and conditions as deemed in the public interest. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.075 Indemnification.
        Franchisees shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries and deficiencies that the city shall incur or suffer as a result of the franchisee’s operations. Such obligation shall include payment of interest, penalties and attorneys fees. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.080 Conflicting Improvements.
        If the city or any other public entity constructs or maintains a storm drain, sewer structure or other improvement under or across any facility of a franchisee, then the franchisee shall at its sole expense provide such support as is necessary for the preservation of the franchisee’s facility. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.085 Relocation.
        Franchisees shall be responsible for relocating at their sole expense any franchise facilities that must be moved to accommodate a public improvement project by the city or another public entity. If a franchisee fails to perform such relocation after reasonable notice, then the city or other public entity may cause the work to be performed and may bill the cost therefor to the franchisee. The franchisee shall reimburse such cost and shall indemnify the city or other public entity against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries and deficiencies that the city shall incur or suffer as a result of the relocation. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.090 Defective Facilities.
        If any street or portion thereof shall be damaged by reason of defective facilities of a franchisee, then the franchisee shall at its sole expense repair such street or portion thereof to the satisfaction of the director. If a franchisee fails to commence such work within 10 days of written notice from the city, or fails to prosecute the work to completion with due diligence, then the city may cause the work to be performed at the franchisee’s expense. In the event defective facilities of a franchisee result in an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the city may immediately repair the damage at the franchisee’s expense. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.095 Hazardous Substances.
        Franchisees shall obtain director approval prior to the issuance of an excavation permit for a pipeline to be used for transmission of flammable liquids or gases heavier than air. The city manager shall withhold approval unless a finding can be made that the proposed pipeline will not create an undue fire hazard. To make such a determination, the city manager shall consider the following:

        A.     Type of commodity to be transmitted.

        B.     Population density in the area of the pipeline.

        C.    Adequacy of water supplies for fire control.

        D.    Extent of available fire protection facilities.

        E.     Number and location of shut-off valves in the pipeline. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.100 Franchise Fees.
        A.     Public Utilities. Public utility franchisees shall pay to the city in lawful United States currency 2% of the franchisee’s gross annual receipts arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than 1% of the gross annual receipts derived by the franchisee from the sale within the city of the franchisee’s utility service.

        B.     Nonpublic Utilities. Nonpublic utility franchisees shall pay to the city in lawful United States currency one of the following fees:

        1.     4% of the franchisee’s gross annual receipts arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise.

        2.     4% of the annual royalty paid by the franchisee to the state in connection with the operation of gathering lines used to extract oil, gas or other minerals from state-owned tidelands or submerged lands. This fee shall only apply if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the franchise involves only gathering lines and (ii) no revenues are derived from the use, operation or possession of such gathering lines.

        3.     An amount based upon the size and length of the pipeline calculated as follows:

 

Pipelines With an Internal Diameter of

Amount per Linear Foot

0-4″

12¢

6″

16¢

8″

22¢

10″

25¢

12″

30¢

14″

35¢

16″

40¢

18″

50¢

20″

55¢

22″

60¢

24″

70¢

26″

75¢

28″

80¢

30″

85¢

 

        The rate applicable to pipelines with an internal diameter falling between incremental size categories shall be determined by adding the price corresponding to the lower size to a figure computed by multiplying the difference between the higher and lower prices times the multiplier. The multiplier shall be determined by dividing the difference between the categories. In determining the number of feet of pipeline upon which the annual fee will be computed, the greatest number of feet of pipeline covered by the franchise during the franchise payment period shall be used. A penalty at the rate of 10% per month or fraction thereof shall be charged but in no event shall such penalty exceed 50%.

        C.    Base Construction Charges. At the time of installation, relocation or replacement of any pipeline or other facility covered by the franchise, the franchisee shall pay a base construction charge of $2,350 per ½ mile of pipeline or fractional part thereof on major streets and $1,550 per ½ mile or fractional part thereof on minor streets.

        D.    Adjustments. The amount of each base fee shall be revised at the time payment is due in accordance with the following formula:

        1.     If 90 days prior to the due date the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers, Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim area (1967 equals 100.00) prepared by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor shall stand at a level different than the base level, then the rate of payment shall vary in direct proportion as such Index has increased or decreased from the base level. For purpose of this provision, “base level” means the level of the Index on December 31, 1984.

        2.     If the Bureau should discontinue the preparation of the Index using prices prevailing during the year 1967 as the base 100 and if no transposition table is available, then the amount of each payment shall be computed by using the most nearly comparable successor index.

        3.     In no event shall any fee less than the base fees established by paragraph B.1 and subsection C be charged.

        E.     Proration of Payments. In the event the initial franchise payment period is less than one year, or in the event of abandonment or removal of facilities during a franchise payment period, the franchise fee shall be prorated for that period. Proration shall be based as of the end of the calendar month in which the franchise is granted or the facilities are abandoned or removed.

        F.     Records. Franchisees shall maintain all records necessary to determine the franchise fee amount for at least 5 years following the end of the franchise payment period. At all reasonable times a franchisee shall permit city representatives to examine all property of the franchisee utilized in connection with the franchise, and to examine the franchisee’s records related to the franchise. The franchisee shall make the records available at a location within the county. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.105 Emergency Equipment.
        Franchisees shall maintain during the franchise term adequate emergency equipment, with a properly trained crew, on a 24-hour-per-day basis. Such equipment and crew shall be located within a 25-mile radius of the franchisee’s facilities in the city and shall be capable of shutting of the facilities. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.110 Franchise Expiration.
        A.     Within 30 days of the expiration, revocation or termination of a franchise, the franchisee shall submit a written application to the director for authority to either (i) abandon in place all or a portion of the franchise facilities; or (ii) remove all or a portion of the franchise facilities. The director may approve, conditionally approve or deny such application as deemed appropriate for the public interest.

        B.     In the event a franchisee shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of an abandonment or removal, or shall fail to prosecute such work to completion with due diligence, the city may cause the work to be performed at the franchisee’s expense.

        C.    All facilities abandoned in place by a franchisee shall be removed at the franchisee’s expense at any time the city should determine that the facilities interfere with a proposed public improvement project. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.115 Oil Pipelines.
        A.     Materials Used. All pipelines used or to be used for transportation of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances or other flammable liquid shall be first class and standard material as set forth by current American Petroleum Institute pipelines specifications.

        B.     Approvals. On any pipeline laid pursuant to the franchise, the location and installation of flush valve connections shall be subject to the approval of the director. The director shall consider the availability of adequate water supplies, the commodity transmitted in the line and the location of control valves when making such determination.

        C.    Reports. Within 90 days after the expiration of each franchise payment period, the franchisee shall:

        1.     File with the director of finance 2 copies of a verified report showing for the immediately preceding franchise payment period the franchisee’s total gross receipts attributable to the franchise. Such report shall be accompanied by any additional data requested by the director to enable calculation of the annual payment owed by the franchisee.

        2.     File with the director of finance a report in triplicate showing the permit number for each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise payment period. Such report shall indicate: the length and size of the mains; any change in the franchise footage since the last franchise payment period; and any footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise payment period. The report shall specify new mains laid, old mains removed and old mains abandoned in place.

        D.    Payment Due. Except as otherwise provided by law, the payments shall accrue from the respective dates of installation whether before or after the effective date of the ordinance awarding the franchise. Such payments, together with the initial construction charge if any, shall be due and payable annually.

        E.     Non-applicability. Subsections B through D of this section do not apply to public utilities. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.120 Public Utilities.
        The requirements of this section shall apply only to public utility franchisees.

        A.     Within 90 days after the expiration of each franchise payment period, the franchisee shall file with the director of finance 2 copies of a verified report showing the franchise’s total gross receipts attributable to the franchise for such period. The report shall include any additional data deemed necessary by the director of finance for verification of the franchise payment amount.

        B.     Within 90 days after the expiration of each franchise report period, the franchisee shall file with the director of finance a report in triplicate. Such report shall indicate the (1) permit number for each permit obtained during the report period to install new mains; and (2) the length and size of such mains. Such report also shall indicate any change since the previous report in the franchise footage, which shall be segregated as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place and existing mains in newly annexed property.

        C.    Public utility franchisees agree, by accepting the terms of the franchise, that in any proceeding for adjusting franchisee’s rates no greater value shall be placed upon the franchise than the actual cash paid by the franchisee. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.15.125 Gas Pipelines.
        The requirements of this section shall apply only to franchisees operating gas pipelines.

        A.     The franchisee shall have the right, subject to the terms and conditions of its franchise, to make service connections with all property in the city adjoining streets and to furnish and distribute gas through its pipelines to all territory in the city adjacent to the pipelines.

        B.     On all pipelines laid pursuant to a franchise and carrying gas heavier than air, the director shall approve the placement of flush valve connection in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodities transmitted in the line and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Flush valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the director. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 6.20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES
6.20.005 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to set forth terms and conditions pursuant to which city council authorization may be granted for the provision of solid waste and recyclables collection services. This chapter also is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the accumulation, collection, processing and disposal of solid waste and recyclables. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning set forth below. The city and a collector may incorporate into a collection agreement definitions that differ from or augment those set forth in this section.

        Bulky Waste: oversized or overweight household articles that have weights, volumes or dimensions exceeding the capacity of containers for residential premises. “Bulky waste” includes without limitation: stoves; freon free refrigerators; water heaters; washing machines; furniture; sofas; mattresses; box springs; large rugs; and landscaping debris.

        Collection: gathering of solid waste and recyclables within the city and transportation of such matter to the point of disposal or processing.

        Collection Agreement: an agreement between the city and a solid waste enterprise for the provision of solid waste and recyclables collection services in the city.

        Collection Permit: a permit authorizing collection of solid waste and recyclables that are not subject to collection pursuant to a collection agreement.

        Collector: a solid waste enterprise operating under the provisions of a collection agreement or a collection permit.

        Collector Fee: the fee paid to the city by a collector.

        Commercial/Industrial Owner: a person owning or occupying commercial/industrial premises.

        Commercial/Industrial Premises: occupied real property in the city other than residential premises and property occupied by public agencies that are exempt from the requirement of utilizing a collector.

        Construction and Demolition Site: real property in the city on which construction and demolition waste is generated.

        Construction and Demolition Waste: non-putrescible solid waste generated from construction or demolition of a building or structure. “Construction and demolition waste” does not include liquid waste, hazardous waste or medical and infectious waste.

        Container: any bin, box, cart or similar device provided by a collector to residential premises or commercial/industrial premises for the storage and movement of solid waste or recyclables to the point of collection by the collector.

        Disposal: treatment and disposal of solid waste after collection.

        Fee: includes rate, fee and charge.

        Green Waste: solid waste consisting of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials generated from landscapes or gardens.

        Hazardous Waste: as set forth in 14 California Code of Regulations Section 17225.32.

        Holiday: New Year’s Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day; and Christmas Day. “Holiday” also means any other day designated as a holiday by city council resolution, collection agreement or collection permit.

        Household Hazardous Waste: as set forth in 14 California Code of Regulations Section 18502.

        Landscaping Debris: green waste that does not fit into a standard container for residential premises green waste.

        Medical and Infectious Waste: biomedical waste generated at hospitals, medical clinics, dental offices, research laboratories, pharmaceutical industries, blood banks, mortuaries, veterinary facilities and similar establishments.

        Mobile Home: as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 18200.

        Mobile Home Park: a site at which mobile home spaces are provided for residential use.

        Multifamily Residence: a building or structure, or portion thereof, that is used for residential purposes and contains 5 or more distinct living units. “Multifamily residence” includes mobile home park.

        Processing: the reduction, separation, recovery and conversion of solid waste.

        Public Agency: a governmental agency or department thereof.

        Recyclables: those materials designated by city council resolution, collection agreement or collection permit as suitable for recycling.

        Recycling: collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning such matter to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products. “Recycling” does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201.

        Residential Householder: any person holding or occupying residential premises in the city.

        Residential Premises: (1) any building or structure, or portion thereof, that is used for residential housing purposes and contains 4 or less distinct living units; and (2) any multifamily residence that, with the prior written approval of the city manager, receives solid waste and recyclables collection services using standard containers for residential premises.

        Resource Recovery: use of solid waste in a manner not involving landfill disposal. “Resource recovery” includes without limitation: transformation; composting; and multi-material recycling.

        Solid Waste: all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes. “Solid waste” includes without limitation: garbage; trash; refuse; paper; rubbish; ashes; industrial wastes; construction and demolition waste; discarded home appliances; dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge that is not a hazardous waste; manure; green waste; vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes; special wastes; and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. “Solid waste” does not include hazardous waste or medical and infectious waste.

        Solid Waste and Recyclables Collection Services: collection, storage and transfer of solid waste and recyclables to the point of disposal or processing.

        Solid Waste Enterprise: an individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste and recyclables collection services.

        Source Separated Recyclables: recyclables separated by a commercial/industrial owner from solid waste generated at the owner’s commercial/industrial premises.

        Special Items: any bulky or heavy objects that require bin service and are not bulky waste. “Special items” includes without limitation: dirt; sod; brick; manure; poultry yard or stable waste; and construction and demolition waste.

        Special Wastes: includes flammable waste; waste transported in a bulk tanker; liquid waste; sewage sludge; pollution control process waste; residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of chemical substances or any other special wastes; contaminated soil, waste, residue, debris and articles from the cleanup of a site or facility formerly used for the generation, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation, or disposal of any other special wastes; dead animals; waste water; explosive substances; radioactive substances; industrial appliances; and abandoned vehicles and parts thereof.

        Vacant Property: real property that is not occupied by any person for a period of 30 days or more. (Ord. 1515)

6.20.015 Collection Agreement Requirement.
        A.     Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no person shall collect or dispose of solid waste or recyclables in the city unless that person has entered into a collection agreement with the city. Collectors operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter under a collection permit or a collection agreement may continue to operate until the rights thereunder are terminated or revoked, or until such rights expire pursuant to the provisions of Public Resources Code Section 49520.

        B.     With or without competitive bidding, the city council may approve collection agreements authorizing solid waste enterprises to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services for residential premises and commercial/industrial premises. In the sole discretion of the city council, the solid waste and recyclables collection services may be authorized on an exclusive or non-exclusive basis, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all or any part of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.020 Collection Permit.
        The city council may approve collection permits authorizing collection of such solid waste and recyclables as are not subject to collection pursuant to a collection agreement. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.025 Collector Fee.
        Each collector shall pay a collector fee in an amount determined by city council resolution or by collection agreement. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.030 Conflict Resolution.
        In the event of any conflict between the provisions of a collection agreement and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the collection agreement shall control. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.035 Permits and Licenses.
        Collectors shall obtain and maintain at all times during their operations a city business license and applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.040 Transfer of Collection Agreement or Collection Permit.
        No collection agreement or collection permit shall be transferred, delegated, sublet, subcontracted or assigned to another person without the prior approval of the city council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or control in the collector, as well as the transfer to another person of 30% or more of the collector’s stock. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.045 Urgency Disciplinary Action.
        Without a hearing, the city manager may suspend a collection agreement or collection permit for not more than 60 days upon making a finding that continued operation by the collector will constitute an immediate threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.050 Non-Urgency Disciplinary Action.
        A.     After a hearing, the city manager may suspend or revoke a collection agreement or collection permit upon making a finding that the collector has violated the terms of the agreement or permit, or a provision of this chapter, or any other applicable law.

        B.     The city clerk shall give the collector written notice of the hearing, and the reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation, at least 15 days in advance. Any decision by the city manager to suspend or revoke a collection agreement or collection permit shall be made in writing and shall be supported by findings. The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the city manager’s decision to the collector. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.055 Appeals.
        Decisions of the city manager to suspend or revoke a collection agreement or collection permit shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city council shall be the hearing officer for the purposes of such procedure. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.060 Fee Limits.
        The city council may limit the fees that collectors charge for the collection of solid waste and recyclables in the city. Such limits may be imposed by resolution, as a term of a collection agreement or as a condition of a collection permit approval. No collector shall charge a fee that is greater than the maximum permitted by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.065 Billing and Collection of Fees.
        A.     The billing and collection of the fees imposed by collectors for solid waste and recyclables collection services at commercial/industrial premises shall be the sole responsibility of the collector. Every commercial/industrial owner shall pay the collector the applicable fees for solid waste and recyclables collection services.

        B.     The billing and collection of fees imposed by collectors for solid waste and recyclables collection services at residential premises shall be the responsibility of the city. The city may collect such fees by causing the fees to be placed on the county tax rolls through procedures established by the county tax collector. Collectors shall not directly charge residential householders except as expressly authorized by the city council. Charges for solid waste and collection services billed by the city shall be billed on the same bill and to the same ownership as the water bill for each property whenever possible.

        C.    Liability for Payment. The occupants of each place or premises shall be liable for payment of applicable fees set forth in this chapter. To the extent allowed by state law, in the event an occupant should fail to pay any such fee prior to delinquency, the owner of the place or premises shall be liable for the payment. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.070 Collection Vehicles—License and Fee Requirements.
        No person may operate any vehicle for the collection of solid waste or recyclables in the city other than a collector who has a valid business license and has paid applicable city fees. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.075 Collection Vehicles—Standards.
        Each vehicle utilized for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste or recyclables in the city shall comply with the following standards:

        A.     The vehicle shall be constructed and used so that no solid waste, recyclables, oil, grease or other substance will blow, fall or leak out of the vehicle.

        B.     A broom and shovel shall be carried on the vehicle at all times.

        C.    The vehicle shall be under 7 years of age unless specifically authorized in writing by the city manager.

        D.    The vehicle shall be inspected annually by the California Highway Patrol and certificates for the inspection shall be filed with the city manager.

        E.     The vehicle shall be kept clean and sanitary, in good repair and well and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city manager.

        F.     The vehicle shall be equipped with a watertight body fitted with a close-fitting metal cover.

        G.    The sides of the vehicle shall contain in conspicuous letters not less than 5 inches in height: the collector’s name; the collector’s telephone number; and the vehicle identification number.

        H.    If the vehicle is 80 inches or wider, then it shall be equipped with high intensity fog lamps consisting of 2 red tail lamps in addition to the standard tail lamps. Such fog lamps shall be utilized when visibility is less than 50 feet.

        I.      All vehicle equipment shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent unnecessary noise during its operation.

        J.     As existing equipment on the vehicle is replaced, the collector shall obtain the city manager’s prior approval of the type and make of the new equipment. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.080 Operation of Equipment.
        All persons operating equipment for the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclables shall do so in a manner that prevents undue interference with normal traffic flows. No such vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on the public streets. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.085 Gardener’s Exclusion.
        No provision of this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of green waste when incidental to providing such gardening, tree trimming or similar services. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.090 Commercial/Industrial Exclusion.
        A.     Source Separated Recyclables.

        1.     No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial owner from selling or donating source separated recyclables provided that both of the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the buyer or recipient is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or recyclables for a fee; and (ii) no such material is transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station.

        2.     No provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or similar enterprise from buying source separated recyclables and removing and transporting such materials to a destination for marketing provided that the following conditions are satisfied: (i) such buyer is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or recyclables for a fee; (ii) such buyer has obtained prior authorization from the city as required by this code; and (iii) no such material is transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station.

        B.     In-House Recycling Programs. No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial owner from utilizing its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclables generated by the owner’s business provided that such program does not involve use of a solid waste enterprise. The recyclables included in any such program are excepted from collection agreements awarded by the city.

        C.    Renovation, Rebuilding, Repairs. No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial owner from arranging for defective business equipment to be picked up, restored and returned. Nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent any person engaged in the business of restoring such equipment from picking up, transporting or returning such equipment in connection with a repair or service contract. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.095 Contractor Exclusion.
        No provision of this chapter shall prevent a person contracted to demolish or reconstruct a building, structure or pavement from doing either of the following: (1) marketing items salvaged from the construction and demolition waste; or (2) causing such salvage items to be transported from the construction and demolition site pursuant to the provisions of the contract. This exclusion does not allow use of a non-collector subcontractor to transport such salvage items. (Ord. 1515)

6.20.100 Document Destruction Service Exclusion.
        No provision of this chapter shall prevent any person engaged in the business of disposing of confidential documents from transporting or disposing of such documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating or other means as a part of the document destruction or disposal service. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.105 Self-Haul Exclusion.
        A.     Occasional Hauling. No provision of this chapter shall prevent commercial/industrial owners or residential householders from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on their premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling or disposing of recyclables generated in or on their premises. Notwithstanding the preceding, no commercial/industrial owner or residential householder shall employ or engage any non-collector solid waste enterprise to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill.

        B.     Regular Hauling. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial owner or residential householder from, on a regular basis and without utilizing a collector, collecting and disposing of solid waste generated in or on its premises provided that the following conditions are satisfied: (1) a self-haul permit has been obtained from the city; and (2) no such material is transported to a landfill or a transfer station by a non-collector solid waste enterprise. The city council may approve self-haul permits upon making a finding that approval will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. The city council may by resolution establish procedures to govern self-hauling. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.110 Effect of Exclusion on Fee Obligations.
        Except as set forth in this section, exercise of an exclusion afforded by this chapter does not eliminate the obligation to pay a collector the minimum fee for available solid waste and recyclables collection services that are not utilized. The following categories of persons shall be exempt from the obligation of paying a collector any fee for available solid waste and recyclables collection services that are not utilized:

        1.     Persons who have a valid self-haul permit.

        2.     Owners of vacant property. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.115 Mandatory Service.
        A.     Subject to the exclusions set forth in this chapter, all solid waste and recyclables collected from residential premises or commercial/industrial premises for a fee shall be collected by a collector.

        B.     Except as expressly allowed by this chapter, no solid waste enterprise that is not a collector shall contract for or provide, within the city, solid waste and recyclables collection services for a fee.

        C.    Except as expressly allowed by this chapter, each residential householder and commercial/industrial owner shall utilize the services of a collector for solid waste and recyclables collection services and shall pay for such services the fees set by the collector and authorized by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.120 Litter.
        Publicly patronized establishments shall provide, empty and maintain adequate containers for public deposit of solid waste generated by the public as a result of patronization. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.125 Transfer of Loads on Public Streets.
        No collector shall transfer solid waste or recyclables from a collection vehicle to another on any public street unless such transfer either is approved by the city manager or is necessary because of mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.130 Unauthorized Removal from Containers.
        No person other than a collector shall remove solid waste or recyclables from a container. This prohibition shall not apply to the owner or occupant of the property served by such container or to city employees engaged in the discharge of official duties. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.135 Collection Hours.
        A.     In residential areas and commercial/industrial areas contiguous to residential premises, no solid waste and recyclables collection services shall be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday.

        B.     In commercial/industrial areas not contiguous to residential premises, no solid waste and recyclables collection services shall be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday.

        C.    The city manager may waive the hours restrictions set forth in this section when necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the collector. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.140 Ownership.
        At such time as solid waste and recyclables are placed for collection at the designated point of collection, ownership of such matter vests in the collector. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.145 Disposal.
        No person shall burn, bury, dump or otherwise dispose of any solid waste or recyclables within the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.150 Trespass.
        No collector shall enter on private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid waste or recyclables properly placed for collection, or beyond the extent necessary to provide any agreed upon special collection service. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.155 Reports.
        A.     Collectors shall provide the city manager with reports to the extent required by the applicable collection agreement or collection permit. An officer of the collector shall sign each report. Collectors shall maintain, and upon request shall provide the city manager, the following: copies of waste disposal and recycling facility invoices that indicate the net amount of all waste disposed, transferred or recycled during each month that collection services are provided.

        B.     Collectors annually shall submit to the city manager a report detailing the quantity and nature of all solid waste or recyclables removed from the city. The report shall include the following information: the facilities to which solid waste and recyclables were transported; a compilation of monthly tonnage reports; copies of tipping receipts; and a customer list that identifies the name and address of each customer in the city receiving service from the collector. The report shall be delivered on or before January 31st of each year for the immediately preceding calendar year. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.160 Insurance.
        A.     Requirement. On or before commencement of any collection operations, collectors shall submit to the city manager certificates confirming the procurement of liability and workers’ compensation insurance in accordance with this section from companies authorized to transact business in the state. Collection operations shall cease during any period that the franchisee fails to maintain such insurance in full force and effect. The insurance policies shall be non-cancellable without 30 days advance written notice to the city manager.

        B.     Liability Insurance. The policy of liability insurance shall:

        1.     Be issued by an insurer with a current rating A.M. Best’s rating of A:VII or better.

        2.     Name the city and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds.

        3.     Be primary and provide that any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess insurance.

        4.     Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted in connection with the franchise.

        5.     Provide coverage for:

        a.     Negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee and the agents, servants and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of franchise operations.

        b.     Provide a combined single limit liability insurance of at least $10,000,000.

        C.    Workers’ Compensation Insurance. The policy of workers’ compensation insurance shall:

        1.     Be approved by the California Insurance Commissioner as to substance and form.

        2.     Cover all franchisee employees who perform work on the franchise operations. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.165 Indemnification.
        Each collector shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries and deficiencies that the city shall incur or suffer as a result of the collector’s solid waste and recyclables services. Such obligation shall include payment of interest, penalties and attorney’s fees. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.170 Construction and Demolition Sites.
        A.     All owners, builders and demolition contractors shall maintain their construction and demolition sites in a clean, safe and aesthetic manner and free of any solid waste.

        B.     Any collector may collect construction and demolition waste. The collector must comply with all provisions of Title 9, Public Property, Public Works and Building Regulations, Chapter 9.65, Recycling and Diversion of Construction and Demolition Waste. (Ord. 1578; Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.175 Accumulation of Solid Waste Declared Nuisance.
        The accumulation of solid waste by any person beyond the period of one week or in any manner other than as specified in this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The city council shall by separate ordinance provide for the summary abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.180 Unauthorized Containers.
        No cardboard box or paper or plastic bag may be used as a receptacle for solid waste or recyclables. Except as expressly authorized by this chapter, no person other than a collector may place a container or other receptacle for the collection of solid waste or recyclables within the city. The city shall have the authority to impound: (1) containers owned or leased by, or otherwise under the control of, non-franchised or unauthorized collectors and other persons; and (2) containers that are not properly identified pursuant to Section 6.20.225.B.1. The city may impound such containers anywhere in the city using any means available and may deliver such containers to an impound facility of its choosing. The city shall arrange to have the solid waste present in such containers delivered to a material recovery facility, recycling facility, or other facility of its choosing. In order to retrieve such containers from impound, the owner or an authorized representative of the owner of said containers must first reimburse the city for any and all expenses the city incurs related to this enforcement action, including but not limited to disposal fees. The owner or authorized representative of the owner of said containers may then retrieve said containers from the impound facility operator after paying the operator any retrieval fees. In the city’s sole discretion, the owner of said containers shall also be subject to any other penalty authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1578; Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.185 Interference with Collection.
        No person shall interfere with collection and disposal of solid waste or recyclables by a collector. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.190 Residential Collection—Frequency.
        Unless otherwise approved by the city council, collection of solid waste and recyclables from residential premises shall take place no less than once each calendar week in accordance with a schedule approved by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.195 Residential Collection—Provision of Containers.
        Collectors shall provide standard residential solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers to each residential householder. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.200 Residential Collection—Placement and Removal of Containers.
        Every residential householder shall place each solid waste, recyclables, and green waste container for collection at the curb in front of its premises, or at the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to multiple streets. No person shall place any such container for collection earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection, and all containers shall be removed from the place of collection prior to 10:00 p.m. of the day the containers have been emptied. Such containers shall be removed to a storage location not visible from any public right-of-way, excluding alleys. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.205 Residential Collection—Care of Containers.
        Upon collection, all solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers shall be replaced in an upright position, at the location where found by the collector. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.210 Residential Collection—Special Collection Services.
        Upon request of a residential householder, collectors shall provide special collection of solid waste, bulky waste and special items. Such special collection shall be performed at time agreed upon by the collector and the person requesting the service; provided, however, that if no agreement is reached, then the service shall performed at the time designated by the city manager. Such special collection may include carry-out service, or any other service beyond that required by this chapter, collection agreement or collection permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.215 Residential Collection—Encroachment Permit.
        Any residential householder receiving temporary service for collection of special items shall obtain an encroachment permit from the city prior to placing any container for special items in a public right-of-way. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.220 Commercial/Industrial Collection—Frequency.
        Collectors shall collect solid waste from commercial/industrial premises not less than once per week. In no event shall such collection schedule permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities detrimental to public health or safety. The city manager may adjust the frequency of collection and size or number of containers if necessary to maintain public health. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.225 Commercial/Industrial Collection—Provision of Containers.
        A.     Every commercial/industrial premises served by a collector shall use the standard containers provided by the collector.

        B.     Every collector that provides any container for the storage of commercial/industrial solid waste shall:

        1.     Place and maintain on the outside of such container, in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height, the collector’s business name and telephone number in a color contrasting with the background color of the container; and

        2.     Provide containers on wheels or skids or with hasps and locks upon request by the commercial/industrial owner. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.230 Commercial/Industrial Collection—Maintenance and Placement of Containers.
        A.     Solid waste and recyclables containers provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition by the collector. Containers that are not provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition by the commercial/industrial owner. Every commercial/industrial owner shall provide a solid waste container location on the commercial/industrial premises and shall keep the area in good repair, clean and free of solid waste outside of the container. Every collector shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the collector’s emptying of the container or other activities of the collector.

        B.     Upon collection of solid waste and recyclables by the collector, all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed. No person, other than the owner thereof, shall in any manner, break, damage, roughly handle or destroy containers placed on the premises of a commercial/industrial owner. Any container that has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the commercial/industrial owner or, if provided by a collector, by the collector. Failure to replace any such container within 5 days of written notification from the city shall constitute a violation of this section. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.235 Commercial/Industrial Collection—Special Circumstances.
        Collectors and commercial/industrial owners may make arrangements for collection on mutually agreeable terms whenever: (1) particular commercial/industrial premises require collections at times, frequencies or in a manner such that the collector is unable to perform the collection in the normal course of business; (2) unusual quantities of solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of; (3) special methods of handling are required; or (4) the quantity of solid waste requires the use of more than 3 containers. If a collector and a commercial/industrial owner cannot agree as to the methods for the service provided for in this section, then the city manager shall determine the method of service. If the collector is unable or unwilling to provide such service, then the city manager may authorize the owner to use another solid waste enterprise for such special service until the collector can provide such service in its normal course of business. (Ord. 1515)

 

6.20.240 New Commercial/Industrial Buildings.
        No building permit shall be issued for construction of any commercial/industrial building until the adequacy, location and accessibility of solid waste containers has been approved by the city manager. (Ord. 1515)

Title 7 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS, AND WELFARE
Chapter 7.05 ANIMALS
Chapter 7.10 HARMFUL MATTER DISPLAYS
Chapter 7.15 NOISE
Chapter 7.20 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Chapter 7.25 PARADES
Chapter 7.30 WATER WELLS
Chapter 7.35 PUBLIC NUISANCES
Chapter 7.40 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Chapter 7.45 NOISE DISTURBANCES
Chapter 7.50 SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 7.55 PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 7.60 TENNIS CENTER REGULATIONS

Chapter 7.05 ANIMALS
7.05.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Animal: any fish, fowl, reptile or nonhuman mammal.

        Animal Control Officer: the officer designated by the city council to administer this chapter.

        At-Large: away from the property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal.

        Kennel: a building, enclosure or premises wherein more than 4 dogs and cats (in any combination) over 4 months of age are kept.

        Leashed: securely confined by a leash not exceeding 6 feet in length.

        Nondomestic Animal: an animal of a species that has not been domesticated so as to live and breed in a tame condition. “Nondomestic animal” includes wolf/dog hybrids.

        Owner: a person who legally owns an animal or who harbors an animal with the permission of the legal owner.

        Vicious Animal: an animal that has bitten or scratched a person or another animal without provocation.

        Wild Bird: a bird of the columbine family. “Wild bird” includes pigeons and doves. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.010 Penalty.
        Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to the administrative citation procedure of this code. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.015 Animal Control Officer.
        A.     The animal control officer shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. In performing such duty, the animal control officer may do the following without limitation:

        1.     Require posting of a “Beware of Animal” sign at a property at which there is an animal having a disposition to attack without provocation.

        2.     Order the enclosure of an animal having a disposition to attack without provocation.

        3.     Order the quarantine of a vicious animal. In the event of such order, the owner of the animal shall not remove the animal from the premises and shall not kill the animal for the period specified by the animal control officer.

        4.     Require posting of an “Animal Quarantine” sign at a property harboring an animal for which a quarantine order has been issued.

        5.     Procure license certificates and tags.

        B.     The animal control officer may not remove an animal from the property of its owner without the written consent of such person except where circumstances (including without limitation injury, distress or danger to life or limb) require removal. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.020 Animal Shelter.
        The city or the animal control officer shall provide a building or enclosure to hold impounded animals. The animal control officer shall collect fees for holding impounded animals and miscellaneous animal shelter services. The fee amounts shall be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.025 Animal Keeping.
        A.     In addition to complying with any restrictions set forth in the city’s zoning regulations, no person shall keep any animals except a maximum of:

        1.     Four weaned cats and dogs in any combination.

        2.     Six parakeets, parrots, canaries, or similar domestic birds.

        3.     Six reptiles (e.g. turtles, lizards, or snakes, etc.).

        B.     Reptiles maintained outside shall be kept in a fully enclosed structure located a minimum distance of 10 feet from any lot line, 50 feet from any dwelling units, and 100 feet from any school, park, religious establishment, hospital, or similar institution. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.030 Nondomestic Animal Permit.
        A.     No person shall keep a nondomestic animal without first obtaining from the animal control officer, and maintaining in full force and effect, a nondomestic animal permit for such animal. The fee for a nondomestic animal permit shall be set by city council resolution.

        B.     The animal control officer may approve, conditionally approve or deny a request for a nondomestic animal permit. A nondomestic animal permit may be denied for any of the following reasons:

        1.     Adequate provision has not been made for the restraint, care and feeding of the animal.

        2.     Keeping the animal is not necessary for educational or research purposes.

        3.     Keeping the animal will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

        C.    The animal control officer may revoke a nondomestic animal permit if the permittee has violated this chapter, or if the animal poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The animal control officer shall afford the permittee a hearing prior to revoking a nondomestic animal permit. Reasonable advance written notice of the time and place of such hearing, as well as a brief statement of the grounds on which the proposed revocation is based, shall be given to the permittee. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.035 Cat or Dog Breed Permit.
        A.     No person shall keep a cat or dog for breeding purposes without first obtaining a cat or dog breed permit from the animal control officer. The fee for cat and dog breed permits shall be set by city council resolution.

        B.     A breed permit shall not be issued if the premises where the animal is harbored is within 300 feet of a dwelling inhabited by someone other than the applicant.

        C.    Selling or giving away a puppy or kitten from a litter shall be prima facie evidence of breeding. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.040 Dog License.
        A.     No person shall keep a dog over 4 months of age without maintaining a current license from the animal control officer. The fee for a license shall be established by city council resolution.

        B.     A metallic license tag and certificate with corresponding numbers shall be furnished by the animal control officer upon payment of the license fee. The animal control officer shall keep records of each person to whom a license tag and license certificate is issued.

        C.    Each license shall expire on December 31st each year.

        D.    A dog license shall not be required for the following:

        1.     Seeing eye dogs.

        2.     Dogs honorably discharged from the armed forces.

        3.     Dogs kept by nonresidents traveling through the city for a period of less than 30 days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a license shall be required for dogs that use a city dog park, unless the dog has a valid license and has a license tag or tattoo issued by the jurisdiction of the dog owner’s primary place of residence.

        4.     Dogs temporarily brought into the city to participate in an exhibition. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1533; Ord. 1523; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.045 Display of Dog License.
        A.     The license tag issued for the current license year shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog, and shall be worn by the animal when at large.

        B.     No dog owner shall fail or refuse to show to the animal control officer or to a police officer the license tag or certificate issued for the animal.

        C.    A dog may, at the owner’s option and expense, be tattooed with its registration information. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.050 Rabies Vaccination.
        A.     Every person who possesses a dog over the age of 4 months shall cause the animal to be inoculated against rabies within 30 days from the date the animal is brought into the city. The inoculation shall be with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the county health officer.

        B.     This section shall not apply if proof can be shown that the dog has been inoculated with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the county health officer and that the vaccine period is still active. This section also shall not apply upon presentation of an affidavit from a licensed veterinarian stating that the vaccination likely would seriously injure the dog. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.055 At-Large Requirements for Cats and Dogs.
        A.     No owner of a dog shall permit the animal to be at large unless it is leashed, confined in a motor vehicle or on another person’s property with permission.

        B.     No owner of a cat shall permit the animal to enter upon another person’s property or residential unit without permission.

        C.    The animal control officer may impound any cat or dog found in violation of this section. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.060 Disposition of Impounded Cats and Dogs.
        A.     Impounded cats and dogs shall be held at the animal shelter in accordance with state law.

        B.     The animal control officer may sell any impounded cat or dog that is not redeemed within the statutory hold period. Such sale shall be made to the person offering both the highest amount of cash and payment of all animal shelter fees associated with the animal. Cats older than 6 months shall not be sold unless spayed or neutered. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.065 Noisy Animals.
        A.     No person shall keep, maintain, or permit on any lot or parcel of land under his or her control or ownership, any animal of any type, including any fowl, that makes any sound, noise, or cry that due to a combination of its volume, pitch, pattern, or frequency interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Such interference shall constitute a public nuisance and a noise disturbance in accordance with this title.

        B.     An animal is not deemed to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property if the animal is making noise due to a person or other animal that is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal is situated, or when the animal is being teased or provoked, or is impounded at the city’s animal shelter.

        C.    Any person authorized to enforce the requirements of this chapter may do so on the basis of either his or her own direct observation of a violation or written complaints, signed under penalty of perjury, by 2 or more persons who reside in separate residences and each personally witnessed the violation.

        D.    Nothing in this chapter shall establish standards for private civil claims, in either civil court or small claims court, nor shall this chapter preclude any person from pursuing a private civil action in either civil or small claims court. (Ord. 1609; Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.070 Transportation of Animals.
        No person shall transport an animal by motor vehicle unless the animal is confined to prevent falling or jumping off the vehicle. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.075 Kennels.
        No person shall operate a kennel within 1,000 feet of any dwelling inhabited by someone other than the kennel operator. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.080 Sanitary Measures.
        A.     No cat owner or dog owner shall fail or refuse to remove feces defecated by the animal onto city property or onto private property not owned by such owner.

        B.     No person owning or occupying property where an animal is kept shall maintain such property in an unsanitary condition. An accumulation of uneaten food, feces or other matter that emits an offensive odor or encourages insect breeding shall constitute prima facie evidence of an unsanitary condition. This provision shall not prohibit storage of uneaten food, feces or other matter in a closed container prior to disposal. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.085 Separation from Commercial Food.
        A.     No owner of an animal shall permit the animal to remain in any restaurant, store or vehicle where commercial food for human consumption is offered for sale, prepared, stored or transported.

        B.     This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons utilizing seeing eye dogs. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.090 Blocking Public Places.
        No owner of a dog shall tie the dog to a tree, bike rack or similar object in front of any public place. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.095 Selling on Public Property.
        No person shall offer any animal for sale, barter or donation on city property. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.100 Feeding Wild Birds.
        No person shall feed any wild bird. This prohibition shall not apply to the feeding of wild birds that are confined in an enclosure on private property. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.105 At-Large Requirements for Miscellaneous Animals.
        No owner of an animal, other than a cat or dog, shall permit the animal to run at large. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.110 Separation from Sensitive Uses.
        A.     No person shall keep an animal within 50 feet of a school or hospital. This prohibition shall not apply to the keeping of cats, dogs or birds of the psittacine family. This prohibition also shall not apply to the keeping of an animal in the dwelling of the owner.

        B.     No person shall keep more than 4 birds of the psittacine family within 35 feet of any inhabited structure, school or hospital. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.115 Bees.
        No person shall keep a beehive within 200 feet of a dwelling inhabited by someone other than the beekeeper. This prohibition shall not apply to the keeping of bees within an educational institution, medical office or laboratory for educational or research purposes, provided the bees are not permitted to fly at large. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.120 Prohibited Animals.
        A.     No person shall keep any of the following animals: cattle; hogs; fowl; goats; horses; mules; or pigs of any size, kind, or sex.

        B.     Notwithstanding this section, a person may keep a pig of any size, kind, or sex if that person first obtains a non-domestic animal permit pursuant to Section 7.05.030 of Chapter 7.05. All permitting requirements, conditions, and procedures applicable to the non-domestic animal permit shall also apply to a non-domestic animal permit for the keeping of a pig. (Ord. 1635; Ord. 1633; Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.05.125 Dog Park.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the park located at Lampson Avenue and Heather Street (“Arbor Park”) is hereby established as a dog park, in which responsible adults may allow dogs to be without leashes within the fenced areas, provided that the responsible adults and all persons accompanying them comply with all of the following conditions. For purposes of this section, “responsible adult” means any person 18 years or older who owns, has a proprietary interest in, harbors, or has the care, charge, control, custody or possession of a dog.

        A.     Each dog must be chaperoned by a responsible adult. For the purposes of this section, to “chaperone” a dog means that a responsible adult is inside the dog park and is in control of the dog at all times.

        B.     Each responsible adult may chaperone a maximum of 3 dogs in the dog park on each visit.

        C.    A responsible adult may allow any dog that he or she chaperones to be without leashes inside the fenced areas of the dog park. However, dogs must wear leashes at all times the dogs are not inside the fenced areas.

        D.    No animals, other than domesticated dogs, are permitted in the dog park.

        E.     Persons entering or exiting the fenced areas of the dog park must close park gates behind them.

        F.     Dog License. A license must be obtained prior to a dog using the dog park, as follows:

        1.     A city dog license must be obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for a dog owned by a city resident or by any person who lives in a jurisdiction that does not require a license for the dog; or

        2.     A valid dog license must be obtained by any person who is not a city resident pursuant to the laws of jurisdiction of the dog owner’s primary place of residence.

        G.    Metallic License Tags or Registration Tattoos. Dogs in the dog park must wear metallic license tags at all times, unless the dogs are tattooed with their registration information. If a dog owner is not a city resident, and the jurisdiction of the dog owner’s primary place of residence does not provide either license tags or tattooing for licensed dogs, the owner must obtain a license tag or tattoo from the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter prior to the dog using the dog park.

        H.    Annual Dog Park Permit for Non-Residents. Prior to using the dog park, an annual dog park permit must be obtained for each dog that belongs to a person who is not a city resident. The application for the permit shall consist of an application fee and proof of a current dog license. The annual fee shall be set by city council resolution. In addition to a license tag or tattoo required pursuant to subsection G, such dog must wear a metallic permit tag at all times the dog is inside the dog park.

        I.      No dog shall be permitted in the dog park unless it has received a rabies vaccination within the last 3 years, and the effective period of the vaccine has not elapsed.

        J.     Each responsible adult shall, at all times, take all reasonable precautions to prevent the dog(s) they chaperone from biting, attacking or attempting to bite or attack any person or dog. A responsible adult shall immediately remove a dog he or she chaperones from the dog park if it bites, attacks or attempts to bite or attack any person or dog.

        K.     No person who has the care, charge, control, custody, or possession of any of the following kinds of dog shall allow such dog to enter or remain in the dog park at any time:

        1.     A dog less than 4 months old.

        2.     A dog in heat.

        3.     A vicious animal.

        4.     A dog with a communicable illness, infection, fleas, or parasites.

        5.     A dog that is currently under quarantine or that has previously been under quarantine by order of the animal control officer.

        L.     The following are prohibited in the dog park and no person shall bring any of the following into the dog park:

        1.     Food (irrespective of whether the food is intended for consumption by humans, dogs, or other species).

        2.     Dog treats.

        3.     Glass containers.

        4.     Alcohol.

        5.     Children’s toys.

        6.     Sports equipment.

        M.    Smoking is prohibited in the dog park and within 20 feet of the perimeter of the dog park.

        N.    In the event the city designates specific areas of the dog park for dogs of certain sizes, a responsible adult shall not allow a dog to enter an area of the park for dogs of a different size. If a responsible adult brings dogs in different size categories to the dog park, none of those dogs will be allowed to enter the park unless each dog within a different size category is accompanied by a chaperone for its designated specific area.

        O.    No responsible adult shall fail or refuse to remove feces defecated by a dog he or she chaperones at the dog park. Waste receptacles are located within the park for disposal purposes.

        P.     For the safety of all dogs, spike collars, pinch collars and choke collars are not permitted.

        Q.    Responsible adults shall not allow their dogs to dig holes.

        R.    All persons shall comply with instructions of peace officers and animal control officers at all times. Violation of this or any other provision of this section shall be grounds for immediate and permanent expulsion from the use of the dog park and revocation of a dog permit. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1533; Ord. 1523; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.10 HARMFUL MATTER DISPLAYS
7.10.005 Definition.
        As used in this chapter, the phrase “material that is harmful to minors” means “harmful matter” as that term is defined in Penal Code Section 313. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.10.010 Blinder Rack Requirement.
        No material that is harmful to minors shall be displayed in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless blinder racks are placed in front of the material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.15 NOISE
7.15.005 County Code Adopted by Reference.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the noise code for the county, set forth at Orange County Code Section 4-6.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference as the noise ordinance for the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.010 Designated Noise Zones.
        The noise zones of the city are as follows:

        A.     Noise Zone 1: Residential properties.

        B.     Noise Zone 2: Commercial properties.

        C.    Noise Zone 3: Industrial, manufacturing and oil properties. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.015 Exterior Noise Standards.
        A.     Unless otherwise specifically indicated, the following exterior noise standards shall apply to all property within a designated noise zone:

 

 

Noise Standards:

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 db(A)

7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.

 

50 db(A)

10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.

2

65 db(A)

At any time

3

70 db(A)

At any time

 

        In the event the alleged offensive noise consists of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by 5 db(A).

        B.     No person shall create any noise, or allow the creation of any noise, on property owned or occupied by such person when such noise causes the noise level to exceed the following when measured from a residential property:

        1.     The exterior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour.

        2.     The exterior noise standard plus 5 db(A) for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour.

        3.     The exterior noise standard plus 10 db(A) for a cumulative period of more than 5 minutes in any hour.

        4.     The exterior noise standard plus 15 db(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour.

        5.     The exterior noise standard plus 20 db(A) for any period of time.

        C.    In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first 4 noise limit categories in subsection B, the cumulative period applicable to such category shall be increased to reflect that ambient level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.020 Interior Noise Standards.
        A.     Unless otherwise specifically indicated, the following interior noise standards shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone:

 

Noise Standards:

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 db(A)

7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.

 

50 db(A)

10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.

 

        In the event the alleged offensive noise consists of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by 5 db(A).

        B.     No person shall create any noise, or allow the creation of any noise, on property owned or occupied by such person when such noise causes the noise level to exceed the following when measured from another dwelling unit on residential property:

        1.     The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than 5 minutes in any hour.

        2.     The interior noise standard plus 5 db(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour.

        3.     The interior noise standard plus 10 db(A) for any period of time.

        C.    In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first 2 noise limit categories in subsection B, the cumulative period applicable to such category shall be increased to reflect that ambient level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.025 Exemptions.
        The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

        A.     Activities conducted on the grounds of a nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college.

        B.     Activities conducted pursuant to a special event permit issued by the city.

        C.    Activities conducted at a publicly owned park or playground.

        D.    Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used in connection with emergency machinery, vehicle or work.

        E.     Noise associated with construction, repair, remodeling or grading of real property performed in the following periods: between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays; and between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday.

        F.     Noise associated with real property maintenance performed in the following periods: between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays; between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday; and between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday or a holiday.

        G.    Activities for which local noise regulations are preempted by federal or state law. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.030 Schools, Hospitals and Churches.
        A.     No person shall create any noise that causes the noise level at a school, hospital or church to exceed the exterior noise standard for the noise zone in which such facility is located.

        B.     No person shall create any noise that causes the noise level at a school, hospital or church to interfere unreasonably with the operation of the facility.

        C.    The prohibitions of this section apply only if signs are conspicuously displayed at 3 separate locations within one-tenth of a mile of the school, hospital or church. Additionally, the prohibitions of this section apply only if the school, hospital or church is in use. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.035 Heating, Venting, and Air Conditioning Equipment.
        A.     No building permit shall be issued for the installation of heating, venting and air conditioning (“HVAC”) equipment in or adjacent to residential areas if the noise produced by the HVAC equipment exceeds an A-weighted exterior sound pressure level of 50 db(A). The method of computation used shall be that specified in the “Application of Sound Rating Levels of Outdoor Unitary Equipment,” Standard 275, Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute, 1997 ed. or the latest revision thereof.

        B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a building permit may be issued for the installation of:

        1.     HVAC equipment containing a timing device deactivating the HVAC equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. provided the noise produced by the HVAC equipment does not exceed an A-weighted exterior sound pressure level of 55 db(A).

        2.     HVAC equipment generating noise that does not exceed an A-weighted exterior sound pressure level of 65 db(A), provided that the applicant obtains the prior written consent of the owner of each property where the exterior sound pressure level would exceed 55 db(A). (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1515)

 

7.15.040 Motor Vehicle Burglar Alarms.
        A.     No person shall cause or allow a burglar alarm located in a motor vehicle owned or operated by such person to emit an audible sound for a period of more than 10 minutes. Calculation of the time shall commence with the first audible sound and shall terminate 10 minutes thereafter, notwithstanding any variation or delay in the emissions of the sound.

        B.     Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction. Notwithstanding the preceding, any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for the 4th and each subsequent violation in a year period. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.20 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
7.20.005 Definition.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the term “city property” shall mean all property owned by the city, including without limitation the public beach, pier, parks and public parking facilities. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.010 Consumption/Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places.
        A.     Prohibitions. The following acts are prohibited on city property, public and private parking lots and parking facilities, and vacant lots:

        1.     Consumption of an alcoholic beverage.

        2.     Possession of any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage, which has been opened, or which has had a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.

        B.     Exemptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to consumption of alcoholic beverages at the following locations:

        1.     Premises licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.

        2.     Events conducted pursuant to a special event permit and licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.

        3.     Private property where the owner has provided consent. (Ord. 1552; Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.015 Glass Containers.
        No person shall consume a beverage from, possess or use a glass container while in or upon the public beach, pier, parks or parking facilities adjacent thereto. For purposes of this section, the term “glass container” means any receptacle made of glass including without limitation a bottle, cup, tumbler, jar, vial, flask, decanter, carafe, pitcher, cruet or jug. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.020 Camping and Storage on City Property.
        A.     Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Camp: to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.

        2.     Camp Facilities: temporary shelters including without limitation tents, huts and lean-tos.

        3.     Camp Paraphernalia: tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city provided cooking facilities and similar equipment.

        4.     Store: to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

        B.     Prohibitions.

        1.     No person shall camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in or on any city property, public property or public right-of-way.

        2.     No person shall store any personal property in or on any city property, public property or public right-of-way. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.025 Nighttime Curfew.
        A.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Constitutionally Protected Expressive Activity: an activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or by Article I, Section 2 of the California Constitution.

        2.     Emergency: an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action. “Emergency” includes without limitation a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or other situation requiring immediate action to prevent bodily injury.

        3.     Nighttime Curfew Hours: the period from 10:00 p.m. of any evening through 6:00 a.m. of the following day.

        4.     Guardian: a person designated by a court to be the guardian of a minor.

        5.     Responsible Adult: a person, 18 years of age or older, who has been authorized by the parent or guardian of a minor to have custody of the minor.

        6.     Public Place: a place to which the public has access, including without limitation, publicly owned alleys, beaches, parks, sidewalks and streets. “Public place” also includes privately owned businesses that are open to the public, including without limitation arcades, bars, saloons and restaurants.

        7.     Unemancipated Minor: a person who is under the age of 18 years and is not an “emancipated minor” as defined in Family Code Section 7002.

 

        B.     Prohibitions.

        1.     No unemancipated minor shall be present in a public place during nighttime curfew hours.

        2.     No parent or guardian of an unemancipated minor shall knowingly permit such person to be present in a public place during nighttime curfew hours.

        C.    Exemptions. Subsection B of this section does not apply if the unemancipated minor is any of the following:

        1.     On the sidewalk abutting his or her residence.

        2.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.

        3.     Responding to an emergency.

        4.     Attending an adult-supervised activity sponsored by the city, a school, religious institution, civic organization or similar entity.

        5.     Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or responsible adult.

        6.     On an errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian or responsible adult.

        7.     Traveling between home and an employment activity or a constitutionally protected expressive activity.

        8.     Engaged in an employment activity or a constitutionally protected expressive activity. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.030 Daytime Curfew.
        A.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Daytime Curfew Hours: the period from 8:00 a.m. through 2:30 p.m. on a school day.

        2.     School Age Minor: a person who is between the ages of 6 and 18 years.

        3.     School Day: a weekday in which school is in session.

        4.     Guardian: a person designated by a court to be the guardian of a minor.

        5.     Responsible Adult: a person, 18 years of age or older, who has been authorized by the parent or guardian of a minor to have custody of the minor.

        6.     Public Place: a place to which the public has access, including without limitation publicly owned alleys, beaches, parks, sidewalks and streets. “Public place” also includes privately owned businesses that are open to the public, including without limitation arcades, bars, saloons and restaurants.

        B.     Prohibitions.

        1.     No school age minor shall be present in a public place during daytime curfew hours.

        2.     No parent or guardian of a school age minor shall knowingly permit such person to be present in a public place during daytime curfew hours.

        C.    Exemptions. Subsection B of this section does not apply if the school age minor is any of the following:

        1.     Exempt from compulsory full-time education or compulsory continuation education pursuant to the Education Code.

        2.     Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or responsible adult.

        3.     On an errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian or responsible adult.

        4.     Traveling to or from an employment activity with a valid permit from school.

        5.     Traveling to or from a medical appointment with written proof of the appointment.

        6.     Traveling to or from lunch with a valid permit from school.

        7.     Traveling to or from a school-sponsored activity.

        8.     In possession of a valid off-campus permit from school.

        9.     Not a resident of the Los Alamitos Unified School District and is in possession of identification confirming such nonresidency.

        10.   Receiving instruction at a private school pursuant to Education Code Section 48222 or by a private tutor pursuant to Education Code Section 48224.

        11.   On an excused absence authorized by Education Code Section 48205(a). (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.035 Public Nudity.
        A.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Nudity:

        a.     The showing of human genitals, pubic area, anus or cleft of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering.

        b.     The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.

        c.     The exposure of any device, costume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region.

        d.     The exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.

        2.     Theater, Concert Hall or Similar Establishment: a building or place having fixed seats so arranged for spectators to have an unobstructed view of a stage upon which theatrical performances or similar forms of artistic expression are presented. “Theater, concert hall or similar establishment” does not include an adult cabaret as defined in Title 5 of this code and in the zoning ordinance.

        B.     Prohibitions.

        1.     No person shall appear in a state of nudity in a public place.

        2.     No person shall change clothing worn by such person, or remove clothing worn by such person, in any motor vehicle located on a public alley, parking lot, street or other public place.

        C.    Exemptions. Subsection B of this section shall not apply to the following:

        1.     A child under the age of 10.

        2.     A woman exposing a breast in the process of nursing an infant.

        3.     Acts prohibited, or the prohibition of which is preempted, by state law.

        4.     Performers in a theater, concert hall or similar establishment. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.040 Gaming.
        A.     Scope. This section does not apply to gaming that is prohibited by state law.

        B.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Gaming: the dealing, playing, carrying on or conducting of a game with cards, dice, dominos or any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value.

        2.     Gaming house: a house, room, venue or other place where gaming is conducted.

        C.    Prohibitions.

        1.     No person shall operate a gaming house, or allow a gaming house to be operated, on any property owned or occupied by such person.

        2.     No person shall knowingly permit gaming to occur on any property owned or occupied by such person.

        3.     No person shall visit a gaming house or bet in any gaming.

        4.     No person shall engage in gaming on public property including without limitation the municipal pier. Nor shall any person transport another person by water vessel from the municipal pier or any water within the city’s boundaries to another vessel or a place where such gaming is conducted.

        D.    Exemptions. Subsection C of this section does not apply to the following:

        1.     Gaming that is conducted for purely social purposes and that occurs in a private residence.

        2.     Gaming that is conducted by a civic, religious or veteran’s organization pursuant to a gaming permit issued by the city council. Gaming permits may be issued by the city council to allow gaming by the members of such organizations for a maximum of 12 hours per calendar month. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.045 Damaging City Property.
        A.     No person shall damage, destroy or deface any city property.

        B.     Any person who gives to the police department information leading to the arrest and conviction of a person for violation of subsection A shall, upon making a claim therefor, be paid by the city a reward in an amount set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.050 Obedience to Official Signs.
        All persons shall not refuse to obey the provisions of an official sign posted by the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.055 Firearms and Ammunition.
        A.     No person shall discharge a gun, compressed air gun, pistol or other firearm without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. This prohibition does not apply to law enforcement personnel acting in the course of duty.

        B.     No person shall sell, offer for sale or possess ammunition capable of being discharged by a compressed air gun. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.060 Tobacco.
        A.     No person shall do any of the following:

        1.     Sell or dispense any cigarettes or tobacco product, a cigarette paper or cigarette wrapper through the use of a vending machine.

        2.     Accept or place an advertisement for any tobacco product on or in any vehicle of public transportation owned or licensed by the city. For purposes of this provision, “vehicle of public transportation owned or licensed by the city” includes transit depots, transit waiting areas and transit shelters.

        3.     Sell cigarettes apart from the required manufacturer’s package containing health warnings.

        4.     Distribute or furnish without charge in any public place or event to which the public is invited, or cause to be distributed or furnished without charge in any such place, cigarettes or other tobacco products.

        B.     Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.065 Fireworks.
        A.     It is illegal to sell, possess, or discharge fireworks, except pursuant to a special event permit permitting public display of fireworks issued in accordance with this section. For purposes of this section, the terms “firework” and “public display of fireworks” have the meanings set forth in the California Health and Safety Code.

        B.     The public display of fireworks is allowed on property located in the Recreational Golf Zone (R/G Zone) if the property is at least 25 acres in size and the person conducting the display first obtains approval of a special use permit in accordance with Chapter 7.50 of the municipal code. The city may issue a special event permit for the public display of fireworks annually on July 4th provided the applicant: (1) satisfies all requirements of Chapter 7.50; (2) satisfies all Orange County Fire Authority and Seal Beach Police Department requirements; and (3) abides by and conforms to applicable safety, professional and technical standards and all applicable federal, state and local laws regarding fireworks.

        C.    The fire chief shall seize, impound, and dispose of all fireworks sold, possessed, or discharged in violation of this section. Any person who violates this section shall be liable to the city for the actual costs of seizure, impoundment, and disposal of such fireworks, in addition to any and all other penalties available under the municipal code. (Ord. 1606; Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.070 Skate Park Facilities.
        A.     Zoeter Park Skate Facility is designed and maintained, and is hereby designated, as a skateboard park in which skateboarding, in-line skating and roller skating is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section.

        B.     Every person skateboarding, in-line skating or roller skating at Zoeter Park Skate Facility must:

        1.     Wear a fully-functional helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.

        2.     Be supervised by an adult if under the age of 14.

        3.     Comply with all posted rules and regulations. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.075 Signs on Public Property.
        A.     Purpose. The purpose of this section is to curb the visual assault on citizens presented by an accumulation of signs posted on public property.

        B.     Prohibition. No person shall paint, mark, or write on, or post or otherwise affix, any handbill or sign to or upon any public right-of-way, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light or power or telephone or telegraph or trolley wire pole, or appurtenances or apparatus connected therewith, or wire appurtenant thereof or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system or upon any lighting system or public bridge, drinking fountain, life buoy, life preserver, life boat, or other life saving equipment, street sign or traffic sign owned or maintained by any public entity or public utility.

        C.    Removal. Any handbill or sign found posted, or otherwise affixed, upon any property contrary to the provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance and may be removed by the city. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal and the city manager may effect the collection of that cost.

        D.    Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:

        1.     The painting of house numbers on curbs done under a permit issued by the city and in accordance with standards established by such permit.

        2.     Signs installed upon or affixed by a public entity or public utility on property owned by such entity or utility. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.080 Graffiti.
        A.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Graffiti or other inscribed material: includes without limitation any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any real or personal property.

        2.     Expense of abatement: includes without limitation: court costs; attorney’s fees; costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material; costs of repair and replacement of defaced property; costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program; and law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused or committed the graffiti or other inscribed material on the publicly or privately owned permanent real or personal property within the city.

        B.     Removal Requirement. No owner, lessee, occupant or other person having present possession of a lot or parcel of land shall permit graffiti or other inscribed material to remain on such lot or parcel for a period in excess of 48 hours following service by the city of a notice to abate graffiti.

        C.    Abatement. The maintenance of property with graffiti, or other inscribed material thereon, shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 7.40 of this code.

        D.    Use of City Funds. City funds may be used to remove graffiti or other inscribed material from publicly or privately owned real or personal property located within the city. Additionally, city funds may be used to replace or repair publicly or privately owned property within the city that has been defaced with graffiti or other inscribed material that cannot be removed cost effectively. This subsection authorizes only the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material itself or, if the graffiti or other inscribed material cannot be removed cost effectively, the repair or replacement of the portion of property that was defaced. This subsection does not authorize the painting, repair or replacement of other parts of the property that was not defaced.

        The removal, repair or replacement shall not be performed without the consent of: the public entity having jurisdiction over the property, in the case of publicly owned real or personal property; or the owner or possessor of the property, in the case of privately owned real or personal property.

        E.     Penalty. Each person violating subsection B of this section is guilty of an infraction unless such a violation is prosecuted through the administrative penalty procedure of this code. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.20.085 Sleeping in Vehicles Overnight Prohibited.
        No person shall sleep in any automobile, recreational vehicle, house trailer, camper, or other vehicle parked on any public parking lot, public street, public alleyway or passageway between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (Ord. 1551)

Chapter 7.25 PARADES
7.25.005 Definition.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the word “parade” shall mean a procession of 25 or more persons, animals or vehicles (in any combination) upon a city park, sidewalk, street or other property. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.25.010 Permit Requirement.
        No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on a parade unless a parade permit has been issued for such activity. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.25.015 Permit Application.
        A parade permit application shall be submitted to the city manager on a city-provided form at least 6 days in advance of the proposed parade. The application shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed parade:

        A.     The name, address and phone number of the person or organization sponsoring the proposed parade.

        B.     The date, time and duration of the proposed parade.

        C.    The approximate number of animals, persons and vehicles that will participate in the parade.

        D.    The route of the proposed parade, including all assembly and dispersal areas. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.25.020 Approval or Denial of Permit.
        A.     The city manager shall approve a parade permit within 3 days of the filing of a complete application if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Written notice of the denial of a parade permit, and the reasons therefor, shall be provided to the applicant. The city manager may deny a parade permit for any of the following grounds:

        1.     The information contained in the application is false or intentionally misleading.

        2.     The parade is proposed for a time and location for which another parade has already been issued a parade permit.

        3.     The parade is proposed to take place in the roadway portion of a street in a commercial zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. or between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless the parade will occur on a national holiday.

        4.     The parade, by itself or in combination with another parade, will require closure of the roadway portion of a street in a commercial zone for more than 3 hours in any day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless the parade will occur on a national holiday.

        5.     The proposed route or location of the parade traverses a street or other public right-of-way scheduled for maintenance, construction or repair prior to the permit application.

        B.     The decision of the city manager on a parade permit application shall be final and shall not be subject to city council review pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.25.025 Demonstration Equipment.
        No person in a parade shall carry or possess any length of lumber, wood, or wood lath unless that object is 0.25 inches or less in thickness and 2 inches or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed 0.75 inches in its thickest dimension. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.25.030 Exemptions.
        This chapter shall not apply to athletic events, social functions, funeral processions or activities for which a special event permit has been issued. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.30 WATER WELLS
7.30.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Abandoned or Abandonment: well that has not been used for a period of one year, unless the well standards advisory board approves the owner’s written declaration that it intends to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purpose (such as an observation well or injection well). All such declarations must be resubmitted to the board for approval annually. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be considered abandoned 24 hours after construction work has been completed, unless otherwise approved by the health officer.

        Agricultural Well: water well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes including so-called stock wells.

        Cathodic Protection Well: any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as a cathodic protection well or a deep anode.

        Community Water Supply Well: water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to the Health and Safety Code.

        Construct, Reconstruct (Construction, Reconstruction): to dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or to reperforate, remove, replace or extend a well casing.

        Destruction: the proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer useful so as to assure that the ground water is protected and to eliminate a potential physical hazard.

        Electrical Grounding Well: any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical ground.

        Health Officer: county health officer.

        Individual Domestic Well: water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment.

        Industrial Well: water well used to supply an industry on an individual basis.

        Observation Well: a well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality.

        Public Nuisance: when applied to a well, means a well that threatens to impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public.

        Salt Water (Hydraulic) Barrier Well: a well used for extracting water from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the intrusion of salt water into a fresh water bearing aquifer.

        Test or Exploratory Hole: an excavation used for determining the nature of underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means.

        Well: any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for providing cathodic protection or electrical grounding of equipment, for making tests or observations of underground conditions, or for any other similar purpose. “Well” shall include, but shall not be limited to, community water supply wells, individual water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and exploratory holes, observation wells and salt water (hydraulic) barrier wells, as defined herein, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the well standards advisory board.

        “Well” shall not include:

        1.     Oil and gas wells, geothermal wells or other wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells;

        2.     Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillside or earth embankments; or

        3.     Other wells whose regulation is not necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the well standards advisory board. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.010 Well Standards Advisory Board.
        The well standards advisory board, as established by the county, shall have jurisdiction for the enforcement of this chapter, including but not necessarily limited to the issuing of permits, inspections, the issuing of notices, the providing for public hearings before the board, the findings if public nuisances exist relating to water wells within the city, the provisions for abatement and abatement costs, and the establishment of standards for the construction, reconstruction or destruction or abandonment of wells and the imposition of penalties for the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.015 Acts Prohibited—Permit Required.
        A.     No person shall construct or reconstruct any well unless such construction or reconstruction is carried out pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued for that purpose by the health officer as provided in this chapter.

        B.     Nor shall any such person abandon a well unless it has been destroyed pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued by the health officer.

        C.    Nor shall any such person violate the terms of any order issued by the well standards advisory board or the health officer, issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.020 Permits.
        A.     Applications for permits shall be made to the health officer containing such information as required by the health officer.

        B.     Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the board of supervisors on the basis of the cost incurred in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Fifty percent of the fee shall be returned to the applicant should the permit be denied or if the permit is canceled within 60 days after issuance and no work has been done. A permit shall remain in effect for one year from date of issuance.

        C.    Permits may be issued subject to any condition or requirement found by the health officer to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

        D.    A permit may be canceled or the conditions amended by the health officer upon a determination that to proceed with the work would result in a public nuisance or the permit holder has violated the terms of the permit or this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.025 Completion of Work.
        The permittee shall notify the health officer in writing upon completion of the work and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification has been received. A final inspection of the work shall be made by the health officer and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this chapter or the permit until such inspection has been performed. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.030 Notice—Cancellation or Denial of Permit.
        In the event a permit is denied or cancelled, the applicant or permit holder shall be given written notice by the health officer, which notice shall specify the reasons for the action and shall notify the applicant or permit holder of the right to request a hearing before the well standards advisory board within 10 days. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.035 Notice—Wells Constituting a Public Nuisance.
        In the event the health officer determines that a well constitutes a public nuisance, the health officer shall mail a written notice to the landowner and the permit holder, if other than the landowner. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the affected property. The notice shall state the specific facts giving rise to such nuisance, the corrective measures deemed necessary, and the time, date and place at which a hearing shall be held by the well standards advisory board relating thereto, which date shall be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days after the date such notice is mailed. The notice shall state that in the event the board determines that a public nuisance exists, a special assessment shall be imposed upon the land for any costs of abatement. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.040 Immediate Abatement.
        If the health officer finds that immediate action is necessary to prevent impairment of the ground water or a threat to the health or safety of the public, the health officer may abate the nuisance without giving notice. Within 24 hours after initiating such abatement, the health officer shall give notice of a hearing before the well standards advisory board in the manner prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.045 Board Hearing.
        At the time fixed for the hearing, the well standards advisory board shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the landowner, and by any other interested person. In the event the board finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall direct the health officer to take any necessary action to protect the ground water or the health and safety of the public, unless the situation is corrected by the landowner on or before a date to be specified by the board. The costs of such corrective work by the health officer shall become a special assessment upon the land pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.050 Abatement Costs a Special Assessment.
        Upon a finding by the well standards advisory board that a well constitutes a public nuisance, all costs of abatement carried out under the terms of this section shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon the parcel of land involved. If such costs are not paid within 60 days, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code Section 38773.5. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. The county shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.30.055 Standards.
        Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, Chapter II, and future amendments thereto. Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of cathodic protection wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1. Well standards may be modified by the health officer, with the advice and concurrence of the well standards advisory board, where required to cope with local geological and ground water conditions. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.35 PUBLIC NUISANCES
7.35.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of Chapter 7.35 and Chapter 7.40, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Hearing Officer: a city department head designated by the city manager, including without limitation the director of development services and director of public works/city engineer.

        Occupant: any person in possession and/or control of any property, including without limitation the owner, owner’s agent or employee, a lessee, lessee’s agent or employee or a tenant, tenant’s agent or employee.

        Owner: the owner of record as shown in the county assessor’s current tax records. For purposes of providing notice to such owner of any action under this chapter, owner shall include the actual owner of record, or such owner’s agent, employee or other legal representative.

        Property: any grounds, lot, parcel, tract or other piece of land, as well as any building or other structure located thereon. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.35.010 Public Nuisances Prohibited.
        A.     A public nuisance is any violation of this code or anything injurious to health, indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by a neighborhood or by a considerable number of persons even where the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals is unequal. The city council shall have the power to declare by resolution that any particular act or condition constitutes a public nuisance.

        B.     In addition, each of the following acts or conditions constitutes a public nuisance:

        1.     Emission of Noxious Fumes or Odors. No person shall operate or maintain any furnace, oven, drier, bleacher, evaporator, roaster or other heating, drying, burning or charring device or apparatus, or any vat, storage yard, warehouse, shed or place where any raw or manufactured material or commodity is treated, dried, burned, charred or stored, from which noxious fumes or odors are emitted.

        2.     Deposit of Harmful Material or Waste on Public Property. No person shall scatter, throw, place, discharge, deposit or leave, or cause, suffer or permit to be scattered, thrown, placed, discharged, deposited or left, any refuse matter, waste matter, rubbish, garbage, effluent, carcasses or remains of any creature, or any portion thereof, paper, empty containers, remnants of any food or other waste, trash or broken glass, nails, tacks, dirt, or any substance or material whose presence at such location might result in injury to any person in or upon any public property, including without limitation the beach or pier. Notwithstanding the preceding, a person may discard items in receptacles designated for such items.

        3.     Deposit of Petroleum Product on Any Property. No person shall cause or permit any oil, waste oil, oil refuse, oil waste matter or any petroleum product or by-product, to be or remain on the surface of any private or public property, except in an oil sump property legally designated to contain and restrain such materials.

        4.     Disturbing of the Peace. No person shall willfully disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by doing any of the following:

        a.     Creating or causing to be created any loud, unnecessary or unusual noises.

        b.     Firing without just causes any pistol, revolver, shotgun or firearm.

        c.     Fighting.

        d.     Threatening or challenging to fight.

        e.     Keeping an animal that creates a noise disturbance in violation of Section 7.05.065 of the Code.

        f.      Acting in an offensive manner.

        5.     Obstruction on Public Property. No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, public way or public property by causing or permitting to be placed, erected or set in position any fence, post, or other barrier, or by sitting in or upon any public hallway, public sidewalk or public walkway area. This prohibition does not prohibit sitting on the seat of a bench legally placed upon a public hallway or upon a public sidewalk, or standing on the sidewalk at a bus stop for the purpose of boarding a bus.

        6.     Encroachment on Public Property. No person shall erect, construct or maintain any structure, in whole or in part, in or on any street, alley, sidewalk, public way or public property, without an encroachment permit. This provision shall not apply to lawfully installed newsracks.

        7.     Substandard or Dangerous Property Conditions. No person shall cause or allow any condition on his or her property, or on an adjacent sidewalk, that increases the danger of fire or other calamity or that results in substantial detriment to the property of others in the immediate vicinity. Such conditions include without limitation to the following:

        a.     The presence of junk, trash, debris, building materials, substantial quantities of loose earth, rocks or pieces of concrete.

        b.     The presence of abandoned, discarded, unused or deteriorating materials, objects or equipment, including without limitation furniture, bedding, machinery, packing boxes, cans, containers or vehicles.

        c.     The presence of stagnant water, excavations, eroded or eroding earth or sand that sloughs onto adjoining sidewalks or street, or eroded or eroding earth or sand that in normal weather conditions can be carried off or blown from the property as dust.

        d.     Any fence, structure, or landscaping that is visible from any adjacent property, street, road, highway, alley, or right-of-way that may detrimentally affect the aesthetic and economic value of the property in the immediate vicinity.

        e.     The accumulation of any kind of combustible material.

        f.      Any structure, or any structural component thereof, that is partially destroyed or otherwise structurally unsound.

        g.     Any defective wiring, switches, gas lines, valves, pipes or any component part of the electric, gas, water or plumbing systems.

        h.     Any dirt, rubbish, weeds or rank growth.

        8.     Human Waste Disposal—Urinating or Defecating in Public Places or Public View. No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place or in view of a public place, except in toilet facilities intended for accepting human waste. For these purposes, “public” includes common areas located on private property. (Ord. 1609; Ord. 1581; Ord. 1515)

 

7.35.015 Each Day a Separate Offense.
        Each day a nuisance continues to exist shall constitute a new and separate offense. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.40 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
7.40.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions set forth in Chapter 7.35, Section 7.35.005 apply. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.010 Abatement.
        A.     The owner and the occupant of any property where a public nuisance is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for abating the public nuisance and for all costs associated with the abatement. The cost of abatement of the public nuisance and related administrative costs shall include without limitation costs associated with: inspection; investigation; boundary determination and measurement; staff time; processing; clerical and associated acts; attorney services; and costs to repair and eliminate all substandard conditions. If such public nuisance has not been abated within the time prescribed by this chapter, the city council may authorize the abatement, including without limitation the removal or destruction of the nuisance, as hereafter provided.

        B.     The prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding or special procedure to abate a public nuisance pursuant to this section may recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees in those individual actions or proceedings wherein the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to any prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

        C.    The city may collect the costs and attorneys’ fees associated with the abatement by any or all of the following methods: agreement; settlement; civil compromise; filing a cost bill in a civil action; recording a nuisance abatement lien against the property where the nuisance is or was located; or imposing a special assessment against the property where the nuisance is or was located. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.015 Procedure.
        Except for code violations and other nuisances per se, the city shall comply with the following process to declare a public nuisance:

        A.     Resolution. City council shall adopt a preliminary resolution declaring that a public nuisance exists. If the nuisance is located at or upon a specified location, the resolution shall identify the property by street address and lot and block number. The resolution may include any number of separate or contiguous streets, sidewalks, or parcels of private property.

        B.     Notice of Violation. The city shall notify the owner and occupant by serving a written notice to abate a public nuisance in a form approved by the city attorney.

        C.    Service of Notice. Notice shall be provided at least 5 days prior to the time scheduled for a hearing. Notice may be given in any of the following ways:

        1.     Posted Notice. At least one posted notice shall be conspicuously affixed on or in front of the property per every 50 feet of street frontage. The caption of the “notice to abate” shall be in letters at least one inch in height.

        2.     Notice by Mail. Mailed notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to each person to whom the property is assessed in the last equalized assessment roll and to the occupant of the property.

        3.     Notice by Personal Delivery. Personally delivered notice shall be made by leaving the notice at the residence of the occupant and the residence or place of business of the owner, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., with a person of not less than 18 years of age.

        D.    Hearing. At the time stated in the notice, the hearing officer shall consider the testimony of any interested person and any relevant evidence. Formal rules of evidence do not apply. The hearing officer may continue the hearing.

        E.     Decision of Hearing Officer. The hearing officer shall make a finding as to whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. The hearing officer shall file a report of such decision with the city council. If the hearing officer determines that a public nuisance exists, the hearing officer shall order that such nuisance be abated within a specified time.

        F.     Notice and Appeal of Hearing Officer’s Decision. The owner and occupant of the property shall be notified in writing of the hearing officer’s decision within 3 days of the hearing. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance exists, the notice shall include an order to abate and applicable appeal provisions. The owner or the occupant may file an appeal with the city clerk within 10 days of the date of the notice. If no appeal is filed within such 10-day period, the hearing officer’s decision shall be final.

        G.    Notice and Hearing of Appeal. Notice of the city council hearing on the appeal shall be posted on the subject property. The city council shall consider the testimony of any interested person and any relevant evidence. Formal rules of evidence do not apply. The city council may continue the hearing.

        H.    Decision of City Council. The city council shall make a finding as to whether a public nuisance exists. The city shall provide notice to the owner and occupant of the city council’s decision within 3 days of the close of the hearing. If the city council finds that a public nuisance exists, the notice shall include an order to abate. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.020 Additional Procedure for Removing Abandoned Vehicles.
        A.     Removal of Abandoned Vehicles. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22660, the city hereby establishes the procedure for the abatement and removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this municipal code. The provisions of California Vehicle Code Sections 22660 and 22661 are hereby adopted by this reference. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this section and the provisions of Sections 22660 and 22661, the provisions of Sections 22660 and 22661 shall prevail. Neither the city nor its contractor shall be liable for damage caused to the vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this section.

        B.     Recovery of Costs of Administration and Removal. Pursuant to Section 7.40.010 of this chapter, the city may recover all costs associated with the abatement of the public nuisance and the removal of the vehicle or part thereof.

        C.    Exceptions. A vehicle or any part thereof (individually or collectively “vehicle”) shall not be removed pursuant to this chapter if such vehicle is:

        1.     Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street, highway or other public or private property; or

        2.     Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard. This exception does not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance.

        D.    Ten-Day Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove Vehicle.

        1.     The city shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle at least 10 days prior to any proposed abatement or removal, to the owner of the real property (“property owner”) as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle (“vehicle owner”) unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

        2.     The notice of intention shall state that the property owner or vehicle owner has 10 days after the mailing of such notice or at the time of signing a release pursuant to paragraph E.1 of this section, to request a hearing. The property owner does not have to appear at the hearing if he or she submits a sworn written statement, supported by reasons, denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the property. If no request or written statement is received within such 10 days, the city may take all necessary steps to remove the vehicle.

        3.     No notice of intention is required by this section if the property owner and the vehicle owner have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle.

        E.     Low Value Vehicles.

        1.     A notice of intention is not required for a vehicle valued at less than $200 by a person specified in Vehicle Code Section 22855 (“low value vehicle”) if the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle, and the vehicle is:

        a.     Located on a parcel that is either zoned for agriculture use or does not contain any residential structure;

        b.     Inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed; and

        c.     Determined by the city to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety.

        2.     Prior to final disposition under Vehicle Code Section 22662 of a low value vehicle for which evidence of registration was recovered pursuant to subsection H of this section, the city shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of the vehicle of the city’s intent to dispose of the vehicle. If the vehicle is not claimed and removed from a location specified in Vehicle Code Section 22662 within 12 days after the notice is mailed, final disposition may proceed.

        F.     Hearing.

        1.     Either the property owner or the owner of the vehicle may request a hearing before the city council or its designee within 10 days after the mailing of the notice of intention. If a hearing is not requested within this period, the vehicle may be removed.

        2.     At the hearing, the property owner, the owner of the vehicle, or both, may submit evidence, both oral and written, objecting to the abatement or removal. The property owner may appear at the hearing in person or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her property and the reasons for the property owner’s denial. If such a statement is submitted within the 10-day appeals period, it shall be construed as a request for hearing that does not require the presence of the owner submitting the request.

        G.    City Determination. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city shall determine whether the vehicle is a nuisance and should be abated; and whether the vehicle shall be removed. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the real property without the consent of the property owner and that the property owner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city will not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the real property or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the property owner.

        H.    Notice to DMV. Within five days after the city or any agent thereof removes any vehicle or any part thereof pursuant to this chapter, the city shall give the Department of Motor Vehicles notice of such removal. Such notice shall identify the vehicle or part thereof and any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.

        I.      Reconstruction of Abandoned Vehicles. A vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this chapter shall not be reconstructed or made operable unless it qualifies for either a horseless carriage license plate or an historical vehicle license plate, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004. (Ord. 1577; Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.025 Compliance.
        The owner or occupant of the subject property shall comply with an order to abate within the time specified by the hearing officer or, if the hearing officer’s decision was appealed, the time specified by the city council. Notwithstanding compliance with an order to abate, the owner and the occupant of the property described in the notice shall in all events be jointly and severally liable to the city for any and all costs associated with the abatement. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.030 Failure to Comply—Abatement by City or Private Contractor.
        In addition to any criminal penalties imposed, failure to comply with an order to abate within the time specified may result in abatement by the city and the costs thereof assessed against the property as hereinafter provided. The city council may award a contract to abate the public nuisance to a private contractor. The city may obtain an abatement warrant or any other authorization required by law to authorize city or private contractor employees to enter upon private property to abate a nuisance. The director of public works/city engineer or the private contractor shall keep an account and submit the itemized written report for each separate parcel of land to the city council for confirmation. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.035 Cost Report—Posting.
        A copy of the itemized written report showing any costs associated with the abatement shall be posted for at least 3 days prior to its submission to the city council on or near the city council’s chamber door. The report shall indicate the time and date of submission. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.040 Cost Report—Hearing.
        The city council shall hear any objections of the parties who may be assessed for the city’s costs. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply at such hearing. The city council may modify the report. The city council shall then confirm the report, as may be modified, by resolution. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.045 Special Assessment and Lien.
        Costs of abatement shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel and after the assessment is confirmed shall be a lien on the parcel. (Ord. 1515)

7.40.050 Collection of Costs.
        A.     After confirmation of the report, the assessment shall be collected in any of the following ways:

        1.     The owner or occupant of the property described in the notice may pay the amount due on the abatement to the director of public works/city engineer after the confirmation of the report and until 10 days before a copy of such report is given to the county assessor and tax collector, or, if certified copies were filed with the county auditor, until August 1st following the confirmation of the report.

        2.     The county tax collector may collect the assessments by issuing separate bills and receipts for the assessments, or the amount of the assessment may be added to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for ordinary municipal purposes and be collected therewith at the time and in the manner as ordinary municipal taxes, subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale for delinquencies.

        B.     Notwithstanding the preceding, the city council may direct that the assessment be collected in successive annual installments at the time and in the manner of property taxes. Such installments shall be subject to the same penalties and procedures for foreclosure and sale for delinquencies applicable to property taxes. An assessment payment made in installments may include interest on the unpaid balance at a rate to be determined by the city council. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.40.055 Refunds.
        The city council may order a refund of all or part of the nuisance abatement assessment if it finds that all or part of the assessment had been erroneously levied. An assessment or part thereof shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the city clerk on or before 6 months after the assessment became due and payable. Any claim shall be verified by the person who paid the assessment, or by such person’s guardian, executor, or administrator. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.45 NOISE DISTURBANCES
7.45.005 Prohibition.
        A.     No person shall willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

        B.     The standards that may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists include without limitation the following:

        1.     The level of noise.

        2.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.

        3.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.

        4.     The level and intensity of the background noise, if any.

        5.     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.

        6.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.

        7.     The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.

        8.     The time of the day or night the noise occurs.

        9.     The duration of the noise.

        10.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

        11.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.45.010 Liability for Costs of Subsequent Responses.
        Upon the initial response of the police department to any disturbance involving loud, unnecessary and unusual noise, the chief of police may, in lieu of or in addition to taking other action authorized by law, give notice to the person or persons in actual or apparent control of the activity creating the disturbance, or to the person or persons in actual or apparent control of the property or premises wherein the disturbance has occurred, or both, that liability may be imposed upon the person or persons receiving such notice for the costs to the city of any subsequent response by the police department in connection with any continuation or resumption of such disturbance. Such notification shall be in such form as may be approved by the chief of police. The costs of any subsequent response shall be assessed to the person or persons receiving such notice and shall include all costs reasonably incurred by the city in providing law enforcement services and equipment at the scene of the disturbance, including the cost or value of the time expended by police department personnel in making any subsequent response. The method of computing such costs shall be established by the chief of police and approved by the city council. The finance department shall invoice such costs to the person or persons liable therefor under this chapter, and such costs shall constitute a debt to the city and be collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract; provided, however, that in no event shall a person’s liability hereunder exceed $1,000 for any single subsequent response. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.45.015 Liability of Parents and Guardians.
        If a minor is in actual or apparent control of the activity creating the disturbance, or is in actual or apparent control of the property or premises wherein the disturbance has occurred, and, following notification, a subsequent response by the police department is made in connection with any continuation or resumption of such disturbance, then the acts or omissions of such minor shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of imposing liability for costs hereunder, and the parent or guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for all costs resulting there from. The liability imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other liability imposed by law. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.50 SPECIAL EVENTS
7.50.005 Scope.
        This chapter provides for the approval and regulation of special events on private property, city-owned property and Public Land Use/Recreation (PLU/R) zone property. This chapter does not apply to parades, political rallies or similar constitutionally protected expressive activities; filming activities subject to Title 5 of this code; or adult-supervised, child-oriented parties conducted at a residential property and involving no live music. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.50.010 Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Director: director of development services.

        Special Event: a short term land use activity that is distinct from the customary land use of the property on which it is conducted and that involves the potential for a substantial number of participants or spectators. “Special event” includes carnival, live music concert, outdoor dining, seasonal goods market (such as a Christmas tree farm or pumpkin farm), street fair and street marathon. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.50.015 Permit Requirement.
        No person shall conduct a special event on private property, city-owned property or Public Land Use/Recreation (PLU/R) zone property unless such person first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, a special event permit for such special event. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.50.020 Procedure.
        A.     Application Filing Time. An application for a special event permit, along with an application fee in an amount established by city council resolution, shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of the proposed special event. Notwithstanding the preceding, the director may accept a special event permit application filed less than 30 days in advance when the special event is proposed to be conducted in a city park and there is adequate time for review of the application.

        B.     Application Contents. An application for a special event permit shall be on a form provided by the city. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name of the special event organizer and the organizer’s contact person (if different).

        2.     A list of the special event permits requested by the special event organizer in the previous 12 months.

        3.     A detailed description of the proposed special event (including the hours it is to be conducted).

        4.     A precise diagram of the venue area and floor plan (if applicable) for the proposed special event.

        5.     The anticipated number of workers, participants and spectators at the proposed special event.

        6.     A traffic control plan (including any necessary directional devices and street closures) for the proposed special event.

        7.     Water facilities and sanitary measures (including toilets and trash containers) for the proposed special event.

        8.     Security measures for the proposed special event.

        C.    Public Notice and Comment. Prior to making a decision on a special event permit application, the director shall give written notice of the application to the owners and tenants of businesses and properties located within 100 feet of the proposed venue. If the number of persons to whom notice would be delivered exceeds 200, then the director may instead provide the notice by placing an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation. The director shall give due consideration to any written comments received within 5 days of such notice.

        D.    Decision. The director shall render a written decision, supported by findings, on a special event permit application within 10 days of the filing of the application. The director may approve a special event permit upon determining that the proposed special event will not be detrimental to adjacent property or to the public health, safety and welfare. In making such determination, the director may consider the applicant’s past conduct in connection with any special event approved during the previous 12-month period. All special event permits shall be for a limited duration, which shall be indicated in the approval. No special event organizer shall be issued more than 6 special event permits per calendar year for a particular property. The decision of the director shall be final unless appealed in accordance with subsection F of this section.

        E.     Authority to Impose Conditions. When approving a special event permit, the director may impose conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate to protect adjacent property and the public health, safety and welfare. Such conditions may include a requirement for the provision of security measures recommended by the chief of police.

        F.     Appeals. Decisions involving special event permits shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city council shall be the hearing officer for the purpose of such procedure. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.50.025 Standard Regulations.
        A.     Except as provided in subsection B of this section, in addition to conformance with any conditions imposed in connection with a special event permit, each special event shall be conducted in accordance with the following regulations:

        1.     The special event shall be conducted entirely within the time period and the geographical boundaries approved by the director. The special event organizers shall conspicuously provide public notice of such time period and boundaries by posting signs at locations approved by the director.

        2.     The special event organizer shall submit a refundable security deposit in an amount determined by the director. The security deposit amount shall be based solely on the type of special event, the location of the special event and the anticipated number of participants and spectators. The special event organizer shall be refunded the security deposit less any amount deducted to cover the cost of clean-up of the special event area by city forces; damage to city-owned property due to the special event; and extraordinary repair, law enforcement or public safety costs incurred by the city or another governmental agency due to the special event.

        3.     The special event organizer shall execute a written statement satisfactory to the city attorney whereby the organizer promises to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers and employees with respect to any liability (including attorney’s fees, expenses and costs) for personal injury or property damage sustained by any person as a result of the special event.

        4.     The special event organizer shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing that a comprehensive liability insurance policy has been issued for the special event by an insurance company that both is admitted and licensed to do business in the State of California; and is rated B+VII or better according to the most recent A.M. Best Co. Rating Guide. The policy limits of such insurance shall not be less than $1,000,000 combined single limit or equivalent. Such policy shall name the city as an additional insured; specify that it acts as primary insurance and that no insurance held or owned by the designated additional insureds shall be called upon to cover a loss; and contain a provision that no termination, cancellation or change of coverage of insured or additional insureds shall be effective until after 30 days notice thereof has been given in writing to the city manager.

        B.     The director may modify or waive any regulation set forth in subsection A of this section upon making a determination that, in the context of a specific special event, such regulation is not necessary or appropriate to protect adjacent property or the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1515)

 

7.50.030 Permit Revocation.
        The city manager may revoke a special event permit if the special event is conducted contrary to the conditions of approval, the provisions of this code or the provisions of any law. Prior to revocation, the city manager shall give written notice to the special event organizer and, if requested, shall afford a hearing on the grounds for revocation. Notwithstanding the preceding, the city manager may summarily revoke a special event permit when necessary for the immediate protection of the public health, safety or welfare. If requested, the city manager shall afford the special event organizer a hearing on the grounds for revocation as soon thereafter as is practicable. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 7.55 PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
7.55.005 Park Use Provisions.
        Park use by the public may be regulated in accordance with city council adopted rules and regulations adopted by city council resolution regarding reservations, responsibilities, permit requirements and grounds for denial of permits. (Ord. 1533)

 

7.55.010 Park Use Restrictions.
        A.     No person, other than authorized city staff, shall operate or drive an automobile, motorcycle, truck, or other conveyance in a city park except on the designated roads and parking areas.

        B.     No person shall wash or repair any automobile, motorcycle, truck, or other conveyance in a city park except for law enforcement or emergency purposes.

        C.    No person, other than fire officials or peace officers in the discharge of their official duties, shall possess, carry or use any fireworks, firearms, air guns, BB guns, bows and arrows, sling shots, knives, or other weapons potentially harmful to wild life or to human safety.

        D.    No alcoholic beverages are to be sold or consumed at any park or athletic facility.

        E.     The sale or rent, or the soliciting for sale or rent, of any goods, equipment, merchandise, food, or beverages is prohibited except as allowed by Chapter 5.80, Sidewalk Vending, or pursuant to a special event permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7.50, Special Events.

        F.     No person shall drive, putt, or in any other fashion play or practice golf on city park land or on city athletic field land, except when conducted as part of and directly supervised through a city-sponsored recreation class.

        G.    No person shall fly engine-powered model airplanes on or over city park land or city athletic field land.

        H.    No person shall suspend or attach to trees in a city park or a city athletic field any object that could in any way damage or deface said tree or trees.

        I.      No person shall smoke. For purpose of this Section 7.55.010, the term “smoke” includes, without limitation, the following: carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco product, weed, plant or another combustible substance; the lighting of a pipe, cigar, cigarette or similar device; and the exhaling of gaseous products and particles created by the use of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or similar device. For the purpose of this Section 7.55.010, the term “smoke” also includes the use of an electronic smoking device, which is defined as an electronic or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking and may be referred to as “vaping,” that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. An electronic smoking device includes the nicotine or other substances used in or produced by any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, sold, or given as an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, pipe, hookah, or any other similar device or product name or descriptor. The term electronic smoking device does not include any medical inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor, or any other product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of diseases. No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section. Violations of this section shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to the administrative citation procedure of this code.

        J.     No person shall scatter, throw, place, discharge, deposit or leave, or cause, suffer or permit to be scattered, thrown, placed, discharged, deposited or left, any refuse matter, waste matter, rubbish, garbage, lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes, cigar butts, cigarette butts or any other tobacco-related waste, waste from electronic smoking devices as defined in subsection I of this section, effluent, carcasses or remains of any creature, or any portion thereof, paper, empty containers, remnants of any food or other waste, trash or broken glass, nails, tacks, dirt, or any substance or material whose presence at a park might result in injury to any person. Notwithstanding the preceding, a person may discard items in receptacles designated for such items. Violations of this section shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to the administrative citation procedure of this code.

        K.     No person shall be allowed or permitted to have any dogs or other animals in public parks in College Park West and College Park East, with the exception of the designated dog park area at Arbor Park. Leashed dogs or other animals under the charge of a person competent to exercise care, custody, and control over such dog/animal are permitted in all other areas of the city, including public parks and the Electric Avenue greenbelt. No dogs or other animals are allowed on the city beach or city pier as per municipal code Section 9.05.090. Violations of this section shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to the administrative citation procedure of this code. (Ord. 1685; Ord. 1675; Ord. 1591; Ord. 1538; Ord. 1536; Ord. 1533)

Chapter 7.60 TENNIS CENTER REGULATIONS
7.60.005 Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Hours of Operation: the hours of operation established by the city manager or designee thereof.

        Tennis Center: the property located at 3900 Lampson Avenue, commonly referred to as the Seal Beach Tennis Center.

        Wheeled Device: a device propelled by wheels by human or mechanical power, including, but not limited to, bicycles, roller skates, scooters, Segways, and skateboards. “Wheeled device” does not include cars, trucks, and other motor vehicles that may be legally driven on state roads; baby strollers; wheelchairs; and motorized tricycles and quadricycles assisting those with limited mobility. (Ord. 1551)

 

7.60.010 Entering Tennis Center When Closed to Public.
        A.     It is unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain in any tennis center building, structure, room, yard, court, enclosure or other property, or any portion or area thereof, at any time before or after the hours of operation, or when such building, structure, room, yard, enclosure or other property, or any portion or area thereof, is locked, barred, closed, or otherwise shut off from the use of the public, except with the express consent of the director of parks and recreation or designee thereof.

        B.     This section shall not apply to any duly authorized employee, agent or officer of the City of Seal Beach, when such employee, agent or officer is acting in the scope of his or her duties. (Ord. 1551)

 

7.60.015 Obstructions in Pathways.
        It shall be unlawful for any persons to assemble, collect, or gather together in any tennis center walk, passageway, or pathway, or to occupy the same so that the free passage or use thereof by persons passing along the walk, passageway, or pathway is obstructed. (Ord. 1551)

 

7.60.020 Animals Prohibited.
        No person shall bring any animal, as defined in Section 7.05.005 of this code, onto the tennis center property, and no person owning or having care, charge, control, custody, or possession of any animal shall allow the animal on the tennis center property. The foregoing shall not apply to service animals assisting the disabled in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1551)

 

7.60.025 Wheeled Devices Prohibited.
        No person shall ride or operate a wheeled device on the tennis center property, including the parking lot, if signs prohibiting such activity have been conspicuously posted at the main entrance. (Ord. 1551)

 

7.60.030 Parking Lot Restrictions.
        A.     It is unlawful to park or leave parked any vehicle in the tennis center parking lot between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 4:00 a.m.

        B.     The speed limit for the tennis center parking lot shall be 10 miles per hour. (Ord. 1551)

 

 

7.60.035 Prohibited Conduct.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts on the tennis center property:

        A.     To climb, scale, perch, sit, or stand upon or tamper with any pole, lighting standard, wire, fence, wall building, or structure rooftop.

        B.     To cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure.

        C.    To cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer.

        D.    To indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening or indecent conduct, or threatening or indecent language. (Ord. 1551)

Title 8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1687. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 8.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 8.10 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 8.15 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 8.20 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING LOTS
Chapter 8.25 PARKING CITATIONS

Chapter 8.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.05.005 Definitions.
        A.     For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Central Traffic District: all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: that area bounded by Pacific Coast Highway (101), Eighth Street, Tenth Street and Ocean Avenue.

        2.     Curb: the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether or not marked by curbing construction. “Curb” does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies.

        3.     Divisional Island: a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing streams of traffic.

        4.     Holidays: New Year’s Day (January 1st); Washington’s Birthday (3rd Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4th); Labor Day (1st Monday in September); Veterans’ Day (November 11th); Thanksgiving Day (4th Thursday in November); the calendar day following Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Day (December 25th).

        5.     Loading Zone: the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

        6.     Parking Meter: a mechanical device installed adjacent to a parking space for the purpose of controlling the period of vehicle occupancy of such space.

        7.     Parkway: that portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk.

        8.     Passenger Loading Zone: the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

        9.     Police Officer: an officer of the city police department or a person authorized to direct or regulate traffic, to issue parking tickets or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. “Police officer” includes community service officer and police aide.

        10.   Stop: when required, means complete cessation of movement.

        11.   Stop or Stand: when prohibited, means any cessation of movement of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, traffic control device or traffic signal.

        12.   Street: a way or place of whatever nature, maintained by the city and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Street” includes highway.

        B.     Any word or phrase used in this title that is defined in the Vehicle Code and not defined in subsection A of this section, shall have the meaning set forth in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.010 Applicability to Bicycle and Animal Riders.
        Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall have all the rights and be subjected to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions that by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.015 Applicability to Private Roads.
 

        A.     The city council finds and declares that the public interest will best be served by the application of this title and the Vehicle Code to the following roads and areas due to their proximity to or connection with highways and streets: Surfside Avenue; Pacific Avenue; Seal Way; Phillips Avenue; and each street, road, lane, drive, place, way, and parking area within the respective boundaries of Rossmoor Business Center and Sunset Aquatic Park, and Leisure World.

        B.     The city will enforce traffic laws on the roads and areas listed in subsection A of this section and such roads and areas shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code. The city shall not be deemed to assume any responsibility or liability for the maintenance or care of such roads and areas. (Ord. 1680; Ord. 1589; Ord. 1566; Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.020 Obedience to Traffic Directions.
        A.     No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer or member of the fire department.

        B.     No person shall perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer or member of the fire department. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.025 Obedience to Traffic Control Devices.
        No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the instructions of any official traffic control device unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.030 Interference with Enforcement.
        No person shall interfere with any police officer in the enforcement of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by a police officer in connection with the enforcement of parking regulations shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute unlawful interference. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.035 Traffic Control Signs Prerequisite for Enforcement.
        No provision of the Vehicle Code or this title for which traffic control signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless such signs are in place. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.05.040 Wheeled Devices Prohibition.
        A.     Wheeled Device. For the purpose of this section, a “wheeled device” is any wheeled device propelled by human or mechanical power. “Wheeled device” includes without limitation: bicycles, roller skates, scooters, segways, and skateboards. “Wheeled devices” does not include: cars, trucks and equivalent vehicles; baby strollers; shopping carts utilized for transportation of goods; wheelchairs; and motorized tricycles and motorized quadricycles utilized by persons otherwise unable to move about as pedestrians by reason of physical disability.

        B.     Prohibition. No person shall ride or operate a wheeled device in any of the following locations:

        1.     City sidewalks, unless authorized by Seal Beach Municipal Code Section 8.10.040.

        2.     Public property other than sidewalks where signs prohibiting such activity are conspicuously posted.

        3.     Privately owned sidewalks used for pedestrian traffic where signs prohibiting such activity are conspicuously posted.

        C.    Infraction. Any person who rides or operates a wheeled device in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1608; Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

8.45.045 Golf Carts on Leisure World Streets.
        A.     The privately-owned streets within Leisure World are streets within the jurisdiction of the City of Seal Beach and, for the purposes of this section, shall be collectively referred to herein as the “Leisure World streets.” The Leisure World streets are located adjacent to and provide access to the golf course in Leisure World. Further, the Leisure World streets are located between the golf course and the place where golf carts are parked or stored. The Leisure World streets are all within one mile of the golf course, and are within and bounded in part by a real estate development offering golf facilities. The Leisure World streets are designed and constructed so as to safely permit the use of regular vehicular traffic and also the driving of golf carts on the Leisure World streets.

        B.     Pursuant to the authority of Vehicle Code Section 21115 the city council hereby designates the Leisure World streets as streets for the combined use of vehicles and golf carts.

        C.    Pursuant to the authority of Vehicle Code Section 21115, the following rules and regulations are hereby enacted for the use of vehicles and the use of golf carts on the Leisure World streets. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle or golf cart to be operated in violation of the following rules and regulations, which shall have the force of law:

 

        1.     Golf carts on the Leisure World streets shall not travel faster than the posted speed limit on any street, and in no event faster than 25 mph.

        2.     Where feasible and safe to do so, golf carts shall travel at the far right of every traffic lane.

        3.     Golf cart crossings shall be located and posted with signs that meet the approval of the City’s Traffic Engineer.

        4.     If a golf cart is operated on the Leisure World streets during darkness, the golf cart shall be subject to the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 24001.5 regarding equipment. (Ord. 1680)

 

8.05.050 Exemptions.
        A.     The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to the following when operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call: vehicles operated by the police or fire department; a public ambulance; or any public utility vehicle or private ambulance that has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle. This exemption does not relieve the operator of any such vehicle from the obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or from the consequences of willful disregard for the safety of others.

        B.     The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while in use for construction or repair work, or to any United States Post Office Department vehicle while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail. (Ord. 1680; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 8.10 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1687. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


8.10.005 Traffic Division.
        A.     The traffic division shall be under the control of a police officer appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police.

        B.     In addition to any other powers and duties specified in this title, the traffic division shall do the following:

        1.     Enforce traffic laws.

        2.     Investigate traffic accidents.

        3.     Cooperate with the traffic engineer and other city officers in the administration of traffic laws and the development of traffic condition improvements.

        4.     Maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.

        5.     Annually prepare a traffic safety report for the city council. Such report shall contain the following information regarding incidents in the city:

        a.     The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed or injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data.

        b.     The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.010 Traffic Engineer.
        A.     The director of public works shall serve as the traffic engineer or shall designate a city employee to do so. Alternatively, the city council may contract with a consultant to serve as traffic engineer.

        B.     In addition to any other powers and duties specified in this title, the traffic engineer shall do the following:

        1.     Determine the installation, proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and traffic signals.

        2.     Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures.

        3.     Regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable in the district or at intersections. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.015 One-Way Streets and Alleys.
        Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.020 Traffic Direction by Police and Fire Officials.
        A.     Police officers may direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of a fire or other emergency, police officers or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions require.

        B.     At places where large numbers of people and vehicles have gathered, a police officer may prohibit any person from parking a vehicle or using a street or sidewalk. A police officer also may direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.025 Unauthorized Traffic Direction.
        No person, other than a police officer or member of the fire department, shall direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal. This prohibition does not preclude any person from operating a mechanical push button signal erected by order of the traffic engineer. This prohibition also does not preclude traffic direction by means of a traffic control plan approved by the traffic engineer. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.030 Vehicle Removal.
        Any police officer may remove a vehicle under the following circumstances:

        A.     The vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or other city property for 72 or more consecutive hours in violation of this title.

        B.     The vehicle has been abandoned, as determined pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22523.

        C.    The vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking is prohibited by city law and signs are posted giving notice of the removal.

        D.    The vehicle is parked on a street in violation of this code and the use of the street, or a portion thereof, is necessary for cleaning, repair, or construction, or for the installation of underground utilities. This provision shall apply only if signs giving notice that the vehicle may be removed are erected or placed upon such vehicle at least 24 hours prior to its removal. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.035 Unauthorized Curb Painting.
        No unauthorized person shall paint any street or curb surface. This prohibition does not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface in accordance with city law. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.040 Bicycle Riding on Sidewalk.
        The traffic engineer may post signs permitting bicycle riding on sidewalks at locations where riding in the street would be hazardous. Any person may ride a bicycle on a sidewalk where such a sign has been posted. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.045 Driving Vehicle Across New Pavement or Marking.
        A.     No person shall drive a vehicle over newly made pavement in a street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place giving notice of such restriction.

        B.     No person shall drive a vehicle over a freshly painted marker in a street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place giving notice of such restriction. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.050 Limited Curb Parking.
        A.     For purposes of this section, the term “limited curb parking space” shall mean an area that is open for lawful parking along side of, and adjacent to, a curb; and is not of sufficient length to accommodate parking of 2 vehicles.

        B.     Any person seeking to park a vehicle in a limited curb parking space, whose vehicle arrives at the space prior to any other vehicle, and who proceeds beyond the space less than 10 feet for the purpose of backing into the space, shall have the right-of-way over another person seeking to drive a vehicle directly into the space. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.055 Installation of Traffic Control Devices.
        A.     The traffic engineer shall place and maintain official traffic control devices as required to accomplish the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code.

        B.     The traffic engineer may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as deemed appropriate for traffic regulation. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.060 Traffic Control Device Hours of Operation.
        The traffic engineer shall determine the days and hours during which each traffic control device shall be in effect except in those instances where such period is specified by law. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.065 Installation of Traffic Signals.
        A.     The traffic engineer shall place and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the traffic flow be alternately interrupted and released in order to relieve congestion or to protect life or property from hazard.

        B.     Street name signs shall be visible to the principal flow of traffic wherever the traffic engineer places and maintains an official traffic signal at an intersection. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.070 Lane Markings.
        The traffic engineer shall mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles. The traffic engineer may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.075 Distinctive Roadway Markings.
        The traffic engineer shall place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the traffic volume or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings. Such markings shall have the same effect as similar markings by the California Department of Public Works. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.080 Removal of Traffic Control Devices.
        The traffic engineer may remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not required by the Vehicle Code or this chapter. Such removal, relocation or discontinuation shall be based on a determination that the conditions that warranted the device are no longer applicable. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.085 Removal of Obstructive Shrubbery.
        The traffic engineer shall remove or reduce in height any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway and obstructing the view of an intersection or street traffic approaching an intersection. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.090 Turning Markers.
        The traffic engineer may place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections to indicate the course to be traveled by turning vehicles. The traffic engineer may indicate multiple lanes of traffic from which vehicles may make right or left hand turns. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.095 Restricted Turn Signs.
        A.     The traffic engineer may determine intersections at which vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours.

        B.     The traffic engineer may determine intersections at which vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red light or stop signal. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.100 Establishment and Use of Crosswalks.
        A.     The traffic engineer shall establish and maintain crosswalks at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such other intersections as deemed appropriate. Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalks shall be established in any block that is less than 400 feet in length.

        B.     No pedestrian in the central traffic district or in any business district shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.105 Driving or Leaving Vehicles on Private Property.
        No person shall drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon private property without the permission of the owner or legal occupant of such property. (Ord. No. 1577; Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.110 Advertising Vehicles.
        A.     Definition. For purposes of this section, the term “advertising vehicle” shall mean a motor vehicle designed or used for the primary purpose of displaying advertisements.

        B.     Prohibition. No person shall operate an advertising vehicle within the central traffic district.

        C.    Exemptions. Subsection B of this section does not apply to the following:

        1.     Vehicles displaying an advertisement or business notice of its owner so long as such vehicle is engaged in the usual business or regular work of the owner and not used merely, mainly or primarily to display advertisements.

        2.     Buses.

        3.     Taxicabs. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.115 Animal Drawn Vehicles.
        No person shall drive an animal drawn vehicle in the city except as authorized by a parade permit or a special event permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.120 Truck Routes.
        A.     Designation. The city council may by resolution designate streets and parts of streets as truck routes for movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of 3 tons.

        B.     Prohibition. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of 3 tons on any street that is not part of a truck route designated by city resolution and indicated by appropriate signs.

        C.    Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following:

        1.     A vehicle that is subject to Public Utilities Code Sections 1031 to 1045, inclusive.

        2.     A commercial vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained.

        3.     A vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily used in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.125 Commercial Vehicles.
        The traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs to indicate those streets on which commercial vehicles have been prohibited by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 8.10.130 Maximum Speed.
        A.     The city council has determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by state law outside of business and residence districts is more than is reasonable or safe. Except as otherwise provided in subsection B, the prima facie speed limit for all streets and portions of streets is declared to be 25 miles per hour.

        B.     Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following:

        1.     Any state or federal highway posted with a speed limit by authority of that jurisdiction.

        2.     Any of the following streets or portion of the following streets, upon the basis that pursuant to engineering and traffic surveys, for safe operation of vehicles on the following streets, the prima facie speed limit shall be set forth on the following designated streets or portion thereof, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22358:

 

 

NAME OF STREET OR PORTION THEREOF

DECLARED PRIMA FACIE SPEED ZONE

Adolfo Lopez Drive from Seal Beach Boulevard to end

30 miles per hour

Almond Avenue from Oleander Street to Violet Street

30 miles per hour

Balboa Drive from Pacific Coast Highway to Bolsa Avenue

25 miles per hour

Bolsa Avenue from Pacific Coast Highway to Seal Beach Boulevard

30 miles per hour

College Park Drive from Harvard Lane to west city limits

25 miles per hour

Electric Avenue from Seal Beach Boulevard to 6th Street

30 miles per hour

First Street from Marina Drive to Ocean Avenue

30 miles per hour

First Street from Marina Drive to Pacific Coast Highway

40 miles per hour

Lampson Avenue from Seal Beach Boulevard to Basswood Street

45 miles per hour

Lampson Avenue from Basswood Street to east city limits

45 miles per hour

Marina Drive from Pacific Coast Highway to west city limits

30 miles per hour

North Gate Road from Seal Beach Boulevard to Leisure World Gate (end)

35 miles per hour

Ocean Avenue from 1st Street to 5th Street

25 miles per hour

Rossmoor Center Way from Seal Beach Boulevard to west city limits

25 miles per hour

Seal Beach Boulevard from Pacific Coast Highway to Electric Avenue

30 miles per hour

Seal Beach Boulevard from Pacific Coast Highway to Bolsa Avenue

50 miles per hour

Seal Beach Boulevard from Bolsa Avenue to Forrestal Lane

50 miles per hour

Seal Beach Boulevard from Forrestal Lane to Westminster Avenue

50 miles per hour

Seal Beach Boulevard from Westminster Avenue to I-405

50 miles per hour

Seal Beach Boulevard from I-405 to north city limits

40 miles per hour

Westminster Avenue from west city limits to Road “B”

50 miles per hour

Westminster Avenue from Road “B” to Kitts Highway

45 miles per hour

Westminster Avenue from Kitts Highway to east city limits

60 miles per hour

 

        3.     Any other street or portion of any other street posted with signs designating a greater speed as determined by the city council based upon an engineering and traffic survey, in which case the posted speed shall be the prima facie speed limit.

        4.     Streets, portions of streets, alleys or other areas for which a lesser speed is dictated by law. (Ord. 1654; Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.135 Movement of Oversize Vehicles.
        A.     No person shall operate in a street a vehicle, combination of vehicles, mobile equipment or load that weighs or measures in excess of the weight, width, height or length permitted by the Vehicle Code unless an oversize vehicle permit has been obtained from the director of public works.

        B.     Oversize vehicle permit applications shall be filed on a city-provided form and shall include the following information:

        1.     Name and address of the applicant.

        2.     Description of the vehicle and load to be operated or moved.

        3.     Highways over which the permit is requested.

        4.     Date, hour, duration and number of trips to be made.

        5.     Number and location of stops to be made.

        C.    The fee for oversize vehicle permits shall be established by city council resolution.

        D.    The director of public works may issue an oversize vehicle permit upon making a finding that the subject streets and appurtenant property can withstand such use. The permit shall specify the period of time for which it is valid; the routes to be traveled; the date, hour and number of trips allowed; the stops permitted; and such other terms and conditions as are imposed to promote the public safety and convenience. Permits shall be carried during the operation of the oversize vehicle and shall be available for inspection by city representatives.

        E.     Each person issued an oversize vehicle permit shall execute a city-provided indemnification agreement.

        F.     Decisions of the director of public works involving an oversize vehicle permit shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager shall be hearing officer for the purpose of such procedure. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.10.140 Railroad Crossings.
        A.     No person shall cause or permit any railway train, railway car or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than 10 minutes.

        B.     Subsection A of this section does not apply to railway trains, railway cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident that requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 8.15 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
8.15.005 Application of Chapter.
        A.     The provisions of this chapter prohibiting stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times herein specified except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or this code. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.010 No Parking Areas.
        General. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, park or leave standing such vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, traffic officer, or traffic sign or signal:

        1.     In an intersection;

        2.     In a crosswalk;

        3.     Within a divisional island, unless authorized by signage or markings;

        4.     In such no parking or restricted parking areas as designated by the city;

        5.     In such no parking or restricted parking areas as may be defined, designated or established by city council resolution;

        6.     In violation of any provision of this code or applicable state law;

        7.     On a sidewalk;

        8.     On any portion of the area extending from a roadway edge of the curb (or from the highest point of a rolled curb) to the sidewalk;

        9.     In any area where stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited as indicated by signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        10.   In any area where the stopping, standing or parking of the vehicle would block the entrance to a garage or driveway. This provision shall not apply if the owner or occupant thereof has granted permission; and

        11.   In the Surfside Colony in any area between the white lines where stopping, standing or parking of the vehicle would constitute a hazard. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1566; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.015 Stop Signs.
        The traffic engineer shall erect and maintain a stop sign at each street intersecting a through street or portion thereof, at the entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at railroad grade crossings where a stop is required. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.020 Marking of Parking Spaces.
        A.     The traffic engineer may install and maintain parking space markings adjacent to curbings to indicate where parking is permitted.

        B.     No vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single parking space. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.025 Storage of Vehicles on Street or City Property.
        A.     For purposes of this section, the following locations are deemed to be commercial areas:

        1.     Main Street between Ocean Avenue and Pacific Coast Highway;

        2.     Ocean Avenue between 8th Street and 10th Street;

        3.     Central Avenue between 8th Street and 10th Street;

        4.     Electric Avenue between 8th Street and 10th Street;

        5.     Pacific Coast Highway.

        B.     For purposes of this section, any location that is outside of a commercial area as defined in subsection A above, is deemed to be a non-commercial area.

        C.    No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on a street for 72 or more consecutive hours. Vehicles parked longer than 72 hours may be removed from a city street.

        D.    Any vehicle in a commercial area that has not moved a minimum distance of 150 feet after 72 consecutive hours shall be deemed to have remained stationary.

        E.     Vehicles that remain stationary longer than 72 hours may be cited and removed by the Police Department. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.030 Vehicle Servicing on Street.
        A.     No person shall construct, repair or grease any vehicle or part thereof upon a street. This provision does not apply to emergency repairs.

        B.     No person shall wash or polish any vehicle or part thereof upon a street. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.035 Parking Adjacent to Schools.
        The traffic engineer may erect signs to prohibit parking adjacent to school property when deemed necessary to prevent traffic interference or the creation of a hazard. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.040 Parking on Narrow Streets.
        The traffic engineer may place signs and markings to prohibit parking upon any street having a roadway width less than 20 feet, or upon one side of any street having a roadway width less than 30 feet. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.045 Parking on Grades.
        No person shall stop, leave standing or park any unattended vehicle on a street having a grade exceeding 3% unless the wheels of such vehicle are blocked by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.050 Emergency Parking Signs.
        The traffic engineer may place temporary signs to prohibit parking of vehicles on streets and alleys during the holding of authorized parades or special events. Such signs shall be promptly removed after the parade or special event. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.055 Short Term Parking Zones.
        The traffic engineer may designate short term parking zones. Unless otherwise permitted by signs, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a short term parking zone between the hours designated by the traffic engineer on any day for longer than the prescribed period. For purposes of this section, the term “short term parking zone” means an area in which signs, parking meters or curb markings prescribe a short term period for parking of vehicles.

        Any vehicle that has not moved a distance of 150 feet in commercial areas preceding the short term parking time limit shall be deemed to have remained stationary. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.060 No Stopping Zones.
        The traffic engineer may designate no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.065 Parking on City Property.
        A.     The traffic engineer may erect and maintain signs to restrict or prohibit the driving or parking of vehicles on city property.

        B.     The city council may by resolution determine fees and methods of collection for the privilege of public parking on any street, municipal parking lot or other city property. The city council also may by resolution establish provisions for the issuance of parking permits authorizing parking on any street or municipal parking lot without payment of a fee, and appropriate regulations for parking on public property. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.070 Curb Markings.
        The traffic engineer shall utilize the following curb markings to indicate parking regulations:

        A.     Red: no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone that is signed or marked as a bus zone.

        B.     Yellow: no stopping, standing or parking during hours designated by signage for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials. The period of active passenger loading and unloading shall not exceed 3 minutes, and the period of materials loading and unloading shall not exceed 20 minutes.

        C.    White: no stopping, standing during posted hours for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, for a period of time not exceeding 3 minutes. When the zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply only when the theater is open. When the zone is established at a taxicab stand, taxicabs, rideshare vehicles and automobiles for hire may remain in the zone for 20 minutes.

        D.    Green: no stopping, standing or parking between hours and on days designated by city council resolution for a period longer than the time indicated on the curb unless otherwise indicated by signs or curb markings.

        E.     A licensed driver shall be present in or immediately adjacent to any vehicle stopped for the purpose of active loading or unloading passengers or materials. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.075 Loading Zones.
        The traffic engineer may determine and mark loading zones as follows:

        A.     At any place in the central traffic district or any business district.

        B.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

        C.    In no event shall more than half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.080 Parking in Alley.
        A.     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.

        B.     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an alley in a manner that blocks the entrance to a garage. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.085 Parking of Oversize Vehicles.
        A.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Nonmotorized Vehicle: a trailer, camp trailer, semi-trailer or trailer coach as defined in the Vehicle Code.

        2.     Oversize Vehicle: a vehicle or combination of vehicles that exceeds 20 feet in length or 90 inches in width exclusive of projecting lights or devices as allowed by Vehicle Code Sections 35109 and 35110. “Oversize vehicle” does not include a sedan or limousine manufactured expressly for carrying 10 or fewer passengers.

        B.     Prohibitions.

        1.     No person shall park or leave standing an oversize vehicle upon any street between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.

        2.     No person shall park or leave standing upon any street a non-motorized vehicle that has been detached from its motor vehicle.

        3.     No person shall park or leave standing an oversize vehicle in any City parking lot.       

        C.    Exemptions.

        1.     Subsection B of this section does not apply to the following:

        a.     Commercial vehicles making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise.

        b.     Vehicles displaying a valid permit issued by the chief of police.

        2.     Subsection (B)(2) of this section does not apply to vehicles being loaded or unloaded, or if emergency repairs are being made to the vehicle or to an adjacent property.

        D.    Permits. The chief of police or designee may issue temporary permits for the overnight parking of an oversize vehicle or non-motorized vehicle upon making the following findings:

        1.     The proposed parking will not constitute a hazard.

        2.     The proposed parking is necessary due to special circumstances. For purposes of this provision, “special circumstances” includes without limitation:

        a.     The vehicle belongs to a house guest temporarily residing in the city. A permit issued based on this circumstance shall not be valid longer than 14 days.

        b.     The vehicle is newly purchased and a permanent parking place is being arranged. A permit issued based on this circumstance shall not be valid longer than 14 days.

        c.     The vehicle belongs to a new resident and a permanent parking place is being arranged. A permit issued based on this circumstance shall not be valid longer than 14 days.

        d.     The vehicle is used on a daily basis for work and on-premises parking is not reasonably possible. A permit issued based on this circumstance shall not be valid longer than 6 months.

        e.     The proposed parking is necessary for loading or unloading. A permit issued based on this circumstance shall not be valid longer than one day.

        E.     Appeals. Decisions involving the permit provided for in this section shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager or designee shall be hearing officer for the purpose of such procedure, and the decision of the hearing officer shall be final and not subject to further administrative or city appeal. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.090 Truck Parking.
        A.     Prohibitions. No person shall park any commercial vehicle, truck, trailer or truck-trailer combination that exceeds a width of 80 inches on any street for a period longer than 2 hours.

        B.     Exemptions. Subsection A of this section does not apply to vehicles displaying a valid permit issued by the chief of police.

        C.    Permits. The chief of police or designee may issue temporary permits for the parking on a street of a commercial vehicle, truck, trailer or truck-trailer combination that exceeds a width of 80 inches upon making the following findings:

        1.     The proposed parking will not adversely affect the subject neighborhood.

        2.     The proposed parking is necessary due to special circumstances. For purposes of this provision, “special circumstances” means either:

        a.     The vehicle is immobile due to accident or mechanical failure.

        b.     The vehicle is being loaded or unloaded and such work requires more than 2 hours to complete.

        c.     The vehicle is necessary for the performance of a service at an adjacent property and such work requires more than 2 hours to complete.

        D.    Appeals. Decisions involving the permit provided for in this section shall be subject to the administrative review procedure of Chapter 1.20 of this code. The city manager or designee shall be hearing officer for the purpose of such procedure, and the decision of the hearing officer shall be final and not subject to further administrative or city appeal. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.095 Taxicab and Rideshare Vehicle Stands.
        A.     Rideshare. For the purpose of this chapter a rideshare is defined as a vehicle that provides prearranged transportation services for compensation through an Internet-enabled application or digital platform to connect passengers with drivers of vehicles for hire.

        B.     The traffic engineer may determine locations for active passenger loading and unloading for taxicabs, rideshare vehicles or other automobiles identified as “for hire.” The curb surface shall be designated by appropriate signage. When such a loading and unloading zone is designated, taxicabs, rideshare vehicles and other automobiles shall not stop or stand for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers in another location within 1 city block of such designated location.

        C.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab, rideshare vehicle or automobiles identified as “for hire” in a taxicab stand or designated loading and unloading zone. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.100 Surfside Colony Fire Hydrants.
        A.     No person shall stop, leave standing or park a vehicle within 15 feet of the main fire hydrants located within the Surfside Colony at Phillips Avenue and A Row, and Phillips Avenue and C Row, except when the vehicle is attended in the front seat by a licensed driver capable of immediately moving the vehicle.

        B.     No person shall stop, leave standing or park a vehicle within 10 feet of any other fire hydrant within the Surfside Colony unless the vehicle is attended in the front seat by a licensed driver capable of immediately moving the vehicle. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.105 Parking Meters and Zones.
        A.     Parking meter zones are hereby established at the off-street municipal parking lots and along Main Street, Ocean Avenue, Central Avenue and Electric Avenue as delineated on the “City of Seal Beach Parking Meter Zone Map” dated September 23, 2002. Such map is incorporated herein by reference. The city manager or the designee thereof shall cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones.

        B.     The payment to be deposited in parking meters or multispace meters, or by other approved methods of payment, the parking time allowed following deposit of payment, the hours during which such deposits are required, and the days of the week and the weeks of the year during which such deposits are required for paid parking in all zones shall be prescribed by city council resolution.

        C.    Parking meters in the parking meter zones shall be operated according to the posted signs. The parking meter fees for parking meter zones shall be prescribed by city council resolution.

        D.    The payment to be deposited in parking meters or multispace meters, or by other approved methods of payment, the parking time allowed following deposit of payment, the hours during which such deposits are required, and the days of the week and the weeks of the year during which such deposits are required for parking meters in all zones shall be prescribed by city council resolution.

        E.     Parking meters in the parking meter zones shall be operated according to the posted signs. The parking meter fees for parking meter zones shall be prescribed by city council resolution.

        F.     No person shall do any of the following:

        1.     Fail to deposit the parking meter fee immediately after parking a vehicle in a parking meter zone and for the entire time that person has a vehicle parked in the parking meter zone during the parking meter hours of operation.

        2.     Deposit in a parking meter a defaced coin or slug.

        3.     Deface, injure, or tamper with a parking meter.

        4.     Attach a bicycle, newsrack, fabric, handbill, flier, sticker, note, or other article to a parking meter.

        5.     Allow a vehicle owned or operated by such person to remain parked at a paid parking space beyond the expired time.

        6.     Park a vehicle across a line or marking designating a parking meter space.

        7.     Park a vehicle that does not conform to the maximum vehicle length limit applicable to the lot.

        8.     Allow a vehicle parked by such person to remain in a parking meter space after receipt of a citation for failure to pay the parking meter fee. A violation of this provision shall occur after passage, from the issuance of the citation, of the parking time limit of the lot.

        9.     Purchase time for paid parking using any method of payment for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space or zone adjacent to which said parking meter is placed.

        G.    The parking of a vehicle at a paid parking space beyond the expired payment time shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked in such space longer than permitted by this section.

        H.    Mechanical failure of a parking meter shall be a defense to a citation for failure to pay the parking meter fee, provided that the person cited is not responsible for such failure. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.110 Parking Permits.
        A.     The City Manager or designee shall be authorized and directed to issue, upon written applications, parking permits. Each such permit shall be designated by city council resolution to reflect the particular parking permit parking district as well as the license plate number of the motor vehicle for which it is issued. Consistent with this chapter, the city manager or designee is authorized to issue such written rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to govern the process and terms for the issuance of parking permits. Rules and regulations shall be available for public review at City Hall and at the Police Department during normal business hours. This section is subject to the following restrictions:

        1.     On Main Street, Ocean Avenue from Eighth Street to Tenth Street, and Central Avenue from Eighth Street to Tenth Street, residential parking permits may allow 2-hour parking.

        2.     In the municipal parking lots on Main Street, residential parking permits may allow parking between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        3.     In the Eighth Street city employee parking lot south of Central Avenue, residential parking permits may allow parking between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        4.     In the library lot, parking permits may allow residential parking between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        B.     Parking permits may be issued in the following categories:

        1.     Residential Parking Permit. Any city resident may purchase a residential parking permit. Applicants shall submit their name, address, proof of residence and the make, model and license number of each vehicle. Permits shall be displayed or validated as directed by the city.

        2.     Guest Parking Permit. Any city resident may purchase guest parking permits. Applicants shall submit their name, address and proof of residence. Permits shall be displayed or validated as designated by the city. Permits shall be valid within timeframes designated by the city.

        3.     Merchant/Employee Parking Permit. Any merchant or employee working within the Old Town area may purchase a merchant/employee parking permit. Applicants shall submit their name, business address, proof of employment and the make, model and license number of the vehicle. Permits shall be displayed or validated as directed by the city. This permit shall be valid for parking on certain streets or parking lots as designated by the city.

        C.    Parking permits shall be valid within timeframes designated by the city or until a change of ownership of the vehicle for which it is issued, whichever comes first.

        D.    A parking permit shall be destroyed by the permittee upon a change in ownership of the vehicle for which it issued or a change in address by the permittee. The permittee shall promptly report such destruction to the city.

        E.     Parking permit fees shall be as set by city council resolution.

        F.     The following acts shall constitute fraudulent use of a permit punishable by a fine to be prescribed by city council resolution and/or revocation of any permit currently held:

        1.     For any person to falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to furnish false information in an application therefor;

        2.     For any person holding a valid residential parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit use or display of or to use or display such permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued;

        3.     For any person to copy, reproduce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or permits;

        4.     For any person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking applicable in a residential parking permit area;

        5.     For any person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to sell, give or exchange said permit to any other person. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.115 Diagonal Parking Zones.
        A.     On any of the streets or portions of streets established by city council resolution as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle in a manner that interferes with vehicles traveling in the driving lane or to park any vehicle except:

        1.     To park a vehicle in any orientation other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by signs or markings, or in any paid parking space in any orientation other than with the front of the vehicle closest to the parking meter or curb, unless the space is expressly designated for “back in only” parking.

        2.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within 6 inches of such curb.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the other applicable provisions of this chapter shall be complied with. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.15.120 Re-Parking Restrictions in Timed Parking Zones.
        On-street parking on a city street. A vehicle will be deemed to have been stopped, parked or left standing for longer than the time allowed in this section, if it has not been moved at least 150 feet in commercial areas following the expiration of the posted time limit in a timed parking zone. A vehicle may not re-park sooner than a “timeout period” (equal to double the posted time limit) following the time at which a vehicle was initially parked. (Ord. 1672)

 

8.15.125 Obstruction of Enforcement.
        No person shall obstruct the enforcement of this chapter by any officer or employee of the city by removing, obliterating or concealing any distinguishing mark placed by any such officer or employee on any vehicle in the course of enforcing any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1672)

Chapter 8.20 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING LOTS
8.20.005 Damaging Equipment Prohibited.
        No person shall damage any device or equipment, including, without limitation, control gates, pay stations, signs, and parking meters, used in the operation of a motor vehicle parking lot. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.20.010 Parking Without Payment Prohibited.
        A.     No person shall drive a motor vehicle into a motor vehicle parking lot without payment of a required entrance fee.

        B.     No person shall park a motor vehicle in a motor vehicle parking lot without payment of a required parking fee.

        C.    No person shall park a motor vehicle in a motor vehicle parking lot without a valid parking permit properly displayed or validated as directed by the city. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1590; Ord. 1515)

 

8.20.015 Head in Parking Only.
        Vehicles shall be parked with the rear of the vehicle oriented closest to the traffic lane and within the space indicated unless otherwise specified by signage. (Ord. 1672)

 

8.20.020 Sunset Aquatic Park Parking Restriction.
        A.     No person shall park any vehicle within Sunset Aquatic Park between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the vehicle contains a properly displayed valid parking permit, issued by the operator of the Sunset Aquatic Park. Such permit shall be displayed or validated as directed by the city.

        B.     No person shall park a camper, recreational vehicle or vehicle and boat combination at any time within Sunset Aquatic Park. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.20.025 Electric Vehicle Parking Stalls.
        Each electric vehicle parking stall will be clearly marked with signage. When so marked, it is unlawful to park in a designated electric vehicle charging station parking stall unless the vehicle is actively charging. (Ord. 1672)

Chapter 8.25 PARKING CITATIONS
8.25.005 Definitions.
        A.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Contestant: an operator or registered owner who contests a parking citation.

        2.     Department: California Department of Motor Vehicles.

        3.     Hearing Examiner: a qualified individual, as set forth in Vehicle Code Section 40215, appointed or contracted by the city to adjudicate parking citation contests administratively.

        4.     Issuing Agency: the city or its authorized agent that issues parking citations.

        5.     Issuing Officer: a peace officer, as defined in Penal Code Section 830 et seq., or other person authorized to issue a parking citation.

        6.     Operator: an individual driving or in possession of a vehicle at the time a parking citation is issued.

        7.     Parking Citation: a citation that gives notice of a parking, equipment or other vehicle violation and the right to elect to pay the parking penalty for the violation or contest the citation.

        8.     Parking Penalty: the fine authorized by law for the particular violation, including assessments authorized by the Vehicle Code, and any late payment penalty and costs of collection as provided by law.

        9.     Processing Agency: the city or its authorized agent that processes parking citations and issues notices of delinquent parking citations.

        10.   Registered Owner: the person registered with the department as having ownership of a particular vehicle.

        11.   Vehicle: any self-propelled vehicle operated or suitable for operation on a highway.

        B.     Any word or phrase used in this chapter that is defined in the Vehicle Code and not defined in subsection A shall have the meaning set forth in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.010 Establishment of Parking Penalties.
        Parking penalties shall be established by city council resolution. All parking penalties received by the processing agency shall accrue to the benefit of the city. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.015 Processing Agency.
        A.     The city may function as the processing agency. Alternatively, in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 40200.5, the city may contract with the county, a private vendor or with any other city or county processing agency for processing agency services. Any such contract shall provide for monthly distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except amounts payable to the county pursuant to Government Code Section 76000 et seq. and amounts payable to the department pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 4763.

        B.     The processing agency shall prepare an audited report at the end of each fiscal year setting forth the number of cases processed, and all sums received and distributed, together with any other information that may be specified by the city or its authorized issuing agency or the state controller. The report is a public record and shall be delivered to the city and its authorized issuing agency. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.020 Citation Process.
        Parking citations shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures:

        A.     If a vehicle is unattended during the time of the violation, the issuing officer shall securely attach to the vehicle a parking citation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the Vehicle Code, Public Resources Code or this code, or the federal statute or regulation, that has been violated; the date; the approximate time of the violation; the location of the violation; a statement indicating that payment is required to be made not later than 21 days from the date of the citation issuance; and the procedure for the registered owner or operator to deposit the parking penalty or contest the citation. The parking citation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date if they are visible; the last 4 digits of the vehicle identification number if they are readable through the windshield; the color of the vehicle; and, if possible, the make of the vehicle.

        B.     The parking citation shall be accompanied by a written notice of: the parking penalty amount due for that violation; the address of the person authorized to receive a deposit of the parking penalty; a statement in bold print that payment of the parking penalty for the parking violation may be sent through the mail; and instructions on obtaining information on the procedures to contest the citation.

        C.    The parking citation shall be served by attaching it to the vehicle either under the windshield wiper or in another conspicuous place upon the vehicle so as to be easily observed by the person in charge of the vehicle upon the return of that person.

        D.    Once the parking citation is prepared and attached to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the citation with the processing agency.

        E.     If, during the issuance of the parking citation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driven away prior to attachment of the citation to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the citation with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail a copy of the citation to the registered owner.

        F.     If, within 21 days after the parking citation is attached to the vehicle, the issuing officer or the issuing agency determines that, in the interest of justice, the citation should be cancelled, the issuing agency shall notify the processing agency to cancel the citation. The reason for the cancellation shall be set forth in writing.

        G.    If, after a copy of the parking citation is attached to the vehicle, the issuing officer determines that there is incorrect data on the citation, including, without limitation, the date or time, the issuing officer may indicate in writing on a form attached to the original citation, the necessary correction to allow for the timely entry of the citation on the processing agency’s data system. A copy of the correction shall be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.025 Termination Upon Uncontested Payment.
        If the parking penalty is received by the processing agency and there is no contest as to that parking violation, all proceedings as to that parking citation shall terminate. (Ord. 1515)

8.25.030 Notice of Delinquent Citation.
        A.     If payment of the parking penalty is not received by the processing agency by the date fixed on the parking citation, the processing agency shall deliver to the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking citation. Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking citation may be made by personal service or by first-class mail addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle as shown on the records of the department.

        B.     The notice of delinquent parking citation shall contain the information required to be given with the original parking citation. The notice of delinquent parking citation shall also contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking penalty or contests the citation within 21 days from the date of issuance of the citation or 14 days after the mailing the notice of delinquent parking citation or completes and files an affidavit of nonliability, the renewal of the vehicle registration shall be contingent upon compliance with the notice of delinquent parking citation.

        C.    The notice of delinquent parking citation shall contain, or be accompanied with, an affidavit of nonliability and information of what constitutes nonliability, information as to the effect of executing the affidavit and instructions for returning the affidavit to the issuing agency.

        D.    If the registered owner, by appearance or by mail, makes payment to the processing agency within 21 days from the date of issuance of the citation or 14 days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking citation, the parking penalty shall consist solely of the amount of the original penalty.

        E.     If the description of the vehicle on the parking citation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registration card for that vehicle, and the processing agency is satisfied that the vehicle has not been incorrectly described due to the intentional switching of license plates, the processing agency shall, on written request of a person who has received a notice of delinquent parking citation, cancel the notice of parking violation without the necessity of an appearance by the requestor. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.035 Copies of Citation.
        The processing agency shall mail or otherwise provide to the registered owner, or the registered owner’s agent, a copy of the original parking citation. The fee for such copy shall be in amount set by city council resolution. Until the issuing agency or processing agency complies with a request to provide a copy of the parking citation, the processing agency may not proceed pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22651(i), 22651.7 or 40220. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.040 Affidavit of Nonliability.
        A.     If the affidavit of nonliability is returned to the processing agency within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking citation together with proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer, which identifies the rentee or lessee and provides the driver’s license number, name and address of the rentee or lessee, the processing agency shall serve or mail to the rentee or lessee identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking citation. If payment is not received within 21 days from the date of issuance of the parking citation or 14 days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking citation, the processing agency may institute proceedings to collect the parking penalty.

        B.     If an affidavit of nonliability is returned with evidence that the registered owner has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation, the processing agency shall obtain verification from the department that the registered owner has complied with Vehicle Code Section 5602. If the registered owner has complied with that statute, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of delinquent parking citation with respect to the registered owner. If the registered owner has not complied with that statute, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation shall be paid in full or contested pursuant to this chapter. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency may institute proceedings to collect the parking penalty. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.045 Termination Upon Payment After Notice of Delinquent Citation.
        A.     If the registered owner or operator deposits the parking penalty with the processing agency after a notice of delinquent parking citation has been issued, the processing agency shall:

        1.     Deliver to the person making the deposit a copy of one of the following: the notice of delinquent parking citation; a true and correct abstract containing the information set forth in the parking citation if the citation was issued electronically; or an electronically reproduced listing of the citation information presented in a notice of delinquent parking citation.

        2.     Record in the issuing agency’s records the name, address and driver’s license number of the person actually given the copy.

        3.     Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking citation has been filed with the department and whether a civil judgment has been entered.

        B.     If the notice of delinquent parking citation has not been filed with the department and a civil judgment has not been entered, and payment of the parking penalty together with any administrative service fee of the processing agency for costs of service and any applicable assessments is received, then the proceedings shall terminate as to that parking citation.

        C.    If the notice of delinquent parking citation has been filed with the department, has been returned under subdivision (b) or (c) of Vehicle Code Section 4760 or Section 4764, and payment of the parking penalty together with any administrative service fee of the processing agency for costs of service and any applicable assessments is received, the proceedings shall terminate.       

        D.    If the notice of delinquent parking citation has been filed with the department and has not been returned under Vehicle Code Sections 4760, 4762 and 4764, and payment of the parking penalty for, and any applicable costs of, service in connection with civil debt collection, is received by the processing agency, the processing agency shall do the following:

        1.     Deliver a certificate of payment to the person making the payment.

        2.     Immediately transmit the payment information to the department in the manner prescribed by the department.

        3.     Terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking citation.

        4.     Transmit for deposit all parking penalties and assessments in accordance with law. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.050 Review Process.
        A.     Initial Review. For a period of 21 days from the issuance of a parking citation, or 14 days from the mailing of a notice of delinquent parking citation, a person may request an initial review of the citation or the notice by the issuing agency. The request for initial review may be made by telephone, in writing or in person and there shall be no charge for the initial review. If, following the initial review, the issuing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur, that the registered owner was not responsible for the violation, or that extenuating circumstances make dismissal of the citation appropriate in the interests of justice, then the issuing agency shall cancel the parking citation or the notice of delinquent parking citation. The issuing agency shall advise the processing agency of the cancellation. Either the issuing agency or the processing agency shall mail the results of the initial review to the contestant.

        B.     Administrative Hearing—In General. If a contestant is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, such person may request an administrative hearing on the violation no later than 21 days following the mailing of the results of the initial review. The request may be made by telephone, in writing or in person. Before the expiration of the period for requesting an administrative hearing, the contestant shall deposit with the processing agency the amount of the parking penalty and shall file, on a processing agency issued form, a written explanation of the grounds for appeal. The processing agency may waive the deposit requirement upon satisfactory proof by the contestant of an inability to pay the parking penalty due. The administrative hearing shall be held within 90 days of the hearing request; provided, however, that the contestant may request one continuance, not to exceed 21 days.

        C.    Administrative Hearing—Elements.

        1.     The contestant shall have the choice of an administrative hearing by mail or in person. An in-person hearing shall be conducted within the city.

        2.     If the contestant is a minor, such person may appear at an administrative hearing or admit responsibility for the parking violation without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against the minor in the same manner as against an adult.

        3.     The administrative hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the issuing agency and approved by the city manager. The hearing shall provide an independent, objective, fair and impartial review of contested parking violations.

        4.     The issuing officer is not required to participate in the administrative hearing. The issuing agency is not required to produce any evidence other than the parking citation, or copy thereof, and information received from the department identifying the registered owner of the vehicle. The documentation in proper form shall be prima facie evidence of the violation.

        5.     The hearing examiner’s decision following the administrative hearing may be personally delivered to the contestant or sent by first-class mail.

        6.     Upon determining that a contestant has committed the violation, the hearing examiner may, consistent with the issuing agency’s guidelines, allow payment of the parking penalty in installments. Alternatively, the issuing agency may allow for deferred payment or payment in installments if the contestant provides satisfactory evidence of inability to pay the parking penalty in full. If authorized by city council resolution, the hearing examiner may permit the performance of community service in lieu of payment of a parking penalty. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.055 Collection of Parking Penalty.
        A.     Except as otherwise provided below, the processing agency shall proceed under only one of the following options in order to collect an unpaid parking penalty:

        1.     The processing agency may file an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and service fees with the department for collection with the registration of the vehicle pursuant to the Vehicle Code Section 4760.

        2.     If more than $400 in unpaid parking penalties and fees have been accrued by any person, the processing agency may file proof thereof with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution may be levied and such other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of an unpaid civil judgment entered against a defendant in an action on a debtor. The court may assess costs against a judgment debtor to be paid upon satisfaction of the judgment. The processing agency shall send a notice by first-class mail to the person indicating that a judgment shall be entered for the unpaid penalties, fees and costs and that, after 21 days from the date of the mailing of the notice, the judgment shall have the same effect as an entry of judgment against a judgment debtor. The notice shall also indicate that execution may be levied against the person’s assets, that liens may be placed against the person’s property, that the person’s wages may be garnished, and that other steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, the agency may contract with a collection agency to collect the judgment amount.

        3.     If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for 60 days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the department pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 4760, the processing agency may file proof of unpaid penalties and fees with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment as provided in paragraph 2 of this subsection.

        B.     The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the court relating to a parking citation filed with the department unless the processing agency has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for 60 days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been collected by the department pursuant to the Vehicle Code Section 4760.

        C.    The processing agency shall terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking citation in any of the following cases:

        1.     Upon receipt of collected penalties and administrative fees remitted by the department under Vehicle Code Section 4762 for that notice of delinquent parking citation. The termination under this subsection is by satisfaction of the parking penalty.

        2.     If the notice of delinquent parking citation was returned to the processing agency pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 4764 and 5 years have elapsed since the date of the violation. The termination under this subsection is by the running of a statute of limitation of proceedings.

        3.     The processing agency receives information, which it shall verify with the department, that the penalty has been paid to the department pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 4762. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.060 Penalty Deposit.
        All parking penalties collected, including process service fees and costs related to civil debt collection, shall be deposited to the account of the processing agency, and then remitted to the city, if the city is not also the processing agency. If the city is not the processing agency, then the city shall enter into an agreement with the processing agency for periodic transfer of parking citation receipts, along with a report setting forth the number of cases processed and the sums received. (Ord. 1515)

 

8.25.065 Parking Permits.
        Parking permits issued by the city shall not be issued to applicants unless all outstanding parking penalties and other related fees are paid in full. (Ord. 1515)

Title 9 PUBLIC PROPERTY, PUBLIC WORKS, AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1686. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 9.05 BEACHES AND PIERS
Chapter 9.10 NEWS RACKS
Chapter 9.15 STREET EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 9.20 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Chapter 9.25 FATS, OIL AND GREASE MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Chapter 9.30 SEWERAGE
Chapter 9.35 WATER AND WATER CONSERVATION
Chapter 9.40 TREES
Chapter 9.45 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 9.50 GRADING
Chapter 9.55 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.60 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 9.65 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
Chapter 9.70 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE
Chapter 9.75 PREVAILING WAGES

Chapter 9.05 BEACHES AND PIERS
9.05.005 Definitions.
        A.     For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall mean:

        1.     Anaheim Bay Harbor: the area shown on Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 768, on file with the city clerk, consisting of water of the inner and outer harbors of the U.S. Naval Weapons Station, Seal Beach, California and the contiguous tidal channel and basin as far east as Pacific Coast Highway - 101 Bridge.

        2.     Anchorage Area: a portion of a harbor that has been designated as an anchorage area pursuant to law and approved by the federal government.

        3.     Aquatic Sports Equipment: a belly board, boogie board, kite board, paddleboard, sailboard, skim board, surfboard, surf mat or any other similar device used to propel a person into, on, over, under or through the water.

        4.     Harbor Waters: waters in which the tide ebbs and flows.

        5.     Mooring: any appliance used to secure a water vessel other than a pier or dock, which appliance is not carried aboard the vessel as regular equipment.

        6.     Protected Swimming Area: an area designated by the city council for swimming and marked by lines, floats or buoys.

        7.     Turning Basin: a channel portion that has been designated pursuant to law and approved by the federal government for the purpose of permitting vessels to alter direction.

        8.     Water Vessel: a boat or other watercraft designed to be propelled by machinery, oars, paddles or sail. “Water vessel” does not include any aquatic sport equipment.

        B.     Any word or phrase used in this chapter that is defined in the Harbors and Navigation Code and not defined in subsection A of this section shall have the meaning set forth in the Harbors and Navigation Code. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.010 Lifeguards.
        In addition to any other powers and duties specified in this code, city lifeguards shall do the following:

        A.     Designate locations within aquatic sport areas to be used exclusively by persons using paddleboards, sailboards, surfboards or other specified aquatic sport equipment.

        B.     Restrict or prohibit aquatic activities other than swimming or bathing when necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare as a result of weather conditions, water conditions, special marine events, intensity of use or similar factors.

        C.    Restrict or prohibit fishing from the city beach. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.015 Beachcombing.
        No person shall dig into or under the surface of the city beach, or shall sift, screen or riddle the sand upon the city beach for the purpose of retrieving articles. This prohibition does not apply to city employees and agents engaged in the discharge of official duties. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.020 Beach Closure.
        No person shall be upon, use or occupy the city beach during the closure hours designated by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.025 Encroachments.
        A.     No person shall erect upon the city beach an umbrella or tent that has attached sidewalls unless written authorization has been obtained from the city manager. This prohibition does not apply to umbrellas or tents that are fully exposed to public view on at least 2 sides.

        B.     No person shall erect a permanent volleyball pole, table, fire ring, garden or any similar non-temporary encroachment upon the beach without obtaining written authorization from the city manager. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.030 Public Clothing Changes.
        No person shall dress or undress for the purpose of changing into or from bathing garments in or upon any city property other than a public dressing room designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.035 Littering.
        No person shall scatter, throw, place, discharge, deposit or leave, or cause, suffer or permit to be scattered, thrown, placed, discharged, deposited or left, any refuse matter, waste matter, rubbish, garbage, effluent, carcasses or remains of any creature, or any portion thereof, paper, empty containers, remnants of any food or other waste, trash or broken glass, nails, tacks, dirt, or any substance or material whose presence at such location might result in injury to any person in or upon any public property, including without limitation the beach or pier. Notwithstanding the preceding, a person may discard items in receptacles designated for such items. Violations of this section shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to the administrative citation procedure of this code. (Ord. 1538; Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.040 Sand Removal.
        No person shall remove any sand from the city beach unless written authorization has been obtained from the city manager. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.045 Aquatic Activities.
        A.     That area of the Pacific Ocean within the territorial limits of the city and extending seaward 200 yards from the mean high tide line is hereby designated as a swimming area.

        B.     The navigable waters of the Anaheim Bay and the San Gabriel River are hereby designated as a prohibited swimming area, excluding therefrom any portions thereof designated by the city council as regulated aquatic sports areas.

        C.    No person shall use any aquatic sports equipment in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety or property of another person. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.050 Athletic Activities at Seal Way.
        No person shall use any ball, bat, boomerang, flying saucer, frisbee or similar athletic equipment in the area between Seal Way and the line of palm trees located seaward of Seal Way. Nor shall any person conduct or participate in any sport or game in such area. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.055 Fires.
        No person shall build, light or maintain any barbecue, campfire, cookout or other fire upon the city beach or city pier. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.060 Smoking on Pier or Beach.
        It shall be unlawful to smoke in or on the city pier or any public beach. For purpose of this section, the term “smoke” includes, without limitation, the following: carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco product, weed, plant or another combustible substance; the lighting of a pipe, cigar, cigarette or similar device; and the exhaling of gaseous products and particles created by the use of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or similar device. For the purpose of this section, the term “smoke” also includes the use of an electronic smoking device, which is defined as an electronic or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking and may be referred to as “vaping,” that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. An electronic smoking device includes nicotine or other substances used in or produced by any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, sold, or given as an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, pipe, hookah, or any other similar device or product name or descriptor. The term electronic smoking device does not include any medical inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor, or any other product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of diseases. No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section. Violations of this section shall constitute an infraction unless prosecuted pursuant to the administrative citation procedure of this code. (Ord. 1685; Ord. 1538; Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.065 Fishing.
        A.     Each person fishing from the city beach or city pier shall have due regard for the safety of persons on the beach or in the water.

        B.     No person fishing from the city pier shall cast the line overhead or across the deck of the pier.

        C.    No person shall use or possess more than 2 fishing poles on the city pier for the purpose of fishing from the pier.

        D.    No person shall use or possess a bow and arrow, crossbow and arrow or similar device for the purpose of fishing from the city beach, city pier or other city property. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.070 Climbing, Diving and Jumping.
        No person shall climb upon any pier, bridge, wharf, seawall, groin, jetty, lifeguard tower or natural rock formation on city property. Nor shall any person dive, jump or enter the water from any such facility. These prohibitions do not apply to city employees and agents engaged in the discharge of official duties. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.075 Defacement of Pier.
        No person shall damage, destroy or deface the city pier or any building, structure, post, standard, seat, table or other facility located thereon or on any of the approaches thereto. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.080 Removal of Mussels.
        No person shall remove any mussel from the pilings of the city pier. Nor shall any person possess on the city pier a hook or device commonly used for the removal of mussels from pilings or piers. These prohibitions do not apply to city employees and agents engaged in the discharge of official duties. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.085 Commercial Activities on Beach or Pier.
        No person shall sell merchandise or solicit customers for any business upon the city beach or city pier. This prohibition does not apply to persons performing such activity in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 5.80, Sidewalk Vending, or a franchise or lease authorized by the city council. (Ord. 1675; Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.090 Vehicles and Animals.
        A.     No person shall permit any dog or other animal owned or possessed by such person to be in or upon the city beach. This prohibition does not apply to service dogs used by disabled persons.

        B.     No person shall ride or drive any horse or other animal, any bicycle, motorcycle, automobile or other vehicle upon the city beach or city pier unless written authorization has been obtained from the city manager. This prohibition does not apply to city employees and agents engaged in the discharge of official duties. The city manager may authorize use of vehicles for the hauling of freight and other materials for persons occupying places of business on the city pier, or for the repair or improvement of the same. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.095 Water Vessels.
        A.     No person shall operate a water vessel, or permit a water vessel to drift, within 200 yards of the shoreline of the city beach. This prohibition does not apply to the following:

        1.     Water vessels drifting as a result of conditions beyond the operator’s control.

        2.     Water vessels entering or departing a navigable waterway at a speed not exceeding 5 nautical miles per hour.

        3.     Lifeguard rescue and training water vessels engaged in the discharge of official duties.

        4.     Government water vessels engaged in the discharge of official duties.

        5.     Towing, salvage or dredging water vessels engaged in the performance of such activity by a bonded operator.

        B.     No person shall launch or land a water vessel from or upon the city beach, shoreline or surfline of a designated swimming area or surf zone. This prohibition does not apply to launchings and landings performed at a location authorized for such purposes by the city council or the supervising lifeguard on duty.

        C.    No person in command of a water vessel propelled by machinery or sail shall allow the vessel to be used at a speed in excess of 5 nautical miles per hour in any of the following areas not otherwise subject to speed restrictions:

        1.     Within 100 feet of a person swimming or bathing.

        2.     Within 200 yards of a beach frequented by swimmers or bathers.

        3.     Within 200 yards of a pier, dock, wharf, mooring, float or other facility used for the embarkation or discharge of passengers.

        D.    No person in command of a water vessel propelled by machinery or sail shall allow the vessel to be used at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent, having due regard for weather, visibility, water conditions and traffic.

        E.     No person in command of a water vessel shall allow the vessel to be used at a speed or in a manner that endangers the safety or property of another person.

        F.     No person in command of a water vessel shall permit the vessel to land along the city pier at any time unless authorized by the city manager. This prohibition shall not apply to the city’s lessees or franchisees.

        G.    No person shall own or operate a water vessel equipped with a toilet or other receptacle for human waste unless at least one of the following conditions is satisfied:

        1.     The vessel is equipped with a holding tank designed to retain all human wastes until such time as such waste can be discharged into a sanitary sewer system.

        2.     The toilet or receptacle is connected directly to a sanitary sewer system.

        3.     The toilet or receptacle is connected to an on-board sewage treatment system that produces an effluent meeting standards approved by the county health officer for discharge into water. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.100 Anti-Waste Disposal Signs.
        Each commercial docking facility owner or operator shall conspicuously post on its premises signs informing the public of laws prohibiting the discharge of waste in harbor waters. The signs shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. (Ord. 1515)

 

 

 

9.05.105 Anaheim Bay Harbor Regulations.
        The Anaheim Bay Harbor is a danger and controlled zone and is designated as a special-use area subject to military operations within such area and subject to special regulations established by the federal government, the county or by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.110 Storage on Shoreline.
        No person shall place or allow any abandoned vessel or other material, garbage, refuse or timber or waste matter of any type whatsoever to remain on beaches, piers, wharves, jetties, groins, bulkheads, seawalls, floats or shoreline of any harbor. For purposes of this section, a vessel or boat shall be deemed abandoned if it is found in a public place or in public view in a state of disuse or disrepair or if it is found in any place without authorization to be there. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1515)

 

9.05.115 Marina Pump-Out Facilities.
        Each commercial marina owner or operator shall provide a permanent holding tank pump-out facility or equivalent service that is operable at all times the marina is in operation and that is capable of servicing all water vessels docked at the marina. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 9.10 NEWS RACKS
9.10.005 Purpose.
        The purposes of this chapter are to protect pedestrian safety; preserve the aesthetics of the city’s sidewalk areas; facilitate distribution of publications through news racks on public property; and to mitigate the traffic hazards and visual blight that can result from the unregulated placement of news racks on public rights-of-way. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall mean:

        Abandoned: news rack wherein no publication or the same publication has been displayed for a period of at least 30 consecutive days.

        Block: public right-of-way abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets or between the nearest intersecting street and the termination of such public right-of-way.

        City-Approved News Rack Model and Pedestal: model series M100, M50, or a model that the director deems equivalent in size and appearance to the M100 or M50, painted a color equivalent to wood grain brown, mounted on a 16 ½-inch standard pedestal placed on a 10-inch X 10-inch pad. The director has the discretion to allow different colors outside the Main Street specific plan area.

        Curb: raised edge adjacent to a roadway between the sidewalk and the roadway.

        Director: director of public works or the designee thereof.

        Driveway Approach: portion of a public right-of-way, including curb returns or depressed curbs, providing vehicular access to a private roadway, building or other facility.

        Explicit Sexual Acts: depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or any other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.

        Main Street Specific Plan Area: described in the Main Street Specific Plan.

        News Rack: self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of a publication.

        News Rack Area: designated by the city for the placement of news racks within the Main Street Specific Plan Area.

        Owner: person to whom a news rack permit is issued. For purposes of this chapter, “owner” is synonymous with permittee.

        Parkway: area between the sidewalk and the curb of a street. Where there is no sidewalk, area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. “Parkway” includes any roadway area that is not open to vehicular travel.

        Pre-existing Publications: publications that on December 1, 2003 were located in news racks that complied with the news rack location and placement standards set forth in the Code of the City of Seal Beach as such standards existed immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and which were placed in such location pursuant to a validly issued news rack permit and city business license.

        Public Right-of-Way: place of any nature that is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel, including without limitation: a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, park, square or any similar public way.

        Roadway: portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

        Sidewalk: surface improved, designed or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.

        Street: as defined in Vehicle Code Section 590. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.015 News Rack Permit.
        A.     Requirement. No person shall place a news rack on any public right-of-way without first obtaining a news rack permit for such news rack.

        B.     Application. Applications for news rack permits shall be filed with the director upon a city-provided form. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information:

        1.     Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.

        2.     A precise diagram showing the proposed location for the news rack and the location and number of all other news racks existing on the same block.

        3.     Brand name of the news rack and a description of how it will be installed.

        4.     The name of the publication to be contained in the news rack.

        5.     A city attorney-approved written agreement obligating the applicant to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries, and deficiencies that the city shall incur or suffer as a result of the applicant’s news racks. Such obligation shall include payment of interest, penalties and reasonable attorney’s fees.

        6.     A certificate of endorsement evidencing that a comprehensive liability insurance policy has been issued for the period of the requested news rack permit by an insurance company that both is admitted and licensed to do business in the State of California; and is rated A or better according to the most recent A.M. Best Co. Rating Guide. The policy limits of such insurance shall not be less than $1,000,000 combined single limit or equivalent. Such policy shall name the city as an additional insured; shall specify that it acts as primary insurance and that no insurance held or owned by the designated additional insureds shall be called upon to cover a loss; and shall contain a provision that no termination, cancellation or change of coverage of insured or additional insureds shall be effective until after 30 days notice thereof has been given in writing to the director.

        7.     Business License. Every applicant for a news rack permit shall present proof of receipt of a business license or proof of application for such license.

        C.    Fee. Each news rack permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. This fee shall be established by city council resolution and shall not exceed the actual cost of processing a news rack permit application.

        D.    Approval or Denial. The director shall, within 10 city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue a news rack permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        E.     Grounds for Denial. The director may deny an application for a news rack permit for any of the following causes:

        1.     The following grounds for denial shall apply to all applications:

        a.     Failure to complete the application.

        b.     Knowing submission of a fraudulent statement of material fact.

        c.     Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

        2.     In addition to the grounds specified in paragraph 1 of this subsection, the director may deny an application for placement of a news rack within the Main Street specific plan area if the proposed location of the news rack is a location at which no news rack space is available due to the issuance of news rack permits to other persons pursuant to Section 9.10.025.

        F.     Term. Each news rack permit shall be valid for 3 years from the date of issuance unless revoked. A news rack owner shall submit an application for renewal at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the owner’s news rack permit.

        G.    Appeals. Any interested person may request an administrative hearing regarding the issuance, denial of issuance, renewal or denial of renewal of a news rack permit. Notwithstanding the preceding, no administrative hearing shall be held regarding the denial of a news rack permit for a news rack space within the Main Street specific plan area if the denial was based on the lottery. A request for an administrative hearing must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 10 days after the decision of the director. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.020 Placement Standards.
        News racks located on public right-of-way shall comply with the following placement standards:

        A.     News racks shall not be placed:

        1.     Within 20 feet of any marked crosswalk.

        2.     Within 20 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.

        3.     Within 15 feet of any driveway approach.

        4.     Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility.

        5.     Within 5 feet ahead of and 25 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop.

        6.     Within 10 feet of any bus bench or bus shelter.

        7.     Within 10 feet of any mailbox, utility pole, telephone pedestal or any other permanent fixture located in the public right-of-way.

        8.     Within 3 feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees.

        9.     Within 3 feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.

        10.   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than 4 feet.

        11.   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than 5 feet for a length of more than 30 feet.

        12.   Adjacent to or on the curb abutting any fire access lane.

        13.   Within the limits of any portion of curb painted yellow or white.

        B.     News racks shall be placed between 6 inches and 24 inches from the curb at the sole discretion of the director.

        C.    No news rack shall unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

        D.    No news rack shall interfere with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.

        E.     No news rack shall project into a roadway.

        F.     No news rack shall unreasonably interfere with or impede ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.025 Additional Placement Standards—Main Street Specific Plan Area.
        A.     Concentration. The director shall determine the locations within the Main Street specific plan area of news racks on the public right-of-way and shall mark such locations on a map that is available to the public on request. In determining such locations, the director shall adhere to the following concentration standards:

        1.     No more than 24 news racks shall be located on any block of Main Street between Pacific Coast Highway and Ocean Avenue. The maximum grouping of news racks at each location shall be 8. There shall be a minimum 100-foot separation between each grouping.

        2.     No more than 4 news racks shall be located on any block of the northerly side of Ocean, each side of Central Avenue, each side of Electric Avenue, and the southerly side of Pacific Coast Highway, between Main Street and the adjoining alleys.

        B.     No person shall place or maintain a news rack in the Main Street specific plan area except in one of the city-designated areas.

        C.    Permit Process.

        1.     Except as provided in paragraph 2 of this subsection, the director shall approve applications on a first-come, first-served basis.

        2.     Where 2 or more publications seek the same location for a news rack and there is insufficient space at the location to accommodate all such publications, the director shall allocate news rack permits in accordance with the following process. No publication shall be eligible for more than one news rack permit per news rack grouping where demand exceeds supply.

        a.     Priority shall be given to pre-existing publications. In the event demand by pre-existing publications exceeds supply at any particular location, the director shall adhere to the following criteria:

        (1)    Pre-existing publications previously located at that location have priority. Where demand by publications seeking to stay in the same location exceeds supply at that location, the director shall assign the desired location:

        (a)    First to daily publications published at least 5 days a week (“daily publications”).

        (b)    Second to weekly publications published between one and 4 days per calendar week (“weekly publications”).

        (c)    Third to monthly publications published between one and 3 days per calendar month (“monthly publications”).

        (2)    Pre-existing publications not previously located at the desired location will be given priority based upon the criteria in subparagraphs (1)(a) through (c) of this paragraph C.2. In the event 2 or more pre-existing publications seeking to relocate to the same location have the same level of priority, the director shall assign the desired location to the publication that was located in closest proximity to the desired location.

        b.     All Other Publications. As between publications that are not pre-existing publications, the director shall adhere to the following criteria:

        (1)    First priority shall be given to daily publications.

        (2)    Second priority shall be given to weekly publications.

        (3)    Third priority shall be given to monthly publications.

        c.     Location and Space Assignment by Lottery. The director shall approve news racks by lottery in the event that 2 or more publications having the same level of priority seek the same location or space for a news rack; and either there is insufficient space at the location to accommodate all such publications, or 2 publications are seeking the same space in a particular designated area. The lottery shall be conducted by placing into a container the names of all of the applicants having the same level of priority and drawing names from the container one at a time until the number of available news rack spaces at the location reaches zero. The director shall give advance written notice to the applicants of the time and place of the lottery, and shall allow members of the public to witness the lottery. The initial lottery shall be held on a date 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        3.     Space Request. The applicant shall indicate on the application its preference for a particular space in the designated area.

        D.    Permit Renewal. If a news rack in the Main Street specific plan area is abandoned during the permit term, or if the news rack permit for that space is not renewed at the expiration of the term, then the news rack permit for that news rack space shall be re-allocated pursuant to subparagraph 2.c of subsection C of this section. The permittee who abandoned the news rack or failed to renew the news rack permit shall not be eligible to participate in the re-allocation process. 

        E.     Authority of Director. The director may promulgate policies necessary or convenient for the administration of this section. (Ord. 1515)

9.10.030 Operation Standards.
        News racks located on public right-of-way shall comply with the following operation standards:

        A.     Each news rack shall be the city-approved news rack model and pedestal.

        B.     Each news rack shall have conspicuously affixed thereto the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof.

        C.    Each news rack shall have conspicuously affixed thereto the annual permit tag issued by the department.

        D.    No news rack shall be abandoned.

        E.     The liability insurance required by this chapter shall not be reduced or cancelled.

        F.     No news rack shall contain an advertising sign. Notwithstanding the preceding, the name and logo of the publication distributed in a news rack may be stenciled upon the front and back of such news rack.

        G.    No news rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property without the express written permission of the owner of such property. Notwithstanding the preceding, each news rack shall be bolted to the sidewalk upon which it is maintained unless it is vertically stacked upon another news rack pursuant to this chapter.

        H.    Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. The owners of vertically stacked news racks shall be jointly responsible for maintenance of the shared components of such news racks. Occurrence of any of the following conditions on a news rack shall constitute evidence that the news rack is not being maintained in a clean and neat condition or in good repair:

        1.     Graffiti.

        2.     Broken or unreasonably misshapen structural components.

        3.     Cracks, dents or discoloration of the display window.

        4.     Substantial accumulation of dirt, grease, rust or corrosion.

        5.     Substantial amount of chipped, faded, peeling, or cracked paint.

        6.     Substantial amount of tearing, peeling or fading of any paper or cardboard parts or inserts of the news rack.

        I.      Publications offered for sale or distribution in the news rack shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner that exposes to public view from any public right-of-way any of the following:

        1.     Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.

        2.     Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.

        3.     Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.035 Summary Impoundment.
        The director may summarily impound any news rack that poses an imminent danger to pedestrians or vehicles. On the day of such impoundment, the department shall send the owner identified on the news rack written notice of the seizure and the opportunity for an administrative hearing. If the owner files a written hearing request with the city clerk within 10 days of such notice, then the city manager shall conduct an administrative hearing regarding the propriety of the summary impoundment. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.040 Non-Summary Impoundment.
        Whenever any news rack is found to be in violation of this chapter, but the violation does not present an imminent danger to pedestrians or vehicles, the department shall affix a notice of violation tag upon such news rack and shall send a written notice of violation to the owner identified on the news rack. The notice shall state the nature of the violation and shall indicate that failure to correct the violation or to file a written hearing request with the city clerk within 10 days may result in impoundment of the news rack. The director may impound such news rack if the owner has not corrected the violation or filed a written hearing request within the allotted period. If the owner files a timely written hearing request with the city clerk, then the city manager shall conduct an administrative hearing regarding the existence of the violation. The director may impound such news rack 2 days after the city manager’s administrative hearing decision if the decision confirms the existence of the violation and the owner has not corrected the violation. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.045 Administrative Hearing.
        A.     The city manager shall be responsible for conducting administrative hearings related to the implementation of this chapter. This responsibility may not be delegated.

        B.     The city manager shall conduct an administrative hearing and take the matter under submission for decision no later than 15 city business days following the timely filing of the request for hearing, unless the requestor and owner (if different than the requestor) consent in writing to an extension. At least 10 days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the requestor and owner (if different than the requestor).

        C.    Administrative hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the city manager. All parties involved shall have a right to: offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; be represented by counsel; and confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this subsection may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

        D.    The city manager shall, within 10 city business days from the conclusion of the administrative hearing, render a written decision supported by findings. The time period set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the requestor and the owner (if different than the requestor). The decision of the city manager shall be final. Notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the requestor and the owner (if different than the requestor). Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: “You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.” (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.050 Return of Impounded News Racks.
        A.     News racks that have been summarily impounded shall be returned to the owner without charge if a timely hearing request was filed and the city manager determined that the seizure was improper. Otherwise such news racks shall be returned upon payment of the impound fee and filing of a written request therefor within 30 days of the date of the seizure or, if applicable, the date of the city manager’s administrative hearing decision upholding the seizure.

        B.     News racks that have been non-summarily impounded shall be returned to the owner upon payment of the impound fee and filing of a written request therefor within 30 days of the date of the seizure.

        C.    The amount of the impound fee shall be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.10.055 Disposal of Impounded News Racks.
        The department may sell or otherwise dispose of any news rack provided that both 30 days have elapsed since the impoundment or city manager decision affirming the impoundment; and the owner of the news rack has failed to pay the impound fee. The proceeds of such disposal shall be deposited in the city’s general fund. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 9.15 STREET EXCAVATIONS
9.15.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Director: director of public works/city engineer.

        Excavation: an opening in the surface of a city property. “Excavation” does not include an opening into the lawful structure below the surface of city property, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without damage to the city property.

        Facility: pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer or any other structure.

        Permittee: a person in receipt of an excavation permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

        Substructure: a pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable, wire or similar structure located below the surface of a city property. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.010 Authority of Director.
        The director shall be responsible for administration of this chapter and, in such capacity, may do any of the following without limitation:

        A.     Promulgate regulations as deemed necessary or appropriate for the administration of this chapter.

        B.     Make such inspections as are reasonably necessary to enforce this chapter and ensure compliance with the conditions of an excavation permit.

        C.    Authorize closing of streets and alleys to traffic to facilitate an approved excavation.

        D.    Require that a particular size crew perform an approved excavation on a nonstop basis so as to ensure the quickest possible completion when warranted by the location of the proposed work or the circumstances in which it is conducted.

        E.     Require soil testing of backfill by a laboratory or engineer of the director’s choice. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.015 Excavation Permit Requirement.
        No person shall do any of the following on city property without first obtaining and maintaining in full force and effect an excavation permit:

        A.     Cause or maintain an excavation.

        B.     Construct, reconstruct or repair a curb, sidewalk, gutter, roadway surface, pavement, sanitary sewer, sewage works, storm drain, culvert, stairway, retaining wall or similar improvement.

        C.    Perform grading or filling.

        D.    Subject a water line to excessive loading. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.020 Excavation Permit Application.
        An excavation permit application consists of the city-provided application form and an application fee in an amount set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.025 Approval or Denial of Excavation Permit.
        A.     The director shall, within 60 city business days of the filing of a complete application, approve or conditionally approve the excavation permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant.

        B.     The director may deny an application for the excavation permit upon any of the following grounds:

        1.     Failure to complete the application.

        2.     Knowing submission of a misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact.

        3.     The applicant lacks the financial, technical or legal ability to install and maintain the proposed facilities.

        4.     The subject city property lacks capacity to accommodate the proposed facilities.

        5.     The proposed facilities would interfere with future plans for the subject city property as reflected in the city’s general plan or capital improvement plan.

        6.     The proposed facilities would adversely impact the public health, safety and welfare.

        C.    An excavation permit shall not be effective until the permittee has paid the inspection fee, and has submitted proof of public liability insurance and a surety bond in a form approved by the city attorney or deposit. The inspection fee amount shall be as set by city council resolution; the amount of the insurance and surety bond or deposit shall be as set by the director. A surety bond shall be submitted if the director authorizes the permittee to resurface or repair the surface of the city property to be affected by the excavation; otherwise a deposit shall be submitted to cover the city’s expense of performing the work.

        D.    An excavation permit shall not be effective until the permittee also has executed a city attorney-approved written agreement obligating the permittee to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries and deficiencies that the permittee shall incur or suffer as a result of the permittee’s operations. Such obligation shall include payment of interest, penalties and legal fees. (Ord. 1533; Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.030 Standard Conditions.
        In addition to any conditions imposed by the director, each excavation permit shall be subject to the following standard conditions:

        A.     The authorized work shall be prosecuted diligently to conclusion.

        B.     The permit shall be kept on site of the work and shall be presented to city representatives on request.

        C.    The permit shall not be transferable.

        D.    The permit shall expire 60 days after issuance if the authorized work has not commenced.

        E.     Access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures and other vital equipment shall not be obstructed.

        F.     The permittee shall place and maintain traffic barriers and warning devices in accordance with the instruction of the director.

        G.    Safe crossing for 2 lanes of vehicle traffic shall be maintained at street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians shall be maintained at intervals of not more than 300 feet.

        H.    Appropriate measures shall be taken to minimize noise, dust and debris to the maximum extent practical.

        I.      Noisy equipment shall not be used in the vicinity of residences between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. without the prior written consent of the director.

        J.     Monuments shall not be removed or disturbed without the prior written consent of the director.

        K.     Existing facilities shall not be damaged, interfered with or relocated without the prior written consent of the director and the owner of such facility.

        L.     All necessary steps shall be taken to protect adjoining property from damage.

        M.    Excavated material shall be piled in such manner as to prevent danger to and minimize inconvenience for pedestrians and motorists.

        N.    Streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of soil and debris on a daily basis in accordance with the city’s NPDES permit, the permittee’s storm water pollution prevention plan and, if necessary, the director’s instruction.

        O.    Gutters shall be kept unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the curb at the gutter line. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.035 Abandoned Substructures.
        Any person who abandons a substructure shall, within 30 days of the abandonment, file with the director a written statement identifying the precise location of the substructure. The substructure shall be removed at the owner’s expense if necessary to accommodate installation of a facility by the city or another government entity. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.040 Emergency Work.
        Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the making of such excavations as may be necessary to eliminate an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The person responsible for the excavation shall apply for an excavation permit on the first city business day following the commencement of the work. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.15.045 Administration.
        This chapter shall be administered consistent with rights granted by pre-existing franchises and by applicable federal and state law. Any insurance, indemnification and bond requirement imposed by such franchise or law to the exclusion of this chapter shall control in lieu of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

Chapter 9.20 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
9.20.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Authorized Inspector: the director of public works/city engineer and persons designated by and under his/her instruction and supervision, who are assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter.

        Co-permittee: the county, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any of the 31 municipalities, including the city, that are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES permit.

        DAMP: the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        Development Project Guidance: DAMP Chapter VII and the appendix thereto, entitled best management practices for new development including nonresidential construction projects, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        Discharge: any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.

        Discharge Exception: the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only:

        Discharges composed entirely of storm water; discharges subject to regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued NPDES permits, state general permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance are being implemented and followed; discharges to the storm water drainage system from potable water line flushing, fire fighting activities, landscape irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis groundwater infiltration to the storm water drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems); discharges from potable water sources, passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation and other building roof runoff; agricultural irrigation water runoff; water from crawl space pumps, passive footing drains, lawn watering, noncommercial vehicle washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges; discharges of reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility; public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance by, or on behalf of, the city; discharges authorized pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter; discharges allowable under the domestic sewage exception; discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the extent feasible the amount of pollutants in such discharge; and discharges authorized pursuant to federal or state laws or regulations.

        In any action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception.

        Domestic Sewage Exception: discharges that are exceptions to this chapter and excluded from the definition of prohibited discharge, as defined herein, including only discharges composed entirely of accidental spills of untreated sanitary wastes (commonly called domestic sewage) and other wastes, but limited solely to wastes that are controlled by and are within publicly owned wastewater treatment system collection facilities immediately prior to the accidental spill.

        Enforcing Attorney: the city attorney acting as counsel to the city and his/her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the city attorney, or his/her designee, shall act as the enforcing attorney.

        EPA: the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.

        Hearing Officer: the city manager or his/her designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein.

        Invoice for Costs: the actual costs and expenses of the city including without limitation administrative overhead, salaries and any expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter or where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under this chapter is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter.

        Illicit Connection: any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the storm water drainage system occurs or may occur. The term illicit connection shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the storm water drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made.

        Legal Nonconforming Connection: connections to the storm water drainage system existing as of May 25, 1994 that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established.

        New Development: all public and private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

        Nonresidential Plumbing Permit: a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than storm water, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage.

        NPDES Permit: the currently applicable municipal discharge permit(s) issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, which permit(s) establishes waste discharge requirements applicable to storm water runoff in the city.

        Pollutant: any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including without limitation: artificial materials (such as floatable plastics, wood products or metal shavings); household waste (such as trash, paper, and plastics); cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment); metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms; petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease); animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including stables, show facilities, or polo fields); substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor; waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line flushing); materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon; materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractible organic compounds; those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and any other constituent or material, including, without limitation, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state.

        Prohibited Discharge: any discharge that contains any pollutant, from public or private property to the storm water drainage system; any upstream flow, which is tributary to the storm water drainage system; any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough, or any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. The term prohibited discharge shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception.

        Significant Redevelopment: the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other nonresidential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

        State General Permit: the state general industrial storm water permit, the state general construction permit or any other state general permit that has been or will be adopted and the terms and requirements of any such permit. In the event EPA revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term state general permit shall also refer to any EPA-administered storm water control program for industrial and construction activities.

        Storm Water Drainage System: street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the county-wide storm water runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the county, the Orange County Flood Control District or any co-permittee, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of storm water. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.010 Prohibition of Illicit Connections and Prohibited Discharges.
        A.     No person shall:

        1.     Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection.

        2.     Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

        3.     Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

        B.     The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to May 25, 1994; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the following dates:

        1.     For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the storm water conveyance system - May 25, 1999.

        2.     For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the storm water conveyance system, the expiration of 6 months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection, has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter.

        C.    A civil or administrative violation shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

        D.    If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the 30-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the 30-day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation.

        E.     The owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the authorized inspector upon consideration of the following factors:

        1.     The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters.

        2.     The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection.

        3.     The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.015 Controls for Water Quality Management.
        A.     New Development and Significant Redevelopment.

        1.     All new development and significant redevelopment within the city shall be undertaken in accordance with:

        a.     The DAMP, including without limitation the development project guidance.

        b.     Any conditions and requirements established by the responsible city department, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in storm water runoff from the project site.

        2.     Prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the responsible city department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with this chapter.

        If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit, the responsible city department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with this chapter prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the city’s discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map.

        3.     Notwithstanding the preceding, compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of one single-family detached residence unless the responsible city department determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the storm water drainage system.

        4.     Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter.

        5.     If the public works department determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of storm water runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance.

        6.     The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed on a new development or significant redevelopment project.

        Each failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

        7.     The public works department may require that the terms, conditions and requirements imposed be recorded with the county recorder’s office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions and requirements and a signature on behalf of the city shall not be required for recordation.

        B.     Cost Recovery. The city shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred in the review of new development or significant development projects for compliance with the DAMP. The responsible city department may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant.

        C.    Litter Control. No person shall discard any waste material, including without limitation common household rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether generated or accumulated at a residence, business or other location), upon any public or private property, whether occupied, open or vacant, including without limitation to any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area or point of entry to the storm water drainage system. Every person occupying or having charge and control of property on which a prohibited disposal of waste materials occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same. A prohibited disposal of waste materials creates a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and otherwise threatens the environment, surface waters and groundwater; therefore, any owner or occupant of property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the property. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.020 Inspections.
        A.     Right to Inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection as authorized below, the authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.

        B.     Entry to Inspect. The authorized inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the storm water drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the city.

        C.    Compliance Assessments. The authorized inspector may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including without limitation: identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property; identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants; investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems; establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; evaluating compliance with any permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection.

        D.    Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment.

        E.     Records Review. The authorized inspector may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system.

        F.     Sample and Test. The authorized inspector may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. The authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including without limitation smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.

        G.    Monitoring. The authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm water drainage system.

        H.    Test Results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized inspector. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.025 Enforcement.
        A.     Administrative Remedies.

        1.     Notice of Noncompliance. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with this chapter.

        a.     The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision(s) of this chapter or the applicable permit that has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person.

        b.     The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed 90 days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional 90 days where good cause exists for the extension.

        2.     Administrative Compliance Orders.

        a.     The authorized inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be delivered in accordance with this chapter. The administrative compliance order may be issued to:

        (1)    The owner or occupant of any property requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter.

        (2)    The owner of property subject to terms, conditions or requirements imposed on a project to ensure adherence to those terms, conditions and requirements.

        (3)    A permittee subject to the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit.

        (4)    Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge.

        b.     The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements:

        (1)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including without limitation a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area.

        (2)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection.

        (3)    Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact storm water runoff.

        (4)    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state or regional agency.

        (5)    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto.

        3.     Cease and Desist Orders.

        a.     The authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with this chapter. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to:

        (1)    Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the storm water drainage system.

        (2)    Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter.

        (3)    Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter.

        (4)    Clean up the area affected by the violation.

        b.     The authorized inspector may direct by cease and desist order that the owner of any property or that the owner of any property, or his/her successor-in-interest, which property is subject to any conditions or requirements issued pursuant to this chapter or any permittee under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

        Immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the conditions or requirements issued pursuant to this chapter or the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable permit.

        4.     Recovery of Costs. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with this chapter. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and enforcing any notice or order.

        If any owner or occupant, permittee or any other person subject to an invoice for costs fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with this chapter, then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings.

        5.     Delivery of Notice. Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following:

        a.     The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in this chapter.

        b.     Delivery shall be deemed complete upon personal service to the recipient; deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or facsimile service with confirmation of receipt.

        c.     Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the city.

        d.     Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, a notice of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of 10 city business days.

        6.     Administrative Hearing for Notices of Noncompliance, Administrative Compliance Orders, Invoices for Costs and Adverse Determinations. Except as set forth in paragraph 8 of this subsection, any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing. Notwithstanding the preceding, these administrative appeal procedures shall not apply to criminal proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter.

        7.     Request for Administrative Hearing. Any person appealing a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs or an adverse determination shall, within 30 days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the city clerk, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the city manager. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within 45 business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

        8.     Administrative Hearing for Cease and Desist Orders and Emergency Abatement Actions. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within 5 city business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action.

        9.     Hearing Proceedings. The authorized inspector shall appear in support of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs or emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in opposition to the emergency abatement action. Except as set forth in this chapter, the city shall have the burden of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case.

        10.   Final Decision and Appeal. The final decision of the hearing officer shall issue within 10 city business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within 90 days following issuance of the final decision.

        Notwithstanding this paragraph 10, the final decision of the hearing officer in any proceeding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within 5 city business days following the conclusion of the hearing.

        11.   City Abatement. In the event the owner of property, the operator of a facility, a permittee or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, operator, permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the authorized inspector may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including without limitation the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771.

        1.     Court Order to Enjoin or Abatement. At the request of the city manager, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance.

        2.     Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the city manager shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring.

        3.     Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the city manager may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant.

        a.     An imminent danger shall include without limitation exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment.

        b.     Notwithstanding the authority of the city to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to this chapter hereinabove shall follow the abatement action.

        4.     Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under state law, shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.

        5.     Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1.

        At the direction of the city manager, the enforcing attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5.

        C.    Criminal Sanctions.

        1.     Prosecutor. The enforcing attorney may act on the request of the city manager to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        2.     Penalty. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless such conduct is prosecuted as an infraction in the discretion of the enforcing attorney.

        D.    Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith.

        E.     Non-exclusive Remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter.

        F.     Citations. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the authorized inspector shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any person committing a violation of this chapter. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code Sections 853.5, 853.6 and 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation the authorized inspector shall refer the matter to the enforcing attorney.

        Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the violator, the provisions of this chapter violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least 10 city business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the enforcing attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited.

        G.    Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify EPA Region IX, the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter.

        H.    Injunctions. At the request of the city manager, the enforcing attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.

        Order for Reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law.

        I.      Other Civil Remedies.

        1.     The city manager may cause the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of all costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter including without limitation costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and damages for irreparable harm to the environment.

        2.     The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the storm water drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the storm water drainage system.

        3.     The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not limit the right of the city to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. (Ord. 1515)

9.20.030 Permits.
        A.     Discharge Permit Procedure.

        1.     Permit. On application of the owner of property or the operator of any facility, which property or facility is not otherwise subject to the requirements of a state general permit or a NPDES permit regulating storm water discharges, the city manager may issue a permit authorizing the release of non-storm water discharges to the storm water drainage system if both of the following are satisfied:

        a.     The discharge of material or constituents is reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the property.

        b.     The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters, or cause any reduction in established water quality standards.

        2.     Application. The applicant shall provide all information requested by the city manager for review and consideration of the application, including without limitation specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property, identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to determine the constituents, and quantities thereof, that may be discharged if permission is granted.

        3.     Permit Issuance. The permit shall be granted or denied by the city manager or his or her designated representative, no later than 60 city business days following the completion and acceptance of the application as determined by the city manager.

        The applicant shall be notified in person or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, of the action taken.

        4.     Permit Conditions. The permit may include terms, conditions and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter and as necessary to protect the receiving waters, including without limitation:

        a.     Identification of the discharge location on the property and the location at which the discharge will enter the storm water drainage system.

        b.     Identification of the constituents and quantities thereof to be discharged into the storm water drainage system.

        c.     Specification of pollution prevention techniques and structural or non-structural control requirements as reasonably necessary to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of this chapter.

        d.     Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge.

        e.     Requirements for submission of documents or data, such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports, self-monitoring reports and waste manifests.

        f.      Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the protection of receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents approved by any federal, state or regional agency.

        5.     General Permit. In the discretion of the city manager, the permit may, in accordance with the conditions identified in this chapter, be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of activities. If a general permit is issued, any person intending to discharge within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit may do so by filing an application to discharge with the city manager.

        a.     No discharge within the scope of the general permit shall occur until such application is so filed.

        b.     Notwithstanding the preceding, the city manager may eliminate the requirement that an application for a general permit be filed for any specific activity for which a general permit has been issued.

        6.     Permit Fees. The permission to discharge shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of the city’s costs, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by separate resolution, as follows:

        a.     For individually issued permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, preparing and issuing the permit, and the costs reasonably related to administrating this permit program.

        b.     For general permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, that portion of the costs of preparing the general permit that is reasonably attributable to the permittee’s application for the general permit, and the costs reasonably related to administering the general permit program. Notwithstanding the preceding, no permit fee shall be charged for a general permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Permit Suspension, Revocation or Modification.

        1.     The city manager may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that any of the following has occurred:

        a.     The permittee has violated any term, condition or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this chapter.

        b.     The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited discharge contained within this chapter.

        c.     The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this chapter.

        d.     Any regulatory agency, including EPA or a Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies the city that the discharge should be terminated.

        2.     The city manager may modify any permit when it is determined that any of the following has occurred:

        a.     Federal or state law requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a change in the permit.

        b.     The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit’s terms, conditions or requirements.

        c.     A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter or to protect the quality of receiving waters.

        d.     The permittee, or in the case of a general permit, each person who has filed an application pursuant to this chapter, shall be informed by the city of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least 45 business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit.

        3.     The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the procedures applicable to appeal of an administrative compliance order. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision by the hearing officer.

        C.    Permit Enforcement. Penalties. Any violation of the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued by the city manager shall constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the violator to the administrative, civil and criminal remedies available under this chapter.

        D.    Effect of Permit.

        1.     Other Laws. Compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the permittee from compliance with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and permit requirements, applicable to the activity for which the permit is issued.

        2.     Limited Permittee Rights. Permits issued under this chapter are for the person or entity identified therein as the “permittee” only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge.

        3.     Transfer of Permits. No permit issued to any person may be transferred to allow:

        a.     A discharge to the storm water drainage system at a location other than the location stated in the original permit.

        b.     A discharge by a person other than the person named in the permit, provided however, that the city may approve a transfer if written approval is obtained, in advance, from the city manager. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.035 Interagency Cooperation.
        A.     The city intends to cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over storm water discharges to ensure that the regulatory purposes underlying storm water regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33 USC Section 1251 et seq.) are met.

        B.     The city may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.040 Miscellaneous.
        Compliance Disclaimer. Full compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants into storm water and/or the protection of storm water quality. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.20.045 Judicial Review.
        The provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall file such action within 90 days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 9.25 FATS, OIL AND GREASE MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
9.25.005 Purpose, Policy and Findings.
        A.     The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act (California Water Code Sections 13000, et seq.) provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of California.

        B.     The City of Seal Beach is a permittee under the “General Waste Discharge Requirements for Sewer Collection Agencies in Orange County Within the Santa Ana Region,” (Order No. R8-2002-0014), dated April 26, 2002 [“Sewer WDRs”] issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Santa Ana Region (“Santa Ana RWQCB”), and, as a permittee under the Sewer WDRs, the city is required to adopt chapters and implement procedures to reduce the amount of fats, oils and grease (“FOG”) discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer collection system.

        C.    Section C.12(iii) of the Sewer WDRs requires the city to demonstrate that it possesses the legal authority necessary to control discharges of FOG to and from those portions of the city’s sanitary sewer collection system over which it has jurisdiction, so as to comply with the Sewer WDRs.

        D.    FSEs or “food facilities,” as defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (“CURFFL”), Division 104 (Environmental Health), Part 7 (Retail Food), Chapter 4, Articles 1-20 of the California Health & Safety Code (“FSEs”), produce FOG as a byproduct of their operations, which, if not properly managed and disposed, create the potential for blockage of sanitary sewer lines, and which can result in damage to both public and private property, and sewage overflows that cause health issues and have the potential to pollute beaches and water courses in the city, as well as in other portions of Orange County.

        E.     Studies in Orange County have concluded that FOG is one of the primary causes of sanitary sewer blockages. Based on information collected by the Santa Ana RWQCB, sanitary sewer system overflows (“SSOs”) within Orange County from sewer collection systems have caused numerous beach closures, and the most prevalent cause of the SSOs is FOG accumulation in the small to medium sewer lines serving FSEs.

        F.     The current edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code requires FSEs that have the potential to produce a significant amount of FOG to have grease control devices. Many FSEs, such as restaurants within the city do not have grease control devices. These commercial FSEs have the potential to require the city and sanitation districts to perform additional preventive maintenance on sewer lines that service these facilities, as well as respond to and cleanup blockages and sewage overflows caused by improper FOG disposal practices and grease control device maintenance.

        G.    The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the city’s sanitary sewer collection system while preventing blockages of sewer lines resulting from discharges of FOG to the system, and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for FSEs discharging into the city’s sewer system.

        H.    This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Section 9.25.010 of this chapter. To the extent a term is not specifically defined in this chapter, such term will be defined according to the definition set forth in Section 9.20.005 of Chapter 9.20 of Title 9 of this code. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG into city’s sanitary sewer collection system.

        I.      In order to manage and control, in a cost-effective manner, the discharge of FOG into the city’s sanitary sewer collection system to the maximum extent practicable, the adoption of reasonable regulations, as set forth herein, is essential and it is the intent of this section to establish regulations for the disposal of FOG and other insoluble waste discharges from FSEs into the city’s sewer system.

        J.     To comply with federal, state, and local policies and to allow the city to meet applicable standards, provisions are made in this chapter for the regulation of wastewater or waste containing FOG discharges to the sewer facilities.

        K.     Certain FSEs within the boundaries of the city do not discharge wastewater into the city’s sewer system and facilities and discharge into sewer systems and facilities operated by regulatory agencies and sanitation districts other than the city. Such FSEs will be permitted and regulated by regulatory agencies other than the city. In order to avoid the possibility of overlapping and potentially contradictory regulation of such FSEs, this chapter is not intended to apply to FSEs or other dischargers which do not discharge into the city’s sanitary sewer system.

        L.     This chapter establishes quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer facilities causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of SSOs. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.010 Definitions.
        A.     Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as defined in the Sewer WDRs and in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations).

        B.     Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest adopted applicable editions of the California Codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law.

        C.    Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Best Management Practices: schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practice to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities.

        2.     Director: director of the department of public works, the city engineer.

        3.     Discharger: any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. “Discharger” shall mean the same as “user.”

        4.     Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG): any substance, such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions.

        5.     FOG Control Program: the FOG Control Program required by and developed pursuant to RWQCB Order No. R8-2002-0014, Section (c)(12)(viii).

        6.     FOG Discharge Manual: the “Fats, Oil and Grease Discharge Manual,” setting forth best management practices for FSEs, as approved by the director.

        7.     FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit or Discharge Permit: a permit issued by the city subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city authorizing the permittee or discharger to discharge wastewater into the city’s facilities or into sewer facilities which ultimately discharge into a facility.

        8.     Food Grinder: any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation byproducts for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system.

        9.     Food Service Establishment (FSE): facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facility Law (CURFFL) Health & Safety Code Section 113785, and any commercial or public entity within the boundaries of the city, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food.

        10.   Grab Sample: a sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.

        11.   Gravity Grease Interceptor: a multi-compartment device located underground between a FSE and the connection to the sewer system that uses gravity to separate FOG from wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next and that is constructed and located in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

        12.   Grease Control Device: any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. A grease control device may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the director.

        13.   Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee: a fee charged to an owner/operator of a FSE, as provided in this chapter, when there are physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor or grease control device for the FSE under consideration impossible.

        14.   Grease Trap: a grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible.

        15.   Hydromechanical Grease Interceptor: a device other than a gravity grease interceptor located underground before the connection to the sewer system either inside or outside the FSE footprint that separates FOG from wastewater and that is constructed and located in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

        16.   Inspector: a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal facilities.

        17.   Interference: any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city’s sewer system, treatment processes or operations; or is a cause of violation of the city’s NPDES or waste discharge requirements.

        18.   Local Sewering Agency: any public agency or private entity responsible for the collection and disposal of wastewater to the city’s sewer facilities duly authorized under the laws of the State of California to construct and/or maintain public sewers.

        19.   Major Operational Change: a physical change or operational change causing generation of an amount of FOG that exceeds the current amount of FOG discharge to the sewer system by the food service establishment in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur.

        20.   New Construction: any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued.

        21.   Permittee: a person who has received a permit to discharge wastewater into the city’s sewer facilities subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city.

        22.   Public Agency: the State of California and/or any city, county, special district, other local governmental authority or public body of or within this state.

        23.   Public Sewer: a sewer owned and operated by the city, or other local public agency, which is tributary to the city’s sewer facilities.

        24.   Regulatory Agency: regulatory agency or regulatory agencies shall mean those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city, including, but not limited to:

        a.     United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA).

        b.     California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB).

        c.     California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region (Santa Ana RWQCB).

        d.     South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

        e.     California Department of Health Services (DOHS).

        f.      Any public agency.

        25.   Sewage: wastewater.

        26.   Sewer Facilities or System: any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and sludge operated by the city.

        27.   Sewer WDRs: the “General Waste Discharge Requirements for Sewer Collection Agencies in Orange County Within the Santa Ana Region,” (Order No. R8-2002-0014), dated April 26, 2002, adopted by the Santa Ana RWQCB, and any successor permit to such WDRs.

        28.   Sludge: any solid, semi solid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility.

        29.   User: any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer system. “User” shall mean the same as “discharger.”

        30.   Waste: sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.

        31.   Wastewater: the liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.

        32.   Wastewater Constituents and Characteristics: the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and other parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater.

        33.   Water Minimization Practices: plans or programs intended to reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve water, including, but not limited to, product substitutions, housekeeping practices, inventory control, employee education, and other steps as necessary to minimize wastewater produced. (Ord. 1639; Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.015 FOG Discharge Requirement.
        No FSE (“FSE”) shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that exceeds a concentration level adopted by a regulatory agency or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral which connects the FSE to the sewer system. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.020 Prohibitions.
        The following prohibitions shall apply to all FSEs:

        A.     No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged any wastewater from FSEs directly or indirectly into the sewer system without first obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Discharge of any waste, including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device to the sewer system, is prohibited.

        C.    The discharge of any waste or FOG to the sewer system which fails to comply with the FOG discharge manual is prohibited.

        D.    The discharge of any waste or FOG to the sewer system in a manner which either violates the Sewer WDRs or causes or contributes to condition which fails to comply with any of the provisions of the Sewer WDRs is prohibited. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.025 Food Grinders Prohibited.
        A.     No food grinder shall be installed in a plumbing system of new construction of an FSE.

        B.     All food grinders shall be removed from an existing FSE upon: major operational change to the FSE; or any construction requiring the issuance of a building permit for either remodeling or construction of the FSE valued at $500 or more. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.030 Best Management Practices Required.
        A.     All FSEs shall implement best management practices in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.

        B.     All FSEs must implement and demonstrate compliance with best management practices (BMP) requirements as specified in the city’s FOG discharge manual. Detailed requirements for best management practices are specified in the FOG discharge manual and may include kitchen practices and employee training that are essential in minimizing FOG discharges. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.035 FOG Pretreatment Required.
        FSEs are required to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized gravity grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter in accordance with the FOG discharge manual and the requirements of 40 CFR Section 403.5. (Ord. 1639; Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.040 Variance and Waiver of Gravity Grease Interceptor Requirement.
        A.     Variance from Gravity Grease Interceptor Requirements. A variance or a conditional waiver from the gravity grease interceptor requirements on such terms and conditions as may established by the director, consistent with the requirements of the Sewer WDRs, the city’s FOG control program, the FOG discharge manual, and best construction, engineering, environmental and health and safety practices, (1) to allow an HGI or alternative pretreatment technology that is, at least, equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge in lieu of a gravity grease interceptor, may be granted by the director to FSEs demonstrating to the director’s satisfaction that it is impossible to install, operate or maintain a gravity grease interceptor; or (2) where the FSE demonstrates to the director’s satisfaction that any FOG discharge from the FSE is negligible and will have an insignificant impact to the sewer system.

        B.     Waiver from Gravity Grease Interceptor Installation with a Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee. For FSEs where the installation of a gravity grease interceptor is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can be installed, a waiver from the gravity grease interceptor requirement may be granted with the imposition of a grease disposal mitigation fee as described in Section 9.25.050. The director’s determination to grant the waiver with a grease disposal mitigation fee will be based upon such considerations that the director determines to be appropriate and consistent with the Sewer WDRs, the city’s FOG control program, the FOG discharge manual, and best construction, engineering, environmental and health and safety practices. Provided, however, that a gravity grease interceptor will be installed when the FSE either (i) applies for any discretionary permit, including, but not limited to, a conditional use permit; or (ii) conducts any remodeling to a FSE which involves construction valued at $50,000 or more requiring a building permit and which involves any one or combination of the following: (1) under slab plumbing in the food processing area; (2) a 30% increase in the net public seating area; (3) a 30% increase in the size of the kitchen area; or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. No discretionary permit, including but not limited to, a conditional use permit, shall be issued to a FSE unless the applicant can demonstrate that a grease interceptor has been or will be installed at the FSE.

        C.    Application for Waiver or Variance of Requirement for a Gravity Grease Interceptor. A FSE may submit an application for waiver or variance from the gravity grease interceptor requirement to the director. Terms and conditions for issuance of a variance to a FSE shall be set forth in the permit. A waiver or variance may be revoked at any time when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the waiver was based change so that the justification for the waiver no longer exists. (Ord. 1639; Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.045 Multiple FSEs at Commercial Properties.
        For properties at which multiple FSEs are operated on a single parcel, each FSE operator shall be individually and separately responsible for installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor serving its FSEs and for compliance with this chapter. Furthermore, owners of commercial properties at which multiple FSEs that are operated on a single parcel shall be responsible for ensuring compliance by each FSE on the parcel. Such operators and/or property owner can comply with this chapter by installing and maintaining a grease interceptor or grease interceptors serving multiple FSEs upon approval by the director on such terms and conditions that the director may establish in his or her sole discretion. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.050 Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee.
        A.     FSEs that operate without a gravity grease control interceptor or approved alternative may be required to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to equitably cover the costs of increased maintenance and administration of the sewer system as a result of the FSEs’ inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. This section shall not be interpreted to allow a new FSE, or existing FSEs undergoing remodeling or change in operations or ownership, to operate without an approved gravity grease interceptor unless the director has determined that it is impossible to install or operate a gravity grease control interceptor or an approved alternative for the FSE under the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The grease disposal mitigation fee shall be established by resolution of the city council, and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or grease control device and such other costs that the city council considers appropriate.

        C.    The grease disposal mitigation fee may not be waived or reduced when the FSE does not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter and/or its discharge into the sewer system in the preceding 12 months has caused or potentially caused or contributed alone or collectively, in sewer blockage or a sanitary sewer overflow (“SSO”) in the sewer downstream, or surrounding the FSE prior to the waiver request. (Ord. 1639; Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.055 Sewer System Overflows, Public Nuisance, Abatement Orders and Cleanup Costs.
        Notwithstanding any waiver of grease interceptor requirements under this chapter, FSEs determined by the director to have contributed to a sewer blockage, SSOs or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered by the director to immediately install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan determined by the director to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. SSOs may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by FSEs alone or collectively are the responsibility of the private property owner or FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the city must act immediately to contain and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or serving a FSE, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the city’s costs for such abatement may be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s) and may constitute a debt to the city and become due and immediately payable upon the city’s request for reimbursement of such costs. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.060 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Required.
        A.     FSEs proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater containing FOG into the city’s sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit from the city within either 180 days from the effective date of this chapter or at the time any FSE applies for or renews its annual business license from the city. Compliance with this chapter must be demonstrated at the time any business license is issued, provided that the director may extend the compliance date for no more than 90 days after the date of the issuance of the license.

        B.     FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the city. The conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be enforced by the city in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations.

        C.    The city shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any new construction, or occupancy, which includes new ownership, unless a FSE has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1639; Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.065 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Application.
        Any person required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city prior to commencing discharges, an application in a form prescribed by the director and shall provide the city such information and documents as the director determines is necessary and appropriate to properly evaluate the application. The applicable fees shall accompany this application. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and as otherwise determined by the director to be appropriate to protect the city’s sewer system. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.070 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Condition.
        The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits as determined by the director:

        A.     Limits on discharge of FOG and other priority pollutants.

        B.     Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors and other grease control devices.

        C.    Gravity grease interceptor, hydromechanical grease interceptor, or other approved alternative maintenance frequency and schedule.

        D.    Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate grease interceptor and/or grease control device.

        E.     Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices.

        F.     Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests.

        G.    Requirements to self-monitor.

        H.    Requirements for the FSE to construct, operate and maintain, at its own expense, FOG control device and sampling facilities.

        I.      Consent by the operator of the FSE for the city and other regulatory agencies to inspect the FSE to confirm compliance with this chapter, the NPDES permit and other applicable laws, rules and regulations, including any NPDES permit applicable to the city.

        J.     Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the director to protect the city’s system or as specified by other regulatory agencies.

        K.     Other terms and conditions, which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with this chapter as determined by the director. (Ord. 1639; Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.075 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Fee.
        The FOG wastewater discharge permit fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by resolution of the city council. Payment of permit fees must be received by the city prior to issuance of either a new permit or a renewed permit. A permittee shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to permit renewal. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.080 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification of Terms and Conditions.
        A.     The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be subject to modification and change by the sole determination of the director during the life of the permit based on:

        1.     The discharger’s current or anticipated operating data;

        2.     The city’s current or anticipated operating data;

        3.     Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the city; or

        4.     A determination by the director that such modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter.

        B.     The permittee may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change, and the reasons for the change. The director shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing.

        C.    The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least 45 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.085 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration and Renewal.
        FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year. Upon expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.090 Exemption from FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit.
        A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE for the purposes of this chapter and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.095 Nontransferability of Permits.
        A.     FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under this chapter are for a specific FSE, for a specific operation and create no vested rights.

        B.     No permit holder shall assign, transfer or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit.

        C.    Any permit, which is transferred to a new owner or operator or to a new facility, is void. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.100 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Charge for Use.
        In addition to the discharge permit application fee, a charge to cover all costs of the city for providing the sewer service and monitoring shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.105 Grease Interceptor Requirements.
        A.     Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition in accordance with the FOG discharge manual.

        B.     Grease interceptors must be cleaned, maintained, and FOG must be removed from grease interceptors at regular intervals.

        C.    FOG removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors and disposed of in a proper manner and at regular intervals. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.110 Monitoring and Reporting Conditions.
        A.     Monitoring for Compliance with FOG Wastewater Discharge Conditions and Reporting Requirements.

        1.     The director may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of best management practices, in accordance with the FOG control program and the FOG discharge manual.

        2.     The director may require visual and other monitoring at the sole expense of the permittee to observe the actual conditions of the FSE’s sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream.

        3.     The director may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the permittee needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements as specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. Monitoring reports of the analyses of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics shall be in a manner and form approved by the director and shall be submitted upon request of the director.

        4.     Failure by the permittee to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the director constitutes a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for the city to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or in this chapter.

        5.     The permittee shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports.

        6.     Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        B.     Record Keeping Requirements. The permittee shall be required to keep all documents identified by the director relating to its compliance with this chapter, including manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than 2 years. The permittee shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to any city representative, or inspector.

        C.    Falsifying Information or Tampering with Process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.115 Inspection and Sampling Conditions.
        A.     The director may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the permittee is complying with all requirements. The permittee shall allow the city access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor.

        B.     The director shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE’s property or other locations as determined by the director, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a FSE has security measures in force, the permittee shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

        C.    For the director to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining the annual use charge and for compliance with permit requirements, the permittee shall make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth in this chapter. All such records shall be kept by the permittee a minimum of 2 years. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.120 Right of Entry.
        Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the director, or city representatives, reasonable access to all parts of the FSE and all wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the discharger’s facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to city representatives attempting to inspect any FSE or facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city’s sewer system. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.125 Notification of Spill.
        A.     In the event a permittee is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the permittee has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the city by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or results in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department, city or county, and the city.

        B.     Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the director at the address specified in the permit no later than 5 working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.

        C.    Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.130 Enforcement.
        A.     The city council finds that, in order for the city to comply with the laws, regulations, and rules imposed upon it by regulatory agencies and to ensure that the city’s sewer facilities are protected and are able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and to protect the public health and environment, specific enforcement provisions must be adopted to govern the discharges to the city’s sewer system by FSEs.

        B.     To ensure that all interested parties are afforded due process of law and that violations are resolved as soon as possible, a permittee, or applicant for a permit may appeal any determination made by the director, including but not limited to a denial of a discharge permit, a notice of violation; permit suspension or revocation; or a compliance schedule agreement (CSA), pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 9.25.185.

        C.    The city, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination, or all enforcement remedies provided in this chapter in response to any FOG wastewater discharge permit or chapter violations. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.135 Violations.
        A.     The owner and operator of a FSE or permittee shall be in violation of this chapter if such owner or operator or permittee:

        1.     Fails to install an approved grease control device as required by this chapter; or

        2.     Makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city; or

        3.     Tampers with or knowingly renders inoperable any grease control device required under this chapter; or

        4.     Fails to clean, maintain or remove grease from a grease control device within the required time for such cleaning, maintenance or grease removal; or

        5.     Fails to keep up-to-date and accurate records of all cleaning, maintenance, and grease removal and upon request to make those records available to any city code enforcement representative, or his or her designee, any representative of a local sanitation agency that has jurisdiction over the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction under the water quality chapter; or

        6.     Refuses a city code enforcement representative, or his or her designee, a representative of a local sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction over the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized inspector, reasonable access to the food facility for the purposes of inspecting, monitoring, or reviewing the grease control device manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, and/or to inspect the grease control device; or

        7.     Disposes of, or knowingly allows or directs FOG to be disposed of, in an unlawful manner; or

        8.     Fails to remove all food grinders located in the food facility by the date specified by this chapter; or

        9.     Introduces additives into a wastewater system for the purposes of emulsifying FOG without the written, specific authorization from the sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction of the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility; or

        10.   Fails to pay the grease disposal mitigation fee as specified in this chapter when due; or

        11.   Fails to comply with the FOG manual; or

        12.   Otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued by the city under this chapter.

        B.     Violations under this section shall be subject to the procedures, penalties and remedies set out in this chapter and Chapter 1.15. All costs for the investigations, enforcement actions, and ultimate corrections of violations under this section, incurred by the city shall be reimbursed by the owner/operator of the FSE. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.140 Compliance Schedule Agreement (CSA).
        A.     Upon determination by the director that a permittee or other owner or operator of a FSE or owner of a property is in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of this chapter, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device or grease interceptor, the director may require the permittee, owner or operator to enter into a CSA.

        B.     The issuance of a CSA may contain terms and conditions as determined appropriate by the director, including but not limited to requirements for installation of a grease control device, grease interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        C.    The director shall not enter into an CSA until such time as all amounts owed to the city, including user fees, noncompliance sampling fees, or, or other amounts due are paid in full, or an agreement for deferred payment secured by collateral or a third party, is approved by the director.

        D.    If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a CSA during its term, the director may issue an order suspending or revoking the discharge permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.145 FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit Suspension.
        A.     The director may suspend any permit when it is determined that a permittee:

        1.     Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a CSA order.

        2.     Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city.

        3.     Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter.

        4.     Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method.

        5.     Refuses reasonable access to the permittee’s premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring.

        6.     Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this chapter.

        7.     Causes interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with the city’s collection, treatment, or disposal system.

        8.     Violates grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit of its discharge permit or any provision of this chapter.

        B.     When the director has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension, he/she shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist.

        C.    Effect.

        1.     Upon an order of suspension by the director, the permittee shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city’s system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the permittee.

        2.     Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of suspension. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.150 Permit Revocation.
        A.     Revocation. The director may revoke any FOG wastewater discharge permit when it is determined that a permittee has failed to comply with this chapter.

        B.     Notice of Revocation. When the director has reason to believe that grounds exist for the revocation of a permit, he/she shall give written notice by certified mail thereof to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds.

        C.    Effect of Revocation.

        1.     Upon an order of revocation by the director becoming final, the permittee shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city’s system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the permittee.

        2.     Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of revocation.

        3.     Any future application for a discharge permit at any location within the city by any person associated with an order of revocation will be considered by the city after fully reviewing the records of the revoked permit, which records may be the basis for denial of a new permit.

        4.     An order of permit revocation issued by the director of public works shall be final in all respects on the 16th day after it is mailed to the permittee. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.155 Damages to Facilities or Interruption of Normal Operations.
        A.     Any person who discharges any waste, including but not limited to those listed under 40 CFR Section 403.5, which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSOs, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city’s sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs required to clean or repair the facilities together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. A service charge of 25% of city’s costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and record keeping. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing by the city.

        B.     Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.160 Public Nuisance.
        Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the director, as authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.165 Termination of Service.
        A.     The city, by order of the director, may physically terminate sewer service and water service to any FSE, as follows:

        1.     On a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or

        2.     Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city’s sewer facilities after the notice and process as provided herein.

        B.     All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the owner or operator of the FSE or permittee as well as all costs for reinstating service. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.170 Emergency Suspension Order.
        The city may, by order of the director, suspend sewer service and/or water service when the director determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause SSOs, sewer blockages, interference to the city’s sewer facilities, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.175 Civil Penalties.
        A.     In addition to criminal penalties and administrative penalties authorized by this municipal code, all users of the city’s system and facilities are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the city, U.S. EPA, State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board, or the County of Orange and other regulatory agencies. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including, but not limited to:

        1.     Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.A. Section 1251 et seq.);

        2.     California Porter Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.);

        3.     California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health & Safety Code Section 25100 et seq.);

        4.     Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C.A. Section 6901 et seq.); and

        5.     California Government Code, Sections 54739 through 54740.

        B.     In the event the city is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and said violation can be established by the city, as caused by the discharge of any user of the city’s system which is in violation of any provision of the city’s chapter or the user’s permit, the city shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected.

        C.    Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739 through 54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter; any permit condition, prohibition or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $25,000 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $25,000 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. The city attorney of the city, upon request of the director, shall petition the superior court to impose, assess, and recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the city may impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state legislative authorization.

        D.    Administrative Civil Penalties. Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates: any provision of this chapter; any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation order. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.180 Criminal Penalties.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment for not more than 6 months, or both. Each violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.185 Appeals to the City Manager.
        Any FSE, permit applicant, or permittee adversely affected by a decision made by the director may appeal the decision by filing, within 10 days, a written request for hearing before the city manager accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount established by resolution. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute all facts supporting appellant’s request. A hearing shall be held by the city manager within 65 days. If the matter is not heard within the required time, the order of the director shall be deemed final. The appeal fee shall be refunded if the city manager reverses or modifies, in favor of the appellant, the order of the director. After the hearing, the city manager shall uphold, modify, or reverse the decision. The written decision shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant or its legal counsel/representative at the appellant’s business address. The city manager’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.190 Payment of Charges.
        A.     Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties established by this chapter are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. All such amounts are delinquent if unpaid 45 days after date of invoice.

        B.     Any charge that becomes delinquent shall have added to it a penalty in accordance with the following:

        1.     46 days after date of invoice, a basic penalty of 10% of the base invoice amount, not to exceed a maximum of $1,000; and

        2.     A penalty of 1.5% per month of the base invoice amount and basic penalty shall accrue from and after the 46th day after date of invoice.

        C.    Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 90 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit.

        D.    Penalties charged under this section shall not accrue to those invoices successfully appealed, provided the city receives written notification of said appeal prior to the payment due date.

        E.     Payment of disputed charges is still required by the due date during the city review of any appeal submitted by permittees.

        F.     Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with the city’s policy resolution establishing procedures for collection of delinquent obligations owed to the city, as amended from time to time by the city council. Any such action for collection may include an application for an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1526)

 

9.25.195 Judicial Review.
        A.     Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the city hereby enacts this section to limit to 90 days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus.

        B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, and pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, judicial review of a final order of the city manager or the director imposing administrative civil penalties pursuant to this chapter may be made only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the 30th day following the day on which such order becomes final. (Ord. 1526)

Chapter 9.30 SEWERAGE
9.30.005 Connection Permit Required.
        No person shall connect, or cause the connection of, any premises to the city sewer system without first obtaining a connection permit. Connection permit applications shall be filed with the director of public works on a city-provided form. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.30.010 Sewer Lateral Maintenance.
        Each sewer service lateral from the building to the collector sewer shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition by the owner of the property served. For purposes of this section, the term “sewer service lateral” shall mean a pipe that carries sewage from the plumbing system of buildings to a collector sewer located in the public right-of-way and that has no other sewer tributary. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.30.015 Connection Charges.
        The rates, fees and charges for services and facilities furnished by the department of public works for sewerage shall be as set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.30.020 Monthly Charges.
        A.     Each residential unit, business, industrial enterprise or other entity that has a connection to the city sewer system shall pay a monthly service charge in an amount equal to 22% of the water billing to such user.

        B.     In addition to the monthly service charge set forth in subsection A, each residential unit, business, industrial enterprise or other entity that has a connection to the city sewer system shall pay a monthly capital charge in an amount set by city council resolution.

        C.    Monthly charges for a particular property shall be billed on the same bill and to the same ownership as the water bill for that property.

        D.    In the event any property in the city is unoccupied for 32 consecutive days during any 2-month billing period and no sewer service is provided to such property, a pro-rated charge shall be made on the basis of a sworn statement by the property owner attesting to the vacancy for the billing period last past.

        E.     The occupants of each premises shall be liable for payment of all fees and charges provided for in this chapter. Should any premises be unoccupied or should the occupant thereof fail to pay all such fees and charges before delinquency, the owner of the property shall be liable for the payment of all such fees, charges and delinquency penalties.

        F.     Should an account not be paid on or before the 20th day of the month in which it became due, it shall be deemed delinquent and a 10% penalty shall be added thereto. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.30.025 Orange County Sanitation District.
        No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of Ordinance No. OCSD-01 of the Orange County Sanitation District. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 9.35 WATER AND WATER CONSERVATION
9.35.005 Definitions.
        A.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        1.     Backflow: a flow condition, caused by a pressure differential, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of the city water system from any source other than an approved water supply.

        2.     Designated Irrigation Days: even-numbered days shall be the designated irrigation days for properties having an address ending in an even number; odd-numbered days shall be the designated irrigation days for properties having an address ending in an odd number.

        3.     Director: director of public works/city engineer or the designee thereof.

        4.     Local Health Agency: Orange County Health Department.

        5.     Water User: a person who obtains water from the city water system.

        B.     Any word or phrase used in this chapter that is defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 116275 or in California Code of Regulations Title 17, Section 7583 and not defined in subsection A shall have the meaning set forth in such state law provision. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.010 Application Requirement.
        Water shall not be supplied from the city water system to a property until the owner thereof has applied and received approval for a water service connection. An application shall not be processed unless accompanied by an application fee in an amount set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.015 Connection and Service Commencement.
        Upon approval of a water service connection, the director shall issue a permit authorizing the subject property to be connected to the city water system. The charge for water service shall commence from the date of meter installation. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.020 Rates, Fees and Charges.
        The rates, fees and charges for services, facilities and water furnished by the city water department shall be as set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.025 Billing, Delinquency and Security Deposit.
        A.     Billing and meter reading shall be performed by the city every 2 months. Full payment of a bill is due within 20 days after the invoice date. The charge shall become delinquent if the bill, or that portion thereof not in bona fide dispute, remains unpaid on the 36th day after the invoice date.

        B.     The director shall comply with the provisions of the city water utility’s official policy on discontinuation of residential water service, as adopted by city council resolution and on file in the office of the city water department, as well as provisions of applicable law, when issuing delinquency notices or terminating water service to a residential user.

        C.    The basic penalty for nonpayment of water service charges by the due date shall be 10% of each month’s charges for the first month delinquent. In addition to the basic penalty, there shall be a penalty of 0.5% per month for nonpayment of the charges and basic penalty.

        D.    Once water service has been terminated, the service of a delinquent user shall not be resumed until the user’s account has been made current and the applicable a reinstatement fee has been paid. The reinstatement fee amount shall be set by city council resolution, subject to limitations set forth in the policy on discontinuation of residential water service. The director may remove a meter, and take any other appropriate action, upon determining that terminated water service has been unlawfully restored. This paragraph shall not apply to the furnishing of water to a subsequent tenant, or to the furnishing of water to the property owner in the event the tenant vacates the premises.

        E.     Tenant residential users shall submit a security deposit prior to establishing an account. The security deposit shall be in an amount determined by the director. The security deposit shall not exceed 3 times the estimated average monthly bill if water is billed separately to the user, or twice the average periodic payment if the user pays for water as a part of his or her rent. In the event of nonpayment of all or a portion of the bill, the security deposit shall be applied to the final bill issued when water service is terminated. No property owner or subsequent tenant shall be liable for any charges or penalties for water service furnished to a delinquent tenant residential user. This subsection shall not apply to master-metered apartment buildings.

        F.     In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter for the enforcement and collection of delinquent bills, all charges and penalties shall be a lien against the property to which the water service was furnished. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not impose a lien on residential properties for the delinquent rates or charges of a tenant, except for master-metered apartment buildings. (Ord. 1682; Ord. 1524; Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.030 Facility Maintenance.
        When repair or replacement of water meters, service pipes, curb cocks and other fittings installed by the city is necessary due to the act or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises, the expense therefor shall be charged to the owner of the premises. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.035 Meter Testing.
        A.     Any water user may request testing of the meter governing the provision of water. Requests shall be made on a city-provided form and shall be accompanied by a deposit in an amount set by city council resolution.

        B.     Upon receipt of a complete meter testing application, the director shall cause the meter to be tested for the purpose of ascertaining whether it accurately registers the water delivered through it. If such meter is found to register over 3% more water than actually passes through it, then another meter shall be substituted, the deposit shall be returned to the user and the water bill for the current period shall be adjusted in such manner as deemed appropriate by the director. Otherwise, the deposit shall be forfeit and the water bill shall be paid as issued. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.040 Service Interruption.
        When necessary, the director may remove a meter or shut down water service temporarily for the purpose of testing or repairs. If another meter is not substituted therefor, the charge for water service during the period of such removal shall be computed pro rata upon the amount of water consumed during the preceding calendar month or upon the rate for sale of water where no meter is installed. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.045 Private Fire Lines.
        No private fire line shall be used for any purpose other than extinguishing fires unless the line is equipped with a full-flow meter. Regular meter rates shall be charged when the line is so equipped. The director shall impose a charge for any unauthorized use of water through a private fire line, which charge shall not be less than $100. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.050 Fire Hydrants.
        A.     Except as provided in subsection B, fire hydrants shall be used exclusively for extinguishing fires and for flushing water mains under the jurisdiction of the fire department or the director.

        B.     With the prior written authorization of the director, a public or building contractor may connect to a fire hydrant. The charge for water used by such contractors shall be as set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.055 Damaging or Removing Facilities.
        No person shall damage any water meter, service pipe, curb cock or other fitting installed by the city. No person shall remove a meter, service pipe or connection without the prior written consent of the director. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.060 Waste Prevention.
        Each water service user shall prevent water waste and shall keep service pipes, fixtures, stopcocks and other plumbing apparatus at its premises in good condition. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.065 Access to Meters.
        City water meters shall be left open and uncovered at all times, and city representatives shall have access to the meters at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspection, testing and repair. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.070 Wire Grounding.
        No person shall ground any electric wire upon a water main, water pipe or service connection. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.075 Sewer Pipe Proximity.
        No sewer pipe or sewer ditch shall be placed nearer to any water main or service pipe than is allowed by state law and the standards of the director. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.080 Pipe Movement.
        Any water pipes or service connections required to be moved in order to comply with this chapter shall be relocated on the order of the director. Any cost associated with the relocation shall be paid by the owner of the property. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.085 Irrigation and Storm Flood Control Ditches.
        No person shall construct or maintain an irrigation ditch or storm flood control ditch without the prior written consent of the director. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.090 Cross-Connection Program.
        A.     No person shall make or maintain a cross-connection with the city water system.

        B.     Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on each property that has any of the following:

        1.     A substance, other than an auxiliary water supply approved by the director and local health agency as an additional source, that is handled in such fashion as may allow entry into the city water system.

        2.     Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently controlled to the satisfaction of the director and the local health agency.

        3.     Intricate piping arrangements making it impracticable to ascertain the existence of cross-connections.

        4.     A high probability of hazardous cross-connections.

        C.    No backflow prevention device shall be removed, relocated or replaced without the prior written approval of the director. The director may condition any approval to ensure that the removal, relocation or replacement is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

        D.    The director may summarily terminate water service to a property if necessary to eliminate a clear and immediate hazard to the city water system. The director shall afford the water user a hearing on the necessity for such termination if a request is filed within 10 days of the termination. The director may, following reasonable notice and an opportunity for a hearing, terminate water service to a property when there is a non-immediate hazard to the city water system. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.35.095 Permanent Water Conservation.
        The water conservation requirements set forth in this chapter are effective at all times and are applicable unless repealed by the city council. Violations of this chapter shall be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.100 Leaks.
        Each water user shall repair all leaks from indoor and outdoor plumbing fixture at the user’s premises. Such water user shall eliminate any loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system promptly after discovering the leak and in no event in less than 7 days. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.105 Runoff.
        No water user shall cause or allow water to run off landscape areas into adjoining streets, sidewalks, driveways, alleys, gutters, ditches or any paved surfaces due to incorrectly maintained sprinklers, excessive watering or use. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.110 Limits on Watering Hours.
        No water user shall cause or allow watering or irrigating of the user’s lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day, except by use of a hand-water shut-off nozzle or device, or for a very short period of time for the limited purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.115 Limit on Watering Duration.
        No water user shall cause or allow watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended for longer than 15 minutes watering per day per station. This section does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than 2 gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a 70% efficiency standard. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.120 Service of Water at Restaurants.
        Restaurants shall not offer water service and shall serve water only to a customer that specifically requests water. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.125 Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features.
        No person shall operate a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.130 No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems.
        No person shall install single pass cooling systems in connection with new water service. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.135 No Installation of Non-recirculating in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems.
        No person shall install non-recirculating water systems in connection with commercial conveyor car wash and commercial laundry systems. Effective on January 1, 2010, the owner or operator of any commercial conveyor car wash system shall install operational re-circulating water systems, or secure a waiver of this requirement from the director. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.140 Washing of Vehicles and Equipment.
        No person shall wash a motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other type of mobile equipment other than by a hand-held bucket or by a hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle. This prohibition shall not apply to washing performed at a commercial car wash. (Ord. 1586)

9.35.145 Determination of Water Conservation Phase.
        A.     The city council may by resolution declare a water conservation phase upon making a finding specified in subsection B of this section. Such resolutions shall specify the start day of the phase and shall be effective upon publication in a daily newspaper of general circulation within the city.

        B.     The finding necessary for each water conservation phase is as follows:

        1.     A Phase 1 water supply shortage exists when the city council determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city council of a Phase 1 water supply shortage condition, the city council will implement the mandatory Phase 1 conservation measures identified in this section.

        2.     A Phase 2 water supply shortage exists when the city council determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a severe water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city council of a Phase 2 water supply shortage condition, the city council will implement the mandatory Phase 2 conservation measures identified in this section.

        3.     A Phase 3 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A Phase 3 condition exists when the city council declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety. Upon the declaration of a Phase 3 water supply shortage condition, the city council will implement the mandatory Phase 3 conservation measures identified in this section. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.150 Phase 1 Measures.
        The following water conservation measures apply during water conservation Phase 1.

        A.     Irrigation shall not be performed except on designated irrigation days and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Irrigation may be performed at any time if done by means of a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, a hand-held faucet filled bucket of 5 gallons or less, or a drip irrigation system.

        B.     Agricultural users and commercial nurseries shall curtail all non-essential water use, but are otherwise exempt from Phase 1 measures. Watering of livestock and irrigation of propagation beds are permitted at any time.

        C.    Washing of motor vehicles, boats, airplanes and other mobile equipment shall be performed only on designated irrigation days and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This prohibition shall not apply to the washing of garbage trucks, vehicles used to transport food and perishables and other mobile equipment for which frequent cleaning is essential for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

        D.    Filling or refilling of swimming pools, spas, ponds and artificial lakes shall be performed only on designated irrigation days and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        E.     Watering golf courses, parks, school grounds and recreational fields shall be performed only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This prohibition does not apply to golf course greens.

        F.     Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks, hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys. Notwithstanding this prohibition, a water user may wash down such surfaces when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom.

        G.    Ornamental fountains and similar structures shall not be operated. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.155 Phase 2 Measures.
        The following water conservation measures apply during water conservation Phase 2.

        A.     Irrigation shall not be performed except on designated irrigation days and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        B.     Agricultural users and commercial nurseries shall use water only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Watering of livestock and irrigation of propagation beds are permitted at any time.

        C.    Washing of motor vehicles, boats, airplanes and other mobile equipment is prohibited except when performed at a commercial car wash. This prohibition shall not apply to the washing of garbage trucks, vehicles used to transport food and perishables and other mobile equipment for which frequent cleaning is essential for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

        D.    Filling or refilling of swimming pools, spas, ponds and artificial lakes shall be performed only on designated irrigation days and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        E.     Watering golf courses, parks, school grounds and recreational fields shall be performed only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This prohibition does not apply to golf course greens.

        F.     Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas except to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom.

        G.    Restaurants shall not serve water to customers unless specifically requested.

        H.    Ornamental fountains and similar structures shall not be operated.

        I.      New construction meters and permits for unmetered service shall not be issued. Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes.

        J.     The use of non-reclaimed and non-recycled water by commercial car washes shall be reduced in volume by 20%. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.160 Phase 3 Measures.
        The following water conservation measures apply during water conservation Phase 3.

        A.     Outdoor irrigation is prohibited.

        B.     Use of water for agricultural or commercial nursery purposes is prohibited. This prohibition shall not apply to watering of livestock.

        C.    Washing of motor vehicles, boats, airplanes and other mobile equipment is prohibited except when performed at a commercial car wash. This prohibition shall not apply to the washing of garbage trucks, vehicles used to transport food and perishables and other mobile equipment for which frequent cleaning is essential for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

        D.    Filling or refilling of swimming pools, spas, ponds and artificial lakes is prohibited.

        E.     Watering golf course areas, other than greens, is prohibited. Watering of parks, school grounds and recreational fields is prohibited except for plant materials classified as rare, exceptionally valuable or essential to the well being of rare animals.

        F.     Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas except to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards.

        G.    Restaurants shall not serve water to customers unless specifically requested.

        H.    Ornamental fountains and similar structures shall not be operated.

        I.      New construction meters and permits for unmetered service shall not be issued. Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes.

        J.     The use of non-reclaimed and non-recycled water by commercial car washes shall be reduced in volume by 50%.

        K.     The use of water for commercial manufacturing or processing purposes shall be reduced in volume by 50%.

        L.     Water shall not be used for air conditioning purposes. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.165 Relief From Water Conservation Measures.
        A.     Within 15 days of the effective date of a resolution declaring the water conservation phase, any water user may apply to the director for relief from the applicable water conservation measures. Applications shall be filed on a city-provided form and shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set by city council resolution.

        B.     The director may approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for relief from water conservation measures. In making such determination, the director shall consider the following factors:

        1.     Whether additional reduction in water consumption will result in unemployment.

        2.     Whether additional persons have been added to the household.

        3.     Whether additional landscaped property has been added to the property since the corresponding billing period of the prior calendar year.

        4.     Changes in vacancy factors in multifamily housing.

        5.     Increased number of employees in commercial, industrial and governmental offices.

        6.     Increased production requiring increased process water.

        7.     Water uses during new construction.

        8.     Adjustments to water use caused by emergency health or safety hazards.

        9.     First filling of a permit-constructed swimming pool.

        10.   Water use necessary for reasons related to family illness or health.

        11.   Whether the applicant has achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption other than in the specific areas for which relief is sought.

        C.    The decision of the director shall be final. (Ord. 1586)

 

9.35.170 Enforcement of Water Conservation Requirements.
        A.     The penalties set forth in this section shall be exclusive and not cumulative with any other provision of this code.

        B.     Violation of water conservation measures shall be penalized as follows:

        1.     First violation: the director shall issue a written notice.

        2.     Second violation during a water conservation phase: the director shall impose a surcharge in an amount equal to 15% of the violator’s water bill.

        3.     Subsequent violations during a water conservation phase: the director shall install a flow restricting device of one gallon per minute capacity for services up to 1.5 inches size, and a comparatively sized restrictor for larger service, on the service of the violator at the premises at which the violation occurred for a period of not less than 48 hours. The director shall charge the water user the actual costs of installation and removal of the device and for restoration of normal service. Normal service shall not be restored until all the account has been made current and all charges have been paid.

        C.    Any person receiving a notice of second or subsequent violation may request a hearing by the director by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within 15 days of the date of such notice. The appeal fee shall be in an amount set by city council resolution. A timely request for a hearing shall stay the installation of a flow-restricting device on the appellant’s premises until a decision has been made on the appeal. If the director determines that the surcharge was incorrectly assessed, the city shall refund any money deposited by the customer. The director’s decision on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 1586)

Chapter 9.40 TREES
9.40.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Caliper: the maximum cross sectional width of the trunk of a tree measured at 4 feet above the natural grade. In the case of multi-trunked trees, “caliper” means the sum of the calipers of each trunk measured at 4 feet above grade; provided, however, that if the caliper of at least one trunk is not at least 4 inches, the tree shall be deemed to have no caliper.

        Director: director of development services in matters involving private property and director of public works/city engineer in matters involving public property.

        Eucalyptus Grove: cluster of 15 or more eucalyptus trees.

        Eucalyptus Tree: a tree of the eucalyptus species measuring more than 12 inches in diameter at a point 4.5 feet above the ground.

        Top: severely cut back limbs to stubs larger than 3 inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.40.010 City Trees and Structures.
        A.     No person shall do any of the following:

        1.     Remove, cut, destroy, relocate, trim, prune, deface, burn, or otherwise injure any tree, hedge, plant, shrub or flower growing upon city property.

        2.     Top any tree growing upon city property.

        3.     Hitch an animal to, attach a sign upon, deface, burn, cut or otherwise injure any frame, post, trellis or other structure used to protect or support any tree, hedge, plant, shrub or flower growing upon city property.

        B.     Subsection A of this section does not apply to the following when done with written authorization from the director or by city employees engaged in the discharge of official duties:

        1.     Trimming or pruning for the protection or maintenance of traffic control devices, public utility lines or water, sewer or utility lines.

        2.     Removal of tree parts that have been damaged by an act of God and that create a hazard to life or property.

        3.     Removal of a tree that is nonviable as a result of disease or damage. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.40.015 Eucalyptus Tree Permit Requirement.
        No person shall remove, cut, destroy, relocate or perform any activity that may damage a eucalyptus grove without first obtaining a eucalyptus tree permit. This prohibition does not apply to eucalyptus trees located on private property in a residential subdivision that is regulated by a homeowners association. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.40.020 Approval or Denial of Eucalyptus Tree Permit.
        A.     The city council shall be the decision maker for eucalyptus tree permits involving property owned or controlled by the city. The planning commission shall be the decision maker for eucalyptus tree permits involving the use or development of private property. The director shall be the decision maker for other eucalyptus tree permits involving private property.

        B.     The decision maker may approve or conditionally approve a eucalyptus tree permit if the proposed work is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare; otherwise the permit shall be denied. In making such determination, the decision maker shall consider the following factors:

        1.     Tree condition with respect to disease, risk of falling and potential danger to life, property or a grove.

        2.     The number of trees that can adequately be supported on the subject property.

        3.     Extent of tree interference with existing utility services, streets and highways.

        4.     Effect of the proposed work on erosion, soil retention, surface water flow and neighboring properties.

        5.     Feasibility of alternative development plans that do not jeopardize the trees.

        C.    A public hearing shall be held for eucalyptus tree permit applications for which the city council or the planning commission is the decision maker. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to property owners within 300 feet of the subject property and published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than 10 days before the hearing date.

        D.    Eucalyptus tree permit decisions of the director may be appealed to the planning commission, and eucalyptus tree permit decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Appeals shall be filed and processed in accordance with the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.40.025 Eucalyptus Tree Permit Expiration.
        Eucalyptus tree permits shall expire one year after issuance or on the date specified in the permit, whichever is earlier, unless the work authorized by the permit is commenced prior to such date. On written application, the director may extend the term of the permit for a period not exceeding one year. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.40.030 Property Owner Responsibilities.
        A.     Each owner of property containing a tree that overhangs an abutting city parkway, street, sidewalk or right-of-way shall do the following:

        1.     Prune the branches of the tree so as to prevent obstruction of traffic control devices or lighting from street lamps, and so as to ensure a clear space of at least 8 feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk.

        2.     Remove dead, diseased or dangerous limbs or trees that constitute a menace to public safety.

        B.     The city manager may cause such work to be performed summarily whenever the tree presents an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Otherwise, the work shall be performed by the property owner upon written notification from the city manager. The property owner shall be responsible for the city’s actual costs of performing the work. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.40.035 Violations.
        In addition to any misdemeanor penalty assessed, any person violating this chapter shall reimburse the city an amount equal to the actual cost of replacing the tree, hedge, plant, shrub or flower. The director shall determine such cost by considering the characteristics of the damaged or removed tree, including without limitation its age, condition, species and shade potential. Any debt incurred as a result of this chapter shall be enforceable in the same manner as a civil debt. Unless determined otherwise by the director, illegally removed or destroyed trees shall be replaced with a species and in a location designated by the director in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Caliper Width of the Tree Removed

Number Removed

Replace With Up To

Size

10 inches and under

1

4

24″ box

10 inches - 14 inches

1

4

36″ box

15 inches and above

1

4

48″ box

(Ord. 1515)

 
Chapter 9.45 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
9.45.010 Statutory Authority.
        The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the City of Seal Beach does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.020 Findings of Fact.
        A.     The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

        B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 1640)

9.45.030 Statement of Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately-owned land within flood prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:

        A.     Protect human life and health;

        B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

        C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

        D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

        E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

        F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

        G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

        H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.040 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
        In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:

        A.     Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

        B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

        C.    Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

        D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage; and

        E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.050 Definitions.
        Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

        Accessory Structure: a structure that is either:

        1.     Solely for the parking of no more than 2 cars; or

        2.     A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square feet and $1,500 in value.

        Appeal: a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

        Base Flood: a flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

        Base Flood Elevation (BFE): the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

        Basement: any area of the building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides.

        Breakaway Walls: any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material that is not part of the structural support of the building and that is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall must have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

        1.     Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

        2.     The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

        Coastal High Hazard Area: an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V.

        Development: any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.

        Encroachment: the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

        Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 8, 1978.

        Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

        Flood, Flooding, or Flood Water:

        1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

        2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

        Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM): the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

        Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

        Flood Insurance Study: the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

        Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area: any land area susceptible to flooding by water from any source.

        Floodplain Administrator: the public official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

        Floodplain Management: the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

        Floodplain Management Regulations: this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power that control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof that provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

        Floodproofing: any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.

        Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

        Fraud and Victimization: as related to Section 9.45.090 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

        Functionally Dependent Use: a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

        Hardship: for purposes of Section 9.45.090 of this chapter, an exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. A variance may only be granted if the hardship is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

        Highest Adjacent Grade: the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

        Historic Structure: any structure that is:

        1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

        2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

        3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

        4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

        Levee: a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

        Levee System: a flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

        Lowest Floor: the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement.

        1.     An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

        a.     The flood openings standard in Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(c);

        b.     The anchoring standards in Section 9.45.080(A)(1);

        c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 9.45.080(A)(2); and

        d.     The standards for utilities in Section 9.45.080(B).

        2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement”). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

        Manufactured Home: a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

        Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

        Market Value: the figure obtained by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation, that has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

        Mean Sea Level: for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

        New Construction: for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after May 8, 1978, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

        New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 8, 1978.

        Obstruction: includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse that may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

        Primary Frontal Dune: a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope.

        Public Safety and Nuisance: for purposes of Section 9.45.090 of this chapter, anything injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or that unlawfully obstructs the free and customary passage or use of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

        Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle that is:

        1.     Built on a single chassis;

        2.     400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

        3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

        4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

        Regulatory Floodway: the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

        Remedy a Violation: to bring a structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance by means that include but are not limited to protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter, or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

        Riverine: relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

        Sand Dunes: naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

        Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) or Area of Special Flood Hazard: an area in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V.

        Start of Construction: substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

        Structure: a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; including a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

        Substantial Damage: damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

        Substantial improvement: any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. Substantial improvement does not include the following:

        1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

        2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

        Variance: a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

        Violation: the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

        Water Surface Elevation: the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

        Watercourse: a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topo-graphic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. “Watercourse” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1678; Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.060 General Provisions.
        A.     Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.

        B.     Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Seal Beach” dated July 3, 1978, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM’s) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM’s), dated July 3, 1978, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall.

        C.    Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

        D.    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

        E.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

        1.     Considered as minimum requirements;

        2.     Liberally construed in favor of the city; and

        3.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

        F.     Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1678; Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.070 Administration.
        A.     Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

        B.     Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator include, but are not limited to, the following:

        1.     Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine if:

        a.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;

        b.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

        c.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

        d.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city; and

        e.     All Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

        2.     Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures.

        a.     Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining “Market Value.”

        b.     Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.

        3.     Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data.

        a.     When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 9.45.060(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 9.45.080.

        b.     A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations,” dated July 1995.

        4.     Notification of Other Agencies.

        a.     Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

        (1)    Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

        (2)    Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

        (3)    Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

        b.     Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:

        (1)    Within 6 months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).

        (2)    All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

        c.     Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

        5.     Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

        a.     Certification required by Sections 9.45.080(A)(3)(a) and (D) (lowest floor elevations);

        b.     Certification required by Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(b) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

        c.     Certification required by Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(c) (wet floodproofing standard);

        d.     Certification of elevation required by Section 9.45.080(C)(1)(c) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);

        e.     Certification required by Section 9.45.080(F)(2) (floodway encroachments);

        f.      Information required by Section 9.45.080(G)(6) (coastal construction standards); and

        g.     Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

        6.     Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 9.45.070(D).

        7.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 9.45.060(C).

        8.     Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.

        9.     Planning. Assure community’s general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein.

        C.    Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 9.45.060(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:

        1.     Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:

        a.     Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;

        b.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;

        c.     Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;

        d.     Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;

        e.     Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 9.45.060(B) or Section 9.45.070(B)(3);

        f.      Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

        g.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(b) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.

        2.     Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(b).

        3.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(c) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.

        4.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

        5.     All appropriate certifications listed in Section 9.45.070(B)(5) of this chapter.

        D.    Appeals. The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.080 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
        A.     Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

        1.     Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

        2.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:

        a.     With flood-resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;

        b.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

        c.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

        d.     Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

        3.     Elevation and Floodproofing.

        a.     Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

        (1)    In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

        (2)    In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

        (3)    In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 9.45.070(B)(3).

        Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        b.     Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(a) or:

        (1)    Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(a), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

        (2)    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

        (3)    Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(a) and (b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        c.     Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet either of the following minimum criteria:

        (1)    Have a minimum of 2 openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter.

        (2)    Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.

        d.     Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures.

        (1)    Attached Garages. A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(c). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See Section 9.45.080(A)(2). A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.

        (2)    Detached Garages and Accessory Structures. An accessory structure may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; the portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; the accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; the accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 9.45.080(F); and the accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section 9.45.080(A)(3)(c). Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 9.45.080(A).

        B.     Standards for Utilities.

        1.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

        a.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

        b.     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

        2.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding.

        C.    Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed Development.

        1.     All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

        a.     Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE).

        b.     Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.

        c.     If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator:

        (1)    Lowest floor elevation.

        (2)    Pad elevation.

        (3)    Lowest adjacent grade.

        2.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

        3.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

        4.     All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

        D.    Standards for Manufactured Homes.

        1.     All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall:

        a.     Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

        b.     Within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, meet the requirements of Section 9.45.080(G).

        2.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 9.45.080(D)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

        a.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

        b.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade.

        Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        E.     Standards for Recreational Vehicles.

        1.     All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30 and VE will either:

        a.     Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

        b.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

        c.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 9.45.070(C) of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 9.45.080(D).

        2.     Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Sections 9.45.080(E)(1) and (G).

        F.     Floodways. Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

        1.     Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city.

        2.     Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

        3.     If Sections 9.45.080(F)(1) and (2) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 9.45.080.

        G.    Coastal High Hazard Areas. Within coastal high hazard areas, Zones V, V1-30, and VE, as established under Section 9.45.060(B), the following standards shall apply:

        1.     All new residential and nonresidential construction, including substantial improvement/damage, shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards.

        2.     All new construction and other development shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide.

        3.     All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Section 9.45.050 of this chapter. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.

        4.     Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.

        5.     Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

        6.     The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records:

        a.     Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with Section 9.45.080(G)(1); and

        b.     The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement. (Ord. 1640)

 

9.45.090 Variance Procedure.
        A.     Nature of Variances. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

        It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements of this chapter are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

        B.     Conditions of Variances.

        1.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 9.45.070 and 9.45.080 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

        2.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

        3.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

        4.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter.

        5.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

        a.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and

        b.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the Office of the Orange County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

        6.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

        C.    Appeal Board.

        1.     In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

        a.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

        b.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

        c.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

        d.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

        e.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

        f.      Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

        g.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

        h.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

        i.      Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

        j.      Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

        k.     Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

        2.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

        a.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

        b.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” to the applicant; and

        c.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see “Public safety and nuisance”), cause “fraud and victimization” of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

        3.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Section 9.45.090(C) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

        4.     Upon consideration of the factors of Section 9.45.090(B)(1) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1640)

Chapter 9.50 GRADING
9.50.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Approved Plans: the current grading plans bearing the city engineer’s stamp of approval.

        Approved Testing Agency: a facility approved by the city engineer as being capable of performing, under the direction of a civil engineer, the tests required by this chapter.

        Borrow: earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading.

        Clearing, Brushing and Grubbing: mechanical removal of vegetation.

        Compaction: mechanical densification of a fill.

        Director: director of public works/city engineer.

        Earth Material: rock or soil in any combination.

        Excavation: mechanical removal of earth material.

        Existing Grade: the grade prior to grading.

        Fill Placement: mechanical deposit of earth material.

        Finished Grade: the stage at which the grade fully conforms to the approved plans.

        Grade: the vertical location of the ground surface.

        Grading: excavation or fill placement in any combination.

        Natural Grade: the grade unaltered by artificial means.

        Precise Grading Permit: a grading permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans that show the precise structure location, finished elevations and on-site improvements.

        Preliminary Grading Permit: a grading permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans that show interim building pad drainage but do not show precise structure location, finished elevations and on-site improvements.

        Rough Grade: the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plans.

        Slope: an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.010 Implementation Manuals.
        A.     The director may prepare a grading manual and a stormwater pollution prevention manual to facilitate implementation of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this code and either such manual, the provisions of this code shall control.

        B.     Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked for failure to comply with the grading manual or the stormwater pollution prevention manual. Additionally, any person who fails to comply with either such manual shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.015 Grading Permit Requirement.
        No person shall perform any of the following activities without first obtaining from the city engineer, and maintaining in full force and effect, a grading permit:

        A.     Grading or land disturbing or land filling on existing grade that is preparatory to grading.

        B.     Clearing, brushing and grubbing.

        C.    Construction of pavement surfacing in excess of 2,499 square feet on existing grade for the purpose of a road or parking lot. This provision does not include resurfacing or maintenance of existing paved surfaces.

        D.    Alteration of an existing watercourse, channel or revetment by means of excavation, fill placement or installation of rock protection or structural improvements. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.020 Approval or Denial of Grading Permit.
        A.     Grading permit applications shall be filed with the director on a city-provided form. Applications shall include plans and specifications, as well as supporting data consisting of soil engineering and engineering geology reports, unless waived by the city engineer. In lieu of preliminary soil engineering reports, the director may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency.

        B.     The director may approve or conditionally approve a preliminary grading permit or a precise grading permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise the permit shall be denied. A grading permit shall be denied if the director makes any of the following findings:

        1.     The proposed work does not comply with the general plan, the zoning ordinance or an applicable specific plan and no conditions can be imposed to ensure compliance.

        2.     The proposed work is liable to constitute an unreasonable hazard to life or property and no conditions can be imposed to mitigate such risk to an acceptable level.

        3.     The property proposed to be graded is subject to an unreasonable geological or flood hazard and no conditions can be imposed to mitigate such risk to an acceptable level.

        C.    A grading permit shall automatically expire and become null and void if the authorized work is not commenced within 180 days from the date of permit issuance. Additionally, a grading permit shall automatically expire and become null and void if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned after commencement for a period of 180 days. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.025 Grading Permit Exemptions.
        A grading permit shall not be required for any of the following:

        A.     Excavations below finished grade for basements, building footings, retaining walls or other structures authorized by a building permit provided that the excavation does not have an unsupported height greater than 5 feet after completion of the structure.

        B.     Cemetery graves.

        C.    Refuse disposal sites governed by other laws.

        D.    Agricultural crop management practices occurring on land that has been farmed during each of the preceding 3 years.

        E.     Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or substantial flood or fire hazards.

        F.     Excavations within public right-of-way that are performed in accordance with an encroachment permit.

        G.    Activities meeting all of the following requirements:

        1.     The land area that is disturbed or filled is 2,499 square feet or less.

        2.     Natural and finished slopes are less than 10%.

        3.     Volume of earth material disturbed, stored or used is 50 cubic yards or less.

        4.     Rainwater runoff is diverted, either during or after construction, from an area smaller than 2,499 square feet.

        5.     Any impervious surface that is created is 2,499 square feet or less.

        6.     No drainageway has its stormwater carrying capacity modified.

        7.     The activity does not take place within 100 feet from the top of a coastal bluff, the bank of a watercourse, the mean high watermark (line of vegetation) of a body of water or within the wetlands associated with a watercourse or water body. The distance shall be determined by horizontal measurement. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.030 Grade Elevation Permit.
        A.     Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person shall raise the existing grade of a residential lot without first obtaining a grade elevation permit from the planning commission.

        B.     Applications for a grade elevation permit shall be submitted to the director of development services on a city-provided form. Notice of a grade elevation permit application shall be given no less than 10 days before the hearing date by publication in a newspaper of general circulation and by mailing to all property owners and addresses within a 300-foot radius of the subject property.

        C.    The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny a grade elevation permit after conducting a public hearing on the application. A grade elevation permit shall be denied unless the planning commission makes the following findings:

        1.     The change of grade will not result in a significant impairment of the primary view from any property located within a 300-foot radius.

        2.     The change of grade is compatible with the neighborhood.

        D.    The director of development services and the director may jointly waive the grade elevation permit requirement in either of the following circumstances:

        1.     When raising the existing grade is necessary for flood hazard reduction in accordance with law.

        2.     When raising the existing grade is the only feasible alternative for proper drainage function of the site. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.035 Security.
        A.     When deemed necessary, the director may require any person issued a grading permit to post security to assure that the work shall be completed in accordance with the permit, the approved plans and this chapter. The amount and form of the security shall be determined by the director.

        B.     Upon determining that a default has occurred in the performance of any grading permit condition, or that there is a failure to comply with an order issued, the director shall give written notice thereof to the permittee and to the surety if applicable. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the deadline for completion. If the work is not satisfactorily performed prior to the deadline, the estimated cost of completing the work (including a mobilization charge equal to 10% of such cost) shall be demanded from the surety or obtained from the security, and the director shall cause such work to be performed. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.040 Fees.
        A.     The city council may by resolution establish fees to cover the estimated reasonable cost of processing permits and administration of this chapter.

        B.     If the director performs emergency or other work on private property, the owner of such property shall reimburse the city in full for all expenses incurred by the city. Such expenses shall include without limitation a mobilization charge equal to 10% of the cost of performance of the work. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.045 Inspections.
        A.     The director may inspect a property prior to approving a grading permit in order to confirm that the application accurately reflects existing conditions.

        B.     The director may inspect grading operations at the various stages of work requiring approval and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine whether adequate control is being exercised by the permittee and its professional consultants. If any work to be inspected has been covered or concealed, the city engineer may require the permittee to expose such work at its own cost.

        C.    Upon determining that any work does not comply with the terms of a grading permit, grade elevation permit, this code or other applicable law, or that the soil or other conditions are not as stated on the permit, the city engineer may order the work stopped. Such order shall be effectuated by service of written notice on any person supervising the performance of the work. The grading operations shall not proceed until written authorization is received from the director. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.050 Grading Standards.
        Grading operations shall be conducted in compliance with the following standards:

        A.     The permittee shall maintain a copy of the approved plans in an obvious and accessible location on the subject property.

        B.     No grading operations shall be performed between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Sundays or federal holidays, on any property located within one-half mile of a structure for human occupancy. The city engineer may waive this restriction upon making a finding that it is unnecessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare in a particular situation. The city engineer may impose more stringent restrictions upon making a finding that they are necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare in a particular situation.

        C.    Where an excess of 1,000 cubic yards of earth material is moved on public roadways, all the following requirements shall be satisfied:

        1.     The permittee shall apply water, a palliative or both as directed by the director to minimize spillage of dust onto public property.

        2.     The permittee shall maintain public property free of dust, earth material and debris from the grading operations.

        3.     The grading operations shall be performed in accordance with the approved plans.

        4.     The last 50 feet of the access road, as it approaches the intersection with the public roadway, shall have a grade less than or equal to 3%. The access road shall either be posted with flaggers or there shall be 300 feet of unobstructed sight distance to the intersection from both the public roadway and the access road.

        5.     A stop sign shall be posted at the entrance of the access road to the public roadway.

        6.     Advance warning “Truck Crossing” signs shall be posted on the public roadway 400 feet of the access intersection from each direction. The sign shall be diamond shaped, each side being 30 inches in length, shall have an orange background, and the letters thereon shall be 5 inches in height. The sign shall be placed 8 feet from the edge of the pavement and the base of the sign shall be 5 feet above the pavement level. The sign shall be covered or removed when the access intersection is not in use.

        D.    The permittee shall provide the director with 2 copies of all reports, compaction data and recommendations from its civil engineer, soil engineer, engineering geologist, grading contractor and the approved testing agency.

        E.     If the permittee’s civil engineer, soil engineer, engineering geologist, grading contractor or the approved testing agency finds that the grading operations are not being done in conformance with the approved plans, the discrepancies shall be reported in writing to the director immediately.

        F.     Grading operations shall stop whenever, during the course of the work, the permittee replaces the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, the approved testing agency, or the grading contractor of record. This provision shall not apply if the permittee notifies the director in writing of the responsible professional change, and the new responsible professional notifies the director in writing that the work performed to date has been reviewed and approved. This provision also shall not apply if the responsible professional change is between individuals in a single firm. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.055 Completion of Work.
        A.     The permittee shall notify the director when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. The director shall not issue final approval until all work has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved plans.

        B.     No building permit shall be issued for a site until grading has been completed pursuant to a precise grading permit. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.50.060 Violations.
        A.     Any person who causes grading to be done contrary to the provisions of a grading permit, a grading elevation permit, the approved plans or this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        B.     In the event that any grading is done contrary to the provisions of a grading permit, a grading elevation permit, the approved plans or this chapter, the city may take any of the following actions:

        1.     Record with the county recorder a notice of grading violation. The director shall cause the notice of grading violation to be removed upon determining that the violation no longer exists.

        2.     Withhold issuance of a building permit, performance of building permit inspections or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy.

        3.     Deny approval of a zone change, subdivision map or discretionary permit. (Ord. 1515)

Chapter 9.55 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
9.55.005 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Director: director of public works/city engineer.

        Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures: poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

        Underground Utility District or “District”: an area within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited.

        Utility: all persons or entities regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission and supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.010 Public Hearing.
        A.     The city council may schedule public hearings to ascertain whether the public health, safety or welfare requires removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall give 10 days’ advance written notice of the hearing by mail to affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to affected utilities. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time.

        B.     Prior to the public hearing, the director shall consult with affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at the hearing. The report shall contain estimates of the total cost, as well as estimates of the time required to complete the underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.015 Designation of District.
        A.     The city council may by resolution designate an underground utility district upon making a finding that the public health, safety or welfare requires removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within the designated area and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which removal and underground installation must be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal, having due regard for the availability of necessary labor, materials and equipment, for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby and for the utility’s schedule and availability funds. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

        B.     The city council may authorize any or all of the following exceptions in a resolution designating an underground utility district:

        1.     Municipal facilities or equipment.

        2.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.

        3.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures), when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.

        4.     Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts.

        5.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixtures and extending from a location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.

        6.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services.

        7.     Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.

        8.     Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.

        C.    Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution designating an underground utility district, the city clerk shall give written notice thereof to each affected property owner and utility. The notice shall indicate to the property owners that if an owner or any occupant of their property desire to continue receiving electric, communication or similar associated service, then such owner or occupant must provide all necessary facility changes on the premises so as to receive such service at a new location. Notification shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution, together with a copy of this chapter, to each affected property owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 1521; Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.020 Prohibited Conduct.
        No person shall install or maintain poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in an underground utility district after the date when such facilities are required to be removed. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.025 Emergencies.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not exceeding 10 days without director authorization when necessary to provide emergency service. The director may authorize the installation and maintenance of overhead facilities to provide emergency service for longer periods. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.030 Utility Responsibilities.
        If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within an underground utility district, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.035 Property Owner Responsibilities.
        A.     Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within an underground utility district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on the property between the facilities furnished by the utility and the termination facility on or within such building or structure.

        B.     If such work is not accomplished within the time allowed by the resolution designating the district, the director shall give written notice to the person in possession of the premises and to the property owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall specify the work required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within 30 days the director will cause the work to be performed and the cost thereof to be assessed against the property.

        C.    If the required work has not been completed within the 30-day period, the director shall cause the work to be performed unless the premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished to the property. Alternatively, the director may authorize the disconnection and removal of all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property.

        D.    Upon completion of the work, the director shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon the premises, which time shall not be less than 10 days thereafter. The director shall give written notice of the date and time of the hearing, as well as the amount of the proposed assessment, to the owner and person in possession of the property.

        E.     Upon the date and hour set for hearing protests, the city council shall hear and consider the report and any protests against the proposed assessment. The city council may confirm as presented, confirm as modified or reject the assessment.

        F.     If an assessment is not paid within 5 days after confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made. The director shall provide the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on the property, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property taxes and if not paid when due and payable shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum. (Ord. 1515)

 

9.55.040 Administration.
        This chapter shall be administered consistent with rights granted by pre-existing franchises and by applicable federal and state law. (Ord. 1521)

Chapter 9.60 BUILDING CODE *
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1686. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.60.010 Construction Codes and Permitting Administration
9.60.010 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Section 101 General

Section 102 Applicability

Section 103 Building and Safety

Section 104 Duties and Powers of Building Official

Section 105 Permits

Section 106 Construction Documents

Section 107 Temporary Structures and Uses

Section 108 Fees

Section 109 Inspections

Section 110 Certificate of Occupancy

Section 111 Service Utilities

Section 112 Board of Appeals

Section 113 Violations and Penalties

Section 114 Stop Work Order

Section 115 Unsafe Structures and Buildings

SECTION 101 GENERAL

 

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Administrative Provisions of the codes comprising the California Building Standards Code of the State of California, hereinafter referred to as “the code(s).”

 

101.2 Scope. The provisions of the codes shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, used and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

 

101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices of the codes, shall not apply unless specifically adopted.

 

101.3 Intent. The purpose of the codes is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.

 

101.4 Referenced Codes. Codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7 and referenced elsewhere in the codes shall be considered part of the requirements of the codes to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

 

101.4.1 Building Code. The provisions of the California Building Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to all buildings and structures other than those meeting the scoping limitations contained in the California Residential Code.

 

101.4.2 Residential Code. The provisions of the California Residential Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhomes) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures.

 

101.4.3 Electrical Code. The provisions of the California Electrical Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.

 

101.4.4 Mechanical Code. The provisions of the California Mechanical Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of residential and commercial mechanical and gas systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and for appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. Where there is a conflict between the California Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, as related to chapters for gas or fuel, the provisions provided in the Plumbing Code shall prevail.

 

101.4.5 Plumbing Code. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair, replacement of plumbing systems and gas delivery systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.

 

101.4.6 Pool and Spa Code. The mandatory provisions of the International Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to all pool and spas.

 

101.4.7 Fire Code. The mandatory provisions of the California Fire Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach shall apply to all new and existing buildings, structures and premises.

 

SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY

 

102.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.

 

102.2 Other laws. The provisions of the codes shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.

 

102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of the codes.

 

102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in the codes shall be considered part of the requirements of the codes to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of the codes and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of the codes shall apply.

 

102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of the codes is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.

 

102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of the codes shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the codes or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.

 

SECTION 103 BUILDING AND SAFETY

 

103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Building and Safety Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.

 

103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the authorized representative of the authority having jurisdiction.

 

103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other agents. Such appointed agents shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

SECTION 104 DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL

 

104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the codes. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of the codes. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the codes.

 

104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, grading, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of the codes.

 

104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with the codes.

 

104.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.

 

104.5 Identification. The building official and appointees shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under the codes.

 

104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the codes or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the codes which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the codes, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

 

104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records.

 

104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of the codes, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by the codes or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of the codes shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the codes.

 

104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

 

104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of the codes for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official.

 

104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the codes, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the codes impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the codes and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Department of Building Safety.

 

104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of the codes are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by the codes, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the codes, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

 

104.11.1 Evaluation reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in the codes, shall consist of valid evaluation reports from approved sources.

 

104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the codes, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the codes, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in the codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records.

 

SECTION 105 PERMITS

 

105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, grading on private property, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.

 

Work performed without permit constitutes a violation and is subject to Section 113 of this chapter. Upon determination by the building official, work performed without permit may constitute an unsafe structure or building.

 

Incidental structures or improvements of a minor nature may be exempt from the city permit process upon the determination of the building official. In place of permits and inspections the building official may utilize alternate means, such as certifications, imaging or programs to track and verify compliance.

 

105.1.1 Time based permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an already approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing installation, the building official is authorized to issue a permit, valid for a specific time period not exceeding one year, upon application therefor to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more qualified trade persons in the building, structure or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for the permit.

 

The building official may detail the scope, parameters and conditions of this permit. The permit may be revoked when it is determined by the building official that the outlined scope, parameters, conditions or intent of the codes is not upheld by the permittee. The building official shall have access to such records at all times and such records shall be filed with the building official as designated.

 

105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of the codes shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the codes, state laws, ordinances, or established policies of this jurisdiction. Except when otherwise subject to city review and approval or when otherwise required by state or local laws, regulations or standards, permits shall not be required for the following.

 

BUILDING:

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and conforming to the zoning code.

2.     Masonry walls or fences not over 4 feet high and other walls or fences not over 6 feet high. Walls supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III A liquids are not exempt from permit.

3.     Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall.

4.     Oil derricks.

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

6.     Sidewalks and driveways that are not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, not over any basement or story below, not part of an accessible route and not part of a commercial site.

7.     Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

8.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.

13.   Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches in height.

14.   Wood decks not over 30 inches above surrounding grade or finishes, not attached to a structure, or serving any part of the means of egress.

 

ELECTRICAL:

1.     Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.

2.     Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of the codes shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.

3.     Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.

 

MECHANICAL:

1.     Portable heating appliance.

2.     Portable ventilation equipment.

3.     Portable cooling unit.

4.     Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the codes.

5.     Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6.     Portable evaporative cooler.

7.     Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.

 

PLUMBING:

1.     The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the codes.

2.     The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs shall be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official.

 

105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.

 

105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right.

 

105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall:

1.     Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

2.     Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

3.     Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

4.     Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in Section 106.

5.     State the valuation of the proposed work.

6.     Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.

7.     Give such other data and information as required by the building official.

 

105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.

 

No building permit or other similar applicable permit bearing on property development or use including additions, modifications or revisions shall be issued unless and until the review and approval of all other departments and agencies having legal authority for review of construction projects have found the construction project to be in compliance with all applicable code provisions or entitlements.

 

When the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the codes and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable.

 

105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

Permit applications which were submitted as a result of a code enforcement notice of violation and subsequently not issued within 90 days of filing will be deemed to have expired. The building official may authorize the extension of time for justifiable good cause.

 

105.4 Permit issuance. The application, plans, specifications, computations, and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other city departments to verify compliance with any applicable laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the building official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of the codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the specified fees have been paid, the permit shall be issued as soon as practicable.

 

When the building official issues the permit where plans are required, they shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications “APPROVED FOR ISSUANCE” or “REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE.” Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official, and all work regulated by the codes shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.

 

The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of the building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the codes. The holder of such permit shall proceed at their own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted.

 

105.5 Retention of plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the building official for a period as detailed by governing retention laws and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the project site at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.

 

105.6 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications, and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions the codes or of any other ordinance of the city. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the codes or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

 

The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction document and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the codes or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.

 

105.7 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of the codes shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of permit issuance, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days. Before such work can be commenced or recommenced, a permit shall first be renewed or reissued.

 

For the purpose of this section, if an inspection approval is not recorded, the work authorized by the permit is deemed not commenced or recommenced.

 

1.     Requesting extension of an unexpired permit: Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of time within which permittee may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence or recommence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one year upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. Subject to approval of the building official, permits extended in this manner will not require additional permit fees and will not be subject to new regulations adopted after issuance of the permit.

2.     Requesting renewal of an unexpired permit: Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for a renewal of permit. Permit renewal fees shall be in accordance with the fees established by the city council. Each renewal will extend the expiration date for a period of one year. Permits renewed in this manner will not be subject to new regulations adopted after issuance of the permit.

3.     Requesting reinstatement of a permit which has been expired for less than 30 days: Any permittee holding a permit which has been expired for less than 30 days may apply for a renewal of permit. Permit renewal fees shall be in accordance with the fees established by the city council. Subject to the approval of the building official, permits renewed in this manner will not be subject to new regulations adopted after issuance of the permit.

4.     Requesting reissuance of a permit which has been expired for one year or more: Any permittee holding a permit which has been expired for one year or more may apply for reissuance of the permit subject to compliance with current regulations and payment of full plan check and permit fees. Plans shall be resubmitted for plan check. Portions of the structure which have been built under the expired permit will not be subject to current regulations. For the purpose of permit extension, renewal, and reissuance, multiple permits of the same structure such as building, foundation, retaining wall, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical permits shall be considered as one permit. Each separate permit with work completed entirely prior to suspension or abandonment will not be subject to renewal or reissuance.

 

105.8 Change of contractor or of ownership. A permit issued hereunder shall expire upon a change of ownership or a change of contractor regarding the building, structure or grading for which said permit was issued if the work thereon has not been completed, and a new permit shall be required for the completion of the work. If no changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the building official, no charge, other than the permit issuance fee and applicable state fees, shall be made for the issuance of the new permit under such circumstances. If, however, changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the building official, a permit fee based upon the proposed changes may be levied.

 

105.9 Suspension or revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of the codes whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the codes.

 

105.10 Incomplete construction. When a permit is revoked pursuant to 105.9, the incomplete construction for which the permit is issued shall constitute an unsafe condition and shall be appropriately abated as determined by the building official.

 

105.11 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy thereof shall be kept readily available on the site of the work until the completion of the project.

 

105.12 Surrender of permit. If a portion of the work or construction covered by the issued permit has not been commenced, the permittee may deliver such permit and approved documents to the building official with request that such permit is to be canceled. The building official shall make note on the permit with or with like wording “Canceled at the request of the Permittee.” Thereupon the permit and documents shall become null and void.

 

105.13 Liens to be discharged. A permit shall not be issued to any person or corporation under the provision of this chapter in respect to any property where the cost of any building repair or abatement has been performed and a lien therefor has been recorded by the jurisdiction, unless and until the amount of said lien with interest, has been paid in full.

 

SECTION 106 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

 

106.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical reports and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

 

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the codes.

 

106.2 Expiration of plan review. Reviews for which a permit is not issued within 180 days following the date of original submittal shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant, if not stamped as approved for issuance, or may be destroyed by the building official.

 

Exception: The building official may authorize one or more extensions of periods not to exceed 180 days each. These extensions shall not exceed that of the related application as indicated in subsection 105.3.2.

 

106.3 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the codes and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official.

 

106.3.1 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with the codes and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.

 

106.3.2 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of the codes. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-I, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

 

106.3.3 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the codes. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.

 

The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.

 

106.4 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

 

106.5 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances.

 

106.6 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative.

 

106.6.1 Previous approvals. The codes shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 30 days after the effective date of the codes, has not been abandoned or the building official has not determined the permit was issued under false information.

 

106.6.2 Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the codes. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.

 

106.7 Design professional in responsible charge.

 

106.7.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.

 

The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.

 

Where structural observation is required by Section 1709, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1704).

 

106.7.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period.

Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official.

 

Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the building official.

 

106.8 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.

 

106.9 Number of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than that required by state law and the city’s retention policy.

 

SECTION 107 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES

 

107.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 90 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

 

107.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of the codes as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare.

 

107.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the California Electrical Code.

 

107.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

 

SECTION 108 FEES

 

108.1 General. A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid for each plan review when submitted and each permit at time of issuance.

108.2 Permit fees. A fee for each required permit shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by city council.

 

Failure to pay fees and obtain a permit before commencing work shall be deemed a violation of the codes, except when a program is established by the building official and permit conditions are defined, or it can be proven to the satisfaction of the building official that an emergency existed which made it impractical to first obtain the permit. A violation shall result in an assessment of an investigation fee in an amount equal to the permit fee for the work undertaken without permit. Payment of a double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the codes nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.

 

108.3 Plan review fees. When a plan or other data is ready to be submitted by subsection 105.3 a plan-checking fee, in the amount as established by city council shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. When submittal documents are incomplete or changes so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves differed submittal items an additional fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule established by city council.

 

108.4 Investigation fee. An investigation fee as established by the Section 108.2 may be charged by the building official whenever work for which a permit is required by the codes has been commenced without first obtaining said permit. This fee shall be paid and the investigation shall be made prior to the issuance of any permit for said work. An investigation fee may be charged for any investigation of a building, structure, work reports, certification or any other related work requested by an owner or authorized agent of such owner.

 

108.5 Fee refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the codes, except that no refund will be made for less than $100. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is performed, except that no refund will be made for less than $100. The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 60 days after the date of fee payment.

 

Permit and plan check fees will be refunded in their entirety when inadvertently paid for a project outside the jurisdiction or as duplicate fees, except that no refund will be made if 60 days have elapsed from the date of payment.

 

108.6 Additional plan review fees. Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan checking, an additional plan checking fee shall be paid to the building official based upon the value of construction of the proposed change or redesign. In establishing said fee, no allowance for a decreased valuation shall be permitted due to the replacement, omission or lessening of any member or portion of the building shown in the original plans. Said fee may be waived when in the opinion of the building official the additional fee is not warranted. No additional fees shall be charged for checking corrections required by the building official; except where excessive plan reviews are performed, additional fees may be levied as established by city council.

 

108.7 Change of occupancy investigation fee. A fee as established by the city council shall be paid when an occupancy investigation inspection is required by the building official. Note: The occupancy investigation fees are in addition to other investigation fees and do not include the fees for the building permit, or fees for electrical, plumbing or heating and ventilating permits covering the alterations and/or repairs of the occupancy conversion.

 

SECTION 109 INSPECTIONS

 

109.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

 

109.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed.

 

109.3 Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 109.3.1 through 109.3.10.

 

109.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job.

 

109.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

 

109.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the building official.

 

109.3.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved.

 

109.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

 

109.3.6 Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

 

109.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the California Energy, Green Building Standards Codes and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U-values, fenestration U-value, duct system R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency.

 

109.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the codes, standards and other laws that are enforced by the jurisdiction having authority.

 

109.3.9 Special inspections. For special inspections, see Section 1704 of the California Building Code.

 

109.3.10 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed.

 

109.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.

 

109.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall also be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by the codes.

 

109.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the codes. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.

 

SECTION 110 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

 

110.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein.

 

Exception: The building official may not issue certificate of occupancies for remodels and additions to owner-occupied dwellings, such as single-family homes, townhomes, co-op or condominiums and U occupancies.

 

Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the codes or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

 

The jurisdiction may not issue a certificate of occupancy to the builder upon the completion of a commercial structure where there is tenant spacing. Instead, a certificate of occupancy is issued to a business entity that is going to occupy the building, or a portion thereof.

 

110.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the codes or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

1.     The building permit number.

2.     The address of the structure.

3.     The name and address of the owner.

4.     A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

5.     A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the codes for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

6.     The name of the building official.

7.     The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

8.     The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.

9.     The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.

10.   The design occupant load.

11.   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required.

12.   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.

 

110.3 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.

 

In the event the building is not completed and ready for final inspection in the time prescribed by the building official, the building shall be vacated and the utilities disconnected until such time the building is completed, final inspection is completed and a certificate of occupancy is issued.

 

110.4 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of the codes wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the codes.

 

SECTION 111 SERVICE UTILITIES

 

111.1 Connection of service utilities. Connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the codes for which a permit is required, shall not be established until released by the building official.

111.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power.

 

Temporary connections may be terminated by the building official in the event the permit for such work expires, temporary occupancy is terminated, or it is determined by the building official that conditions associated with the connected utility are not met.

 

111.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the codes and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.

 

SECTION 112 BOARD OF APPEALS

 

112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business.

 

112.2 Limitations on authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the codes nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the codes. The application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the codes or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted where the provision of the codes do not fully apply, or where an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.

 

112.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.

 

112.4 Applications, fees and findings. Any person appealing the decision of the building official shall file with the building official a written application accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by city council resolution at any time not more than 20 calendar days after the decision of the building official.

 

The application shall set forth and include any information as the building official may require.

 

Upon the filing of a verified application, the building official shall transmit said application forthwith to the board of appeals, and such board shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony, from and on behalf of the applicant, and shall render findings and decisions on the matter in writing to the applicant with a duplicate copy to the building official within 20 days after the conclusion of its proceedings, the building official shall make all findings and decisions available to the public without fees.

SECTION 113 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

 

113.1 General. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, grading on private property in the City of Seal Beach, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of the codes.

 

113.2 Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the codes, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the codes. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

 

113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the codes or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

 

113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the codes or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, contracts, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction document or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

 

SECTION 114 STOP WORK ORDER

 

114.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by the codes being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of the codes or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

 

114.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.

 

114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

 

SECTION 115 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS

 

115.1 General. All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster damage, or abandonment, as specified in this code or in any other effective ordinance or statute, are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings and constitute an unsafe condition. All such unsafe buildings or conditions are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, improvement, removal, or demolition, in whole or part. A vacant building or structure that is not secure against entry shall be deemed unsafe.

 

SECTION 116 DEFINITIONS

In additions to the definitions specified in Chapter 2 of Residential, Building and Fire Code, the following certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Terms, phrases and words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

In the event of conflicts between these definitions and definitions that appear elsewhere in this Code, these definitions shall govern and be applicable.

 

BUILDING CODE shall mean the City of Seal Building Code as adopted and amended.

 

ELECTRICAL CODE shall mean the City of Seal Beach Electrical Code as adopted and amended.

 

FIRE CODE shall mean the City of Seal Beach Fire Code as adopted and amended.

 

HIGH-RISE STRUCTURE. Every building of any type of construction or occupancy having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet above the lowest floor level having building access (see Section 403), except buildings used as hospitals as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 1250.

 

MECHANICAL CODE shall mean the City of Seal Beach Mechanical Code as adopted and amended.

 

OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction.

 

PLUMBING CODE shall mean the City of Seal Beach Plumbing Code as adopted and amended.

 

RESIDENTIAL CODE shall mean the City of Seal Beach Residential Code as adopted and amended.

 

SKY LANTERN. An airborne lantern typically made of paper, Mylar, or other lightweight material with a wood, plastic, or metal frame containing a candle, fuel cell, or other heat source that provides buoyancy.

 

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

(Ord. 1661)

 

9.60.020 California Codes Adopted by Reference and Amended
9.60.020.010.10 California Building Code Adopted by Reference.
        Chapter 1 through 35 and Appendices F, I and J of 2019 California Building Code, Title 24 Part 2 of California Code of Regulations, as published by the California Building Standards Commission are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein except that those certain sections thereof which are necessary to meet local conditions as hereinafter set forth in Section 9.60.020.010.20 of this Code are hereby repealed, added or amended to read as set forth therein.

        The administration of the Building Code shall be as set forth in Section 9.60.010 of this Code.

        Not less than one copy of said 2019 California Building Code, Title 24 Part 2 of California Code of Regulations together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Building Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.020.010 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.010.20 California Building Code Amended.
        Chapter 1, 9, and 18 of 2019 California Building Code, Title 24 Part 2 of California Code of Regulations adopted by reference as the Building Code of the City of Seal Beach, are hereby amended, deleted or added as follows:

        1.     Chapter 1 Division II is deleted in its entirety.

        2.     Chapter 9 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

Chapter 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS. Chapter 9 of Building Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code as adopted and amended by City of Seal Beach Municipal Code Section 9.60.020.060.

(Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.020 Residential Code Adopted by Reference And Amended.

 

9.60.020.020.10 California Residential Code Adopted by Reference.
        Chapters 2 through 10, Chapter 44 and Appendix H, J, Q, R and S of 2019 California Residential Code, Title 24 Part 2.5 of California Code of Regulations, and Appendix J of 2019 California Building Code, Title 24 Part 2 of California Code of Regulations as published by the California Building Standards Commission, are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein except that those certain sections thereof which are necessary to meet local conditions as hereinafter set forth in Section 9.60.020.020.20 of this Code are hereby repealed, added or amended to read as set forth therein.

        The administration of the Residential Code shall be as set forth in Section 9.60.010 of this Code.

        Not less than one copy of said 2019 California Residential Code, Title 24 Part 2.5 of California Code of Regulations together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Residential Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.020.020 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.020.20 California Residential Code Amended.
        Chapter 3 of 2019 California Residential Code, Title 24 Part 2.5 of California Code of Regulations adopted by reference as the Residential Code of the City of Seal Beach, are hereby amended, deleted or added as follows:

        1.     Section R301.1.1.3.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

R301.1.1.3.2 Wood Frame Structures. The Building Official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of wood frame construction more than two stories and basement in height located in Seismic Design Category A, B, or C. Notwithstanding other sections of law, the law establishing these provisions is found in Business and Professions Code Sections 5537 and 6737.1.

The Building Official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of wood frame construction more than one story in height or with a basement located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2 or E.

 

        2.     Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler System is amended in its entirety to read:

 

R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler System. Section 903 of the Chapter 9 of Seal Beach Fire Code (Title 9 Chapter 9.60 Section 9.60.020.060 Fire Code) is adopted by reference to be the section R313 of the Residential Code.

(Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.030   Electrical Code Adopted by Reference

 

9.60.020.030 California Electrical Code Adopted by Reference.
        Sections 89.102 through 89.114 of Article 89, Article 90, Chapters 1 through 9, and Annexes A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J of 2019 California Electrical Code, Title 24 Part 3 of California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein.

        The administration of the Electrical Code shall be as set forth in Section 9.60.010 of this Code.

        Not less than one copy of said 2019 California Electrical Code, Title 24 Part 3 of California Code of Regulations together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Electrical Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.020.030 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

9.60.020.040 Mechanical Code Adopted By Reference

 

9.60.020.040 California Mechanical Code Adopted by Reference.
        Division I Sections 1.2.0 through 1.14.0 of Chapter 1, Chapters 2 through 17 and Appendices B, C and D of 2019 California Mechanical Code, Title 24 Part 4 of California Code of Regulations, as published by the California Building Standards Commission are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein.

        The administration of the Mechanical Code shall be as set forth in Section 9.60.010 of this Code.

        Not less than one copy of said 2019 California Mechanical Code, Title 24 Part 4 of California Code of Regulations together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Mechanical Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.020.040 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.050 Plumbing Code Adopted by Reference

 

9.60.020.050 California Plumbing Code Adopted by Reference.
        Division I Sections 1.2.0 through 1.14.0 of Chapter 1, Chapters 2 through 17 and Appendices A, B, D, H, I and J of 2019 California Plumbing Code, Title 24 Part 5 of California Code of Regulations, as published by the California Building Standards Commission are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein.

        The administration of the Plumbing Code shall be as set forth in Section 9.60.010 of this Code.

        Not less than one copy of said 2019 California Plumbing Code, Title 24 Part 5 of California Code of Regulations together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Plumbing Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.020.050 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.060   Fire Code Adopted by Reference and Amended.

 

9.60.020.060.10 California Fire Code Adopted by Reference.
        Chapters 1 Division I and Division II, Chapters 2 through 80 and Appendices B, BB, C, and CC of 2019 California Fire Code, Title 24 Part 9 of California Code of Regulations, as published by the California Building Standards Commission are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein except that those certain sections thereof which are necessary to meet local conditions as hereinafter set forth in Section 9.60.020.060.20 of this Code are hereby repealed, added or amended to read as set forth therein.

        Not less than one copy of said 2019 California Fire Code, Title 24 Part 9 of California Code of Regulations together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Fire Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.020.060 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.060.20 California Fire Code Modified
        Chapter 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 12, 28, 49, 50, 56, 57, 58 and 80 of 2019 California Fire Code, Title 24 Part 9 of California Code of Regulations adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the City of Seal Beach, are hereby amended, deleted or added as follows:

 

        1.     Division II Section 101.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of City of Seal Beach hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

        2.     Division II Section 110.4 is amended to read:

 

110.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall fail to comply with any issued orders or notices or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties assessed as prescribed in the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

 

        3.     A new Division II Section 110.4.2 is added to read:

 

110.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

        4.     Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

 

OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction.

 

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

 

        5.     Section 304.1.2 is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

 

304.1.2 Vegetation. Weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises. Vegetation clearance requirement in urban-wildland interface areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. Type, amount, arrangement, and maintenance of vegetation in a fuel modification area, interior slope, or similarly hazardous area shall be in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program.”

 

        6.     A new Section 305.6 is added to read:

 

305.6 Hazardous conditions. Outdoor fires burning wood or other solid fuel are not allowed when any of the following conditions applies:

 

1.     when predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH and relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared

2.     when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or a public announcement is made

 

No outdoor fires using any fuel type are permitted when predicted sustained winds exceed 20 MPH or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

 

        7.     A new Section 305.7 is added to read:

 

305.7 Disposal of rubbish. Rubbish, trash or combustible waste material shall be burned only within an approved incinerator and in accordance with Section 307.2.1.

 

        8.     A new Section 307.6 added to read:

 

307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R shall comply with this section.

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

 

        9.     A new Section 307.6.1 added to read:

 

307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction and vegetation shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202.

 

        10.   A new Section 307.6.2 added to read:

307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Permanent outdoor fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code with clearance from combustible construction and building openings as required therein. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks.

 

The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 25 feet of combustible structures unless within an approved permanent fireplace, Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be in accordance with Sections 305, 307, and 308.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Portable fireplaces and fire rings/pits equipped with a device to arrest sparks shall be located at least 3’ from combustible construction at R-3 occupancies,

2.     Portable fireplaces, and fire pits/rings equipped with a device to arrest sparks, shall be located at least 15 feet from combustible structures at other R occupancies.

 

        11.   A new Section 307.6.2.1 added to read:

 

307.6.2.1 Where prohibited.

The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone, Wildfire Risk Area (WRA), Wildland-Urban Interface Area (WUI), or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or WUI.

 

Exceptions:

1. Permanent fireplaces that are not located in a fuel modification zone

2. Where determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire.

 

        12.   Section 308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns is hereby amended to read:

 

308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns. A person shall not ignite, release, or cause to be released a sky lantern.

 

        13.   A new Section 321 added to read:

 

321 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

        14.   A new Section 322 added to read:

 

322 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces.

 

Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

 

        15.   A new Section 323 added to read:

 

323 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist:

1.     Difficult terrain.

2.     Danger of erosion.

3.     Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species.

4.     Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees.

5.     Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical.

 

        16.   A new Section 324 added to read:

 

324 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 202 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire.

Exceptions:

1.     Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

 

2.     Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition

 

        17.   A new Section 324.1 Use of Equipment and Devices Generating Heat, Sparks or Open Flames added to read:

 

324.1 Equipment and devices generating heat, sparks or open flames. During any time of the year within Wildfire Risk Areas, within or immediately adjacent to any forest- or brush-covered land or non-irrigated grass-covered land, no person shall use or operate any welding equipment, cutting torches, tar pots, grinding devices, or other tools or equipment that may produce a spark, fire, or flame that could result in a wildfire without doing the following:

1.     First clearing away all flammable material, including snags, from the area around such operation for a distance of 30 feet or other approved method to reduce fire spread into the wildlands. If 30-foot clearing cannot be achieved, then an alternate method shall be approved by the AHJ prior to work starting.

2.     Maintain one serviceable round point shovel with an overall length of not less than forty-six (46) inches and one backpack pump water-type fire extinguisher fully equipped and ready for use at the immediate area during the operation.

3.     Stop work when winds are 8 MPH or greater during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

4.     Keep a cell phone nearby and call 911 immediate in case of fire.

 

        18.   A new Section 324.2 added to read:

 

324.2 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 324 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material.

 

        19.   Section 407.5 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall include OCFA’s Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2.

 

        20.   Section 501.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, “Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development.” Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas, and Local Responsibility Areas designated as Very High Hazard Fire Severity Zone shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, “Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas, and Local Responsibility Areas designated as Very High Hazard Fire Severity Zone”.

 

        21.   Section 510.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems utilized by the jurisdiction, measured at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, Communications and Technology Division guidelines and specifications and, where the functionality or performance requirements in the California Fire Code are more stringent, this code.

 

Exceptions:

1.     In buildings or structures where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed, including but not limited to the following:

a.     Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion.

b.     Elevators.

c.     Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Three stories or less, and

ii.     Do not have subterranean storage or parking, and

iii.     Do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story.

d.     Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Residential structures four stories or less, and

ii.     Constructed of wood, and

iii.     Do not have subterranean storage or parking, and

iv.    Are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure.

Should a structure that is three stories or less and 50,000 square feet or smaller on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas.

 

2.     In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of the facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system.

 

        22.   Section 510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is deleted in its entirety.

        23.   Section 510.3 Permit required is deleted in its entirety.

        24.   Section 903.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists:

1.     New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or is more than two stories in height.

Exception: Subject to approval by the Fire Code Official, open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the California Building Code.

2.     Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and one of the following conditions exists:

a.     When an addition exceeds 2000 square feet and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet.

 

Exception: Existing Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8 (2).

 

        25.   Section 903.2.8 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows:

1.     New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings, including attached garages.

2.     Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:

a.     All existing Group R occupancies and U-1 garages when the total area is increased by 750 square feet or more.

b.     An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout any existing Group R Occupancy building when the floor area of the Alteration or Combination of an Addition and Alteration, is 50% or more of area/value of the existing structure and where the scope of the work exposes building framing and facilitates sprinkler installation and is such that the Building/Fire Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

c.     Any addition to an existing building which has fire sprinklers installed.

Exceptions:

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor and not housing clients above the second floor.

2.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 425.8.3.3.

3.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13113 occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill or mentally retarded, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and buildings or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.

4.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6 occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over).

 

When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies.

 

An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies.

 

        26.   A new Section 903.3.5.3 is added to read:

 

903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.

Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and required by the Fire Code Official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3.

 

        27.   Section 1201.1.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

1201.1.1 Other Systems Where required by the fire code official, other systems and operations including but not limited to battery systems assembly, battery reconditioning and storage, research and development of battery storage systems, electric vehicle manufacturing and testing, and battery charging systems for cars and carts inside of buildings or structures, shall comply with this chapter.

 

        28.   Section 2801.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

2801.2 Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6 and 105.6.29.

 

        29.   Section 2808.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

2808.2 Storage site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground, elevated soil lifts or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval obtained from the fire code official before transferring products to the site.

 

        30.   Section 2808.3 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet in height, 50 feet in width and 100 feet in length.

Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1.     Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles.

2.     Factor that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile.

3.     The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants.

4.     Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained.

5.     Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program.

 

Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features.

 

        31.   Section 2808.4 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

2808.4. Pile separation. Piles shall be separated from adjacent piles by a minimum distance of 20 feet. Additionally, piles shall have a minimum separation of 100 feet from combustible vegetation.

 

        32.   Section 2808.7 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

2808.7 Pile fire protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a 40% to 60% moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas.

 

        33.   Section 2808.9 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

2808.9 Material-handling equipment. All material-handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations.

 

        34.   A new Section 2808.11 is added to read:

 

2808.11 Temperature control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2.

 

2808.11.1 Pile temperature control. Piles shall be rotated when internal temperature readings are in excess of 165 degrees Fahrenheit.

 

2808.11.2 New material temperature control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding 165 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable.

 

        35.   A new Section 2808.12 is added to read:

 

2808.12 Water Availability. Facilities with over 2500 cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than 500 GPM @ 20 psi for a minimum of 1 hour duration for pile heights up to 6 feet and 2 hour duration for pile heights over 6 feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of 2500 gallons per pile (maximum 30,000 gallons) for piles not exceeding 6 feet in height and 5000 gallons per pile (maximum 60,000) for piles exceeding 6 feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s).

 

        36.   A new Section 2808.13 is added to read:

 

2808.13 Tipping areas shall comply with the following:

1.     Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 feet by 50 feet.

2.     Material within a tipping area shall not exceed 5 feet in height at any time.

3.     Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a 20-foot-wide fire access lane.

4.     A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within 150 feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area.

5.     All material within a tipping area shall be processed within 5 days of receipt.

 

        37.   A new Section 2808.14 is added to read:

 

2808.14 Emergency Contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency situation.

 

        38.   Section 4906.3 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

4906.3 Requirements. Hazardous vegetation and fuels around all applicable buildings and structure shall be maintained in accordance with the following laws and regulations:

1.     Public Resources Code, Section 4291.

2.     California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 3, Section 1299 (see guidance for implementation “General Guideline to Create Defensible Space”).

3.     California Government Code, Section 51182.

4.     California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 7, Subchapter 1, Section 3.07.

5. OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

        39.   A new Section 4908 is added to read:

 

4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following:

1.     Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map.

2.     Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit.

3.     The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

3.1   The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity.

4.     The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official.

5.     All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code.

 

        40.   Section 5001.5.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include Orange County Fire Authority’s Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information:

1.     Product Name.

2.     Component.

3.     Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number.

4.     Location where stored or used.

5.     Container size.

6.     Hazard classification.

7.     Amount in storage.

8.     Amount in use-closed systems.

9.     Amount in use-open systems.

 

        41.   A new Section 5003.1.1.1 is added to read:

 

5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property.

 

        42.   A new Section 5608.2 is added to read:

 

5608.2 Firing. All fireworks display, regardless of mortar, device, or shell size, shall be electrically fired.

 

        43.   A new Section 5608.3 is added to read:

 

Section 5608.3 Application for Permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on 100 feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA.

 

        44.   A new Section 5701.1.1 is added to read:

 

Section 5701.1.1 Mobile fueling. On-demand mobile fueling of Class I, II, and III liquids into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

 

        45.   Section 5801.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

Section 5801.1 Scope. The storage and use of flammable gases and flammable cryogenic fluids shall be in accordance with this chapter, NFPA 2 and NFPA 55. Compressed gases shall also comply with Chapter 53 and cryogenic fluids shall also comply with Chapter 55. Flammable cryogenic fluids shall comply with Section 5806. Hydrogen motor fuel-dispensing stations and repair garages and their associated above-ground hydrogen storage systems shall also be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with Chapter 23. Mobile fueling of hydrogen-fueled vehicles shall comply with Section 5809. Mobile fueling of gaseous and liquid hydrogen, compressed natural gas (CNG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG) into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Gases used as refrigerants in refrigeration systems (see Section 605).

2.     Liquefied petroleum gases and natural gases regulated by Chapter 61.

3.     Fuel-gas systems and appliances regulated under the California Mechanical Code and the California Plumbing Code other than gaseous hydrogen systems and appliances.

4.     Pyrophoric gases in accordance with Chapter 64.

 

        46.   NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems Section 6.7.3 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½” inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½” inlets shall be provided.

 

        47.   NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems Section 8.3.3.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following:

1-     Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8

2-     Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5

3-     Quick response CMSA sprinklers

4-     ESFR sprinklers

5-     Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers

6-     Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems

 

        48.   NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems Section 8.15.1.2.7 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

8.15.1.2.7 Concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation shall not require sprinkler protection when approved by fire code official.

 

        49.   NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems A new Section 11.1.1.1 is added to read:

 

11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve “G”. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy.

 

        50.   NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems A new Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is added to read:

 

11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official:

1-     Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433;

2-     Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available;

3-     Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California.

        51.   NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes Section 7.1.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service.

 

        52.   NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems Section 7.3.1.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor.

 

        53.   NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances a new Section 6.2.8.1 is added to read:

 

6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted.

2.     Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red.

        54.   NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances Section 6.2.9 amended in its entirety to read:

 

Section 6.2.9 All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated:

1.     A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve.

2.     A wall post indicator valve

3.     An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4

4.     A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer.

5.     Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior

6.     Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior

        55.   NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances A new Section 10.1.5 is added to read:

 

10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2-inch-wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section.

 

        Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings

 

        56.   NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances Section 10.4.1.1 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation.

 

        Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel.

 

        57.   NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances a new Section 10.4.1.1.1 is added to read:

 

10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel.

 

        58.   NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances Section 10.4.3.2 is amended in its entirety to read:

 

10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4.

(Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.070 Effect of Adoption.
        The adoption of the City Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing, Fire Code and the repeal, addition or amendment of ordinances by this code shall not affect the following matters:

        A.     Actions and proceedings which began the effective date of this code.

        B.     Prosecution for ordinance violations committed before the effective date of this code.

        C.    Licenses and penalties due and unpaid at the effective date of this code, and the collection of these licenses and penalties.

        D.    Bonds and cash deposits required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance.

        E.     Matters of record which refer to or are connected with ordinances the substances of which are included in this code; these references shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions of the code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.020.080 Penalty—Violations.
        A.     General Penalty; Continuing Violations. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act required by this code is a misdemeanor or an infraction as set forth in the said respective pertinent sections of this code and any person causing or permitting a violation of any such section of said code shall be subject to the penalties ascribed to each such section as set forth herein.

        B.     Violations Including Aiding, Abetting, and Concealing. Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals the fact of a violation of this code is guilty of violating this code.

        C.    Enforcement by Civil Action. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the said code may be enforced by civil action. Any condition existing in violation of this code is a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.030 Sandblasting
9.60.030 Sandblasting.
        A.     Permit Required. No person shall engage in sandblasting the outside of any building or structure in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the building official.

        B.     Such permit is required for the purpose of placing the city on notice regarding intended sandblasting operations, thus making possible the inspection of sandblasting operations in the city so that sandblasting regulations enacted for the protection of the health and property of members of the public may effectively be enforced.

        C.    No sandblasting permit shall be issued to any person not licensed or otherwise prohibited by state law from engaging in sandblasting operations.

        D.    A separate permit shall be required for each separate premise, court or group of structures to be sandblasted. More than one actual building or structure may be included on a single permit if all said buildings or structures are on one lot or one contiguous parcel of land.

        E.     Application for Permit. Each permit application shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name and address of the person or company applying for the permit.

        2.     The name and address of the foreman or person who will be actually directing the job for the applicant.

        3.     The location of the job.

        4.     The building or structure or portion thereof to be sandblasted.

        5.     The estimated length of time of the job.

        6.     A statement of the amount of the applicant’s public liability and property damage insurance, giving the name and address of the company issuing the policy.

        7.     Such other information as the building official shall reasonably require to aid proper inspection and enforcement of city sandblasting regulations.

        F.     Inspection Fee. No sandblasting permit shall be issued prior to the payment of an inspection fee set forth in the fee schedule. No checking fee or other type of additional fee shall be required.

        G.    Notice of Sandblasting. Any person conducting sandblasting in the city shall, not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to said sandblasting, deliver to each residence or business establishment within 100 feet of all buildings or structures to be sandblasted, a written notice in a form provided by the building official.

        H.    Dry Sandblasting. No person shall engage in “dry” sandblasting in the city in the absence of written special permission from the building official. Said special permission to be granted only if the particular circumstances of the job make wet sandblasting impractical.

        I.      Hours. No person shall engage in sandblasting before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any day, or on Sunday or legal holidays, in any neighborhood that is exclusively a residential neighborhood or upon any structure which is within 100 feet of any inhabited single or multi-unit residential dwelling. All clean-up work must be done before 5:00 p.m. In commercial areas, sandblasting is to be done from 11:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All clean-up must be done by and/or before 7:00 p.m.

        J.     Property Protection. No person shall engage in sandblasting, liquid washing, compressed air cleaning or steam cleaning of exterior surfaces of buildings without first protecting adjacent property, public streets and pedestrian walkway areas by erecting canvas or other suitable barriers sufficient to protect them from the sandblasting or blowing of and/or water. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1634; Ord. 1600)

 

9.60.040 Pool and Spa Code
9.60.040.010.10 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code Adopted by Reference.
        A.     2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as published by International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the State of California as though fully set forth herein, and made a part of the City of Seal Beach Municipal Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full, including all of the regulations, revisions, conditions and terms contained therein except that those certain sections thereof which are necessary to meet local conditions as hereinafter set forth in Section 9.60.040.020 of this Code are hereby repealed, added or amended to read as set forth therein.

        The administration of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be as set forth in Section 9.60.010 of this Code.

        B.     Not less than one copy of said 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code together with any and all amendments thereto proposed by the City of Seal Beach, has been and is now filed in the office of the community development department and shall remain on file with the building official, and shall collectively be known as the City of Seal Beach Swimming Pool and Spa Code and may be cited as Section 9.60.040.010 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. (Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.040.010.20 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code Amended.
        1.     Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety.

        2.     Chapter 2 the following definitions added to read:

 

In addition to the definitions specified in Chapter 2 Section 202 of this Code, the following certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section.

1.     Where the term International Building Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Building Code.

2.     Where the term International Residential Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Residential Code.

3.     Where the term International Plumbing Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Plumbing Code.

4.     Where the term International Energy Conservation Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Energy Code.

5.     Where the term International Fire Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Fire Code.

6.     Where the term International Fuel Gas Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Plumbing Code.

7.     Where the term International Mechanical Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Mechanical Code.

8.     Where the term NFPA 70 is used it shall be replaced with the term California Electrical Code.

(Ord. 1681)

 

9.60.040.020 Chapter 1 amended.
        The text within Chapter 1 is deleted and replaced with the following:

 

Chapter 1

Administrative Provisions

 

Section 101. For administrative provisions for this code, see Section 9.60.005.040.

(Ord. 1661; Ord. 1634)

 

9.60.050 Solar Energy System Permit Expediting
9.60.050.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this section is to establish an expedited, streamlined solar energy system permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems that complies with the Solar Rights Act and Assembly Bill 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes of 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This section encourages the use of solar energy systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This section allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.020 Applicability.
        A.     This section applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

 

        B.     Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this section are not subject to the requirements of this section unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.030 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows:

        A.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

        1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

        2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

        3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

        4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

        B.     “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

        C.    “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

        D.    “Common interest development” means any of the following:

        1.     A community apartment project.

        2.     A condominium project.

        3.     A planned development.

        4.     A stock cooperative.

        E.     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

        1.     Electronic mail or e-mail.

        2.     City’s website.

        3.     Facsimile.

        F.     “Significant” with regards to solar domestic water heating systems or solar swimming pool heating systems that comply with state and federal law, to mean an amount exceeding 10% of the cost of the system, not to exceed $1,000 or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10%, and with regard to photovoltaic systems that comply with state and federal law, an amount not to exceed $1,000 over the system cost or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10%.

        G.    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.040 Solar Energy System Requirements.
        A.     All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city, and the local utility provider’s electricity grid.

        B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

        C.    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.050 Duties Of Building and Safety Division and Building Official.
        A.     All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city’s website.

        B.     An applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building and safety division by personal delivery, mail, or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees.

        C.    An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

        D.    The city’s building and safety division shall adopt a standard plan(s) and checklist(s) of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

        E.     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s) and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the standard plan(s) and checklist(s) contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.060 Permit Review and Inspection Requirements.
        A.     Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

 

        1.     Verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

        2.     At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

        B.     For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the building official and fire chief. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection.

        C.    An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

        D.    Except as otherwise required by subsection E of this section, upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist and standard plan(s), the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

        E.     If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance, shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

        F.     Requirement for a Use Permit.

        1.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the building official may require the applicant to apply for a use permit if the building official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety.

        2.     If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written findings based on substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact.

        3.     Any conditions imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health or safety at the lowest possible cost.

        4.     A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or as such statute may be amended from time to time.

        5.     Any decision of the building official under this subsection F may be appealed to the planning commission. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.070 Fees.
        The city council may adopt or amend plan review and permit fees by resolution to implement and administer this section. The applicant shall pay all plan review fees at the time of plan review submittal. Permit fees shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.050.080 Conflicting Provisions.
        In the event of any conflict between this section and any other provision of this Code, this section shall control. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1657)

 

9.60.060 Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code
9.60.060.010 Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code—Adopted by reference.
        A.     The City Council of the City of Seal Beach hereby adopts by reference the 1997 Edition of the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous, as published by the International Code Council, as Section 9.60.130.010 of Chapter 9.60 of Title 9 of this code, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended as set forth in this chapter. Said Code is adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.

        B.     The purpose of this code is to prescribe regulations for the protection of the public health and safety and to establish minimum regulations for the abatement of dangerous buildings within the city.

        State law references: Adoption by reference, Government Code Section 50022.1 et seq. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1634)

 

9.60.070 Safety Assessment Placards.
9.60.070 Safety Assessment Placards.
        A.     The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Seal Beach. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary.

        B.     For the purposes of this section, the following definition applies:

        1.     Safety Assessment: a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy.

        C.    Safety Assessment Placards.

        1.     The following Safety Assessment Placards shall be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures.

        a.     INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted shall be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found and shall not mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

        b.     RESTRICTED USE shall be posted on each damaged building or structure wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The Restricted Use placard shall contain a general description of the type of damage encountered and shall clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

        c.     UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy shall be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life, health, or safety. No person or persons shall enter a building or structure on which such a placard has been posted under any circumstance except safety assessment teams or persons authorized in writing by the building official. The “Unsafe – Do Not Enter or Occupy” placard shall not be used or construed to be a demolition order. The individual who posts such placard shall note thereon in general terms the type of damage encountered.

        2.     Every Safety Assessment Placard shall cite this section number, and include the city’s name, address, and phone number.

        3.     Once a Safety Assessment Placard has been attached to a building or structure, it shall not be removed, altered or covered except by an authorized representative of the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to alter, remove, cover, obscure, or deface a Safety Assessment Placard unless authorized pursuant to this section.

        4.     The form of Safety Assessment Placard shall be substantially the same as follows:

 

INSPECTED



 

LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED

 

This structure has been inspected (as indicated below) and no apparent structural hazard has been found.

Date: ___________________

 

Time: ___________________

Inspected Exterior Only

(Caution: Aftershocks since inspection may increase damage and risk)

Inspected Exterior and Interior

 

Report any unsafe condition to local authorities;

reinspection may be required.

This facility was inspected under emergency conditions by:

Inspector comments:

________________________________________________________________________________________________

City of Seal Beach

211 Eighth Street

Seal Beach, CA  90740

(562) 431-2527

Facility Name and Address:

________________________________________________

Inspector ID/Agency:

_______________________________________________

Do Not Remove, Alter or Cover this Placard

until Authorized by the Building Official

(Municipal Code Section 9.60.070)

RESTRICTED USE



 

Caution:  This structure has been inspected and found to be damaged as described below:

________________________________________________

________________________

Date: ___________________

 

Time: ___________________

 

(Caution: Aftershocks since inspection may increase damage and risk)

Entry, occupancy, and lawful use are restricted as indicated below

This facility was inspected under emergency conditions by:

 

Do not enter the following areas:

________________________

________________________

City of Seal Beach

211 Eighth Street

Seal Beach, CA  90740

(562) 431-2527

 

Brief entry allowed for access to contents:

________________________

________________________

Inspector ID/Agency:

________________________

________________________

Other restrictions:

__________________________

__________________________

Facility Name and Address:

__________________________

__________________________

Do Not Remove, Alter or Cover this Placard

until Authorized by the Building Official

(Municipal Code Section 9.60.070)

 

 

UNSAFE

 

DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY

(THIS PLACARD IS NOT A DEMOLITION ORDER)



 

Caution:  This structure has been inspected,  found to be seriously damaged and is unsafe to occupy as described below:

___________________________________________________________________________

Date: ____________________

 

Time: ____________________

 

 

This facility was inspected under emergency conditions by:

Do not enter, except as specifically authorized in writing by the City of Seal Beach. Entry may result in death or injury.

 

City of Seal Beach

211 Eighth Street

Seal Beach, CA  90740

(562) 431-2527

Facility Name and Address:

_________________________

_________________________

_________________________

Inspector ID/Agency:

_________________________

_________________________

_________________________

Do Not Remove, Alter or Cover this Placard until Authorized by the Building Official

(Municipal Code Section 9.60.070)

 

(Ord. 1661; Ord. 1634; Ord. 1600)

 

9.60.080 Nonsubdivision Development Standards.
9.60.080 Nonsubdivision Development Standards.
        A.     Construction of Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks.

        1.     Requirements. Any person constructing or arranging for the construction of any commercial building, industrial building, residential building or any other facility, or addition thereto, exceeding 400 square feet in floor area, who is not otherwise required to make the improvements enumerated herein, shall provide for the construction of concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks and pavement on the one-half of the street and alley abutting the lot on which the building or facility is to be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the city engineer unless adequate concrete curbs, gutter, sidewalks and pavement already exist along all streets and alleys abutting the lot on which the building or facility is to be constructed, except as provided in subsection B below.

        Curbs, gutters and sidewalks required to be constructed by this section shall be located within the street right-of-way at the locations and grades established by the city engineer.

        2.     Delay of Construction. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city engineer may delay the construction of curbs, gutters and/or sidewalks and pavement upon determining that the street grade cannot be readily established or when on a block by block basis in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development appears to the engineer to be imminent, provided the property owner posts a cash bond with the city insuring the construction may be performed in a more efficient and expeditious manner.

        3.     Improvement Procedure.

        a.     Any person required to make improvements by the provisions of this section shall file with the city engineer a bond in such amount as the city engineer shall estimate and determine to be necessary to complete all of the improvements required.

        b.     Such bond may be either a cash bond or a bond executed by a company authorized to act as a surety in this state. The bond shall be payable to the city and be conditioned upon the faithful performance of any and all work required to be done and should the work not be done or completed within the time specified, the city may, at its option, cause the same to be done or completed, and the parties executing the bond shall be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses incurred in the construction thereof. The bond shall be executed by the owner of the lot as principal and, if a surety bond, shall also be executed by a corporation authorized to act as a surety under the laws of the State of California.

        4.     Approval and Acceptance by Building Official. The building official shall deny final approval and acceptance on final public utility connections to any commercial building, industrial buildings, residential building, or any other facility until such concrete curbs and gutters, or concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks and pavement exist or are constructed, or their construction is guaranteed by cash deposited with the city in a sum determined by the city engineer, based upon the number of lineal feet of concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks and pavement to be installed.

        Whenever the owner elects to deposit a cash bond, the city is authorized in the event of any default on his part to use any or all of the deposit money to cause all of the required work to be done or completed and for payment of all costs and expenses therefor. Any money remaining shall be refunded to the owner.

        When a substantial portion of the required improvement has been completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer and the completion of the remaining improvements is delayed due to conditions beyond the owner’s control, the city engineer may accept the completed portion and consent to a proportionate reduction of the surety bond in an amount estimated and determined by the city engineer to be adequate to assure the completion of the required improvement remaining to be made.

        B.     Existing Public Utilities.

        1.     Required. Any person constructing or arranging for the construction of any commercial building, industrial building, residential building, or addition thereto exceeding 2,000 square feet in floor area, shall be required to replace existing public utilities facilities such as street lighting, water and sewer lines, and related appurtenances serving the property if in the determination of the city engineer the existing public utilities facilities are insufficient to accommodate such construction.

        C.    Future Undergrounding of Utilities. Any person constructing or arranging for the construction of any commercial building, industrial building, residential building or any other facility, or addition thereto, exceeding 400 square feet in floor area or ground area, or any accessory building having an area greater than 400 square feet, shall provide for future underground power and telephone connections. Undergrounding facilities shall consist of conduits acceptable to the city engineer running from the power panel and/or telephone line hookup to the appropriate utility easement, alley, or street as determined by the city engineer.

        D.    Development Fee for Park and Recreation Facilities. Any person constructing or arranging for the construction of any residential dwelling unit shall, through the payment of a fee, provide at least in part for the park and recreational needs of the proposed development’s inhabitants.

        The amount of the park and recreation fee to be levied pursuant to this section shall be as adopted by the city council on a dwelling unit basis. The building official shall not issue a building permit until such fee has been paid to the city.

        Provided, however, that the net increase in the number of dwelling units situated upon a lot shall be used in determining the fee to be levied under the provisions of this section, and provided further that this section shall not apply to any property the subdivision of which has caused either the dedication of parkland or the payment of a fee in lieu thereof. (Ord. 1661; Ord. 1634; Ord. 1600)

Chapter 9.65 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
9.65.005 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

        Applicant: any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, renovation, or similar operations on a project within the city.

        City-Sponsored Project: a project constructed by the city or a project receiving 50% or more of its financing from the city.

        Construction: the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

        Construction and Demolition Debris: building materials and solid waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, cleanup, or demolition operations that are not hazardous as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 66261.3, et seq. This term includes, but is not limited to, asphalt, concrete, Portland cement concrete, brick, lumber, gypsum wallboard, cardboard, and other associated packaging, roofing material, ceramic tile, carpeting, plastic pipe and steel. The material may be commingled with rock, soil, tree stumps, and other vegetative matter resulting from land clearing and landscaping for construction or land development projects.

        Covered Project: those projects that qualify as covered projects pursuant to Section 9.65.015.

        Deconstruction: the selective dismantling or removal and salvaging of reusable materials, including but not limited to appliances, fixtures, windows, and other components, from buildings or other structures prior to their demolition.

        Demolition: the razing, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

        Divert: to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or material recovery facility.

        Diversion Requirement: the diversion of a percentage of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 9.65.010 in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the waste management plan compliance official in relation to the project.

        Material Recovery Facility: a processing facility permitted by the State of California where solid waste and/or recyclable materials are sorted or separated, by hand or by the use of machinery, for the purpose of recycling, reuse, and/or composting.

        Non-Covered Project: those projects that do not qualify as covered projects pursuant to Section 9.65.015.

        Project: any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the city.

        Recycling: the same meaning as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 40180, as amended from time to time.

        Renovation: any change, addition, alteration or modification to an existing facility, structure, wall, fence, or paving, including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

        Reuse: the use, in the same or similar form as it was produced, of a material which might otherwise be discarded.

        Solid Waste: all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. “Solid waste” does not include any of the following wastes:

        1.     Hazardous waste, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40141;

        2.     Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law [Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code];

        3.     Medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act [Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code].

        Waste Diversion: the diversion of solid waste, in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local requirements, from disposal at solid waste landfills or transformation facilities through recycling, reuse or composting. Where used in this chapter, the words “diversion” and “divert” shall refer to waste diversion.

        Waste Diversion Fee Deposit: a fee deposited with the city pursuant to Section 9.65.045.

        Waste Management Plan (WMP): a completed waste management plan form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project.

        Waste Management Plan Compliance Official: the building official or his or her designee. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.010 Diversion Requirements.
        A.     At least 75% of all concrete and asphalt construction and demolition debris and 50% of all other construction and demolition debris generated by any covered project shall be delivered to a material recovery facility, with the intention that such material be recycled, or otherwise diverted from landfills through direct delivery of such materials to brokers or end-users, through on-site reuse, or through any other diversion method(s) specified in an approved waste management plan. When calculating diversion amounts pursuant to this section, “all other construction and demolition debris” shall include fixtures, appliances, and other similar items. All covered projects are subject to Section 6.20.180 regarding unauthorized containers.

        B.     Each applicant for a covered project shall meet the diversion requirements of this section unless the applicant is granted an exemption pursuant to this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum diversion rates feasible (the “lower alternate diversion rates”) as established in writing by the building official in his or her sole discretion. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.015 Thresholds for Covered Projects.
        “Covered project” shall mean any of the following projects:

        A.     Additions of 1,000 square feet or more of gross floor area;

        B.     Tenant improvements of 1,000 square feet or more of gross floor area;

        C     New structures of 1,000 square feet or more of gross floor area; and

        D.    Demolition of 1,000 square feet or more of gross floor area. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.020 Non-Covered Projects.
        Applicants for non-covered projects are encouraged to divert construction and demolition debris to an extent and in a manner consistent with the diversion requirements of this chapter. All non-covered projects are subject to Section 6.20.180 regarding unauthorized containers. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.025 City-Sponsored Projects.
        A.     City-sponsored construction, demolition or renovation activities that involve 1,000 square feet or greater of project area shall divert construction and demolition debris in a manner consistent with this chapter to the extent necessary to meet or exceed the diversion requirements of Section 9.65.010. For such city-sponsored projects, a written waste management plan, in a form approved by the city, must be submitted to and approved by the building official prior to the commencement of the subject construction, demolition, or renovation activities.

        B.     City-sponsored construction, demolition and renovation activities that involve less than 1,000 square feet of project area are not required, but shall be encouraged, to divert construction and demolition debris to an extent and in a manner consistent with the diversion requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.030 Deconstruction Requirement.
        In order to ensure the diversion of reusable and/or recyclable fixtures, appliances, and other similar items from every demolition or renovation project, no demolition may take place until the applicant for a covered project has demonstrated through documentation submitted to and approved by the building official that deconstruction activities will take place prior to demolition. At a minimum, such documentation shall identify the name of the party that will conduct the deconstruction activity and the dates or time period when such activity is anticipated to occur. Reusable materials salvaged and diverted through the deconstruction of any covered project shall count towards the diversion requirements of Section 9.65.010 if such materials are included in the WMP and in the reporting documentation required by Section 9.65.055. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.035 Waste Management Plan and Waste Diversion Fee Deposit Exemptions.
        A waste management plan and a waste diversion fee deposit shall not be required for the following:

        A.     Activities that do not qualify as covered projects under this chapter;

        B.     Roofing projects that do not include the tear-off of existing roof;

        C.    Work that requires only a plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit;

        D.    Seismic retrofits;

        E.     Emergency demolition required to protect the public health and safety;

        F.     Projects that have obtained a valid building permit prior to the effective date of this chapter; and

        G.    A project of city public works or city public construction for which the notice inviting bids has been published pursuant to Section 3.20.030(B), Bid Invitation Notice, of this code prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1578)

9.65.040 Waste Management Plan.
        A.     The applicant for a covered project shall submit a WMP to the city, in a form approved by the city, and receive express written approval of the WMP from the building official, prior to beginning any construction, demolition, or renovation activities that generate solid waste.

        B.     The applicant shall submit its completed, signed and dated WMP to the city during the construction, demolition, and/or similar permit application process(es). Approval of the WMP by the building official shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any building or demolition permit for all projects that require a WMP under this chapter. At a minimum, an approved WMP shall contain the following:

        1.     Proposed start and end date for the project;

        2.     Description of deconstruction efforts to be made;

        3.     Estimated weight of project waste to be generated by material type;

        4.     Maximum weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling by material type;

        5.     Vendor(s) that the applicant proposes to use to haul the materials;

        6.     Name and location of facility or facilities to which the materials will be hauled, and their expected diversion rates by material type; and

        7.     Estimated weight of construction and demolition debris that will be disposed of in a landfill.

        If necessary to estimate the weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant may use standardized volume to weight conversion rates and methodologies approved by the building official. If the applicant calculates the projected feasible diversion amounts as described above, and finds the amounts do not meet the diversion requirements, the applicant must then submit documentation supporting and justifying a lower alternate diversion rate. If this documentation is not included, the WMP shall be deemed incomplete.

        C.    The building official shall only approve a WMP if he or she determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

        1.     The WMP provides all of the required information set forth in this section, and any other requested information deemed necessary by the building official;

        2.     The WMP indicates that at least the required percentage of each type of construction and demolition debris generated by the project, as set forth in Section 9.65.010, or lower alternate diversion rates as justified in the submitted WMP and approved in writing by the building official, shall be diverted; and

        3.     The applicant has submitted an appropriate waste diversion fee deposit and administrative fee for the project in accordance with Section 9.65.045.

        D.    Upon approval of the building official, a master waste management plan may be submitted for multiple tenant improvement covered projects that will be completed during a single calendar year. The information in the master waste management plan must conform to the requirements contained in subsection B of this section, and must be presented for each individual covered project included in the master waste management plan.

        E.     If the building official determines that the WMP is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least the required percentages (or approved lower alternate diversion rates) of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be diverted, he or she shall either:

        1.     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “Disapproved,” including a statement of reasons for disapproval; or

        2.     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “Further Explanation Required,” including a statement of necessary information or explanation.

        F.     If during the course of a covered project the applicant determines based on new or previously unknown or undiscovered conditions that he or she will be unable to meet the required diversion rates (or approved lower alternate diversion rates), the applicant may submit a revised WMP to the building official including documentation supporting and justifying lower alternate diversion rates. The building official, in his or her sole discretion, may approve or reject the revised WMP and the lower alternate diversion rates. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.045 Waste Diversion Fee Deposit and Administrative Fee Required.
        A.     Waste Diversion Fee Deposit. As a condition precedent to the issuance of any construction, demolition, or similar permit for a covered project, the applicant shall post a deposit with the city in an amount per square foot of building area related to covered project that will be constructed, demolished, or renovated, as established by resolution of the city council. In no case shall the required deposit exceed $50,000 for any single covered project. The deposit shall be returned in total to the applicant, promptly and without interest, at the conclusion of the project and upon the applicant presenting proof satisfactory to the building official that no less than the required diversion rates (or approved lower alternate diversion rates) of construction and demolition debris generated by the covered project have been recycled, reused or otherwise diverted from landfills to the extent indicated in the approved WMP. City-sponsored construction, demolition and renovation activities shall be exempt from the waste diversion fee deposit requirements.

        If lesser diversion rates of construction and demolition debris tonnage than required were diverted, the deposit refund shall be returned on a pro-rata basis based on the percentage of compliance with the required diversion rate.

        Failure to comply with the provisions of Section 9.65.055 will result in the applicant’s forfeiture of the entire waste diversion fee deposit.

        B.     Waste Diversion Administrative Fee. As a condition precedent to the issuance of any construction, demolition, or similar permit for a covered project, the applicant shall pay an administrative fee with the city in an amount per square foot of building area related to covered project that will be constructed, demolished, or renovated, as established by resolution of the city council. City-sponsored construction, demolition and renovation activities shall be exempt from the waste diversion administrative fee requirements.

        C.    Certificates of occupancy on a project shall not be withheld due solely to the failure of a project to achieve the diversion requirements of the WMP.

        D.    The city may at any time, by formal resolution of the city council, modify the basis for calculation of the required fee deposit or administrative fee. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.050 On-Site Practices.
        During the course of completion of the covered project, the applicant shall divert the required percentage of waste and keep records of such activities in a form specified by the building official. The building official will evaluate and may monitor each covered project to determine the percentage of waste recycled or reused from the covered project. For covered projects involving both construction/renovation and demolition activities, diversion of materials from demolition activities shall be tracked and measured separately from diversion of materials from construction/renovation activities. To the maximum extent feasible, project waste shall be separated on-site if this practice increases separation shall include, but not be limited to, salvageable materials (e.g., fixtures, appliances, and other similar items) and dimensional lumber, wallboard, diversion. For construction, demolition and/or renovation projects, on-site concrete and corrugated cardboard. (Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.055 Reporting.
        A.     Within 180 days following the completion of the demolition phase of a covered project, and again within 180 days following the completion of the construction and/or renovation phase of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to receiving a refund of the waste diversion fee deposit set forth in Section 9.65.045, submit documentation demonstrating to the satisfaction of the building official compliance with both the diversion requirements set forth in Section 9.65.010, and the approved WMP for the project.

        The documentation shall include a copy of the approved WMP; actual waste tonnage supported by original or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors, end users, and/or landfill and disposal companies; and any other documentation required in the approved WMP. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether waste generated from the covered project has been or will be recycled, reused, or disposed. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all designated recyclable and reusable waste is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available.

        B.     To the extent practical, all construction and demolition waste shall be weighed in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition waste for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use standardized conversion rates and methodologies approved by the building official.

        C.    If a covered project involves both demolition and renovation or construction, the report and documentation for the demolition phase of the project must be submitted and approved by the building official prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction or renovation phase of the project. Alternatively, the applicant may submit a letter stating that no non-hazardous solid waste or recyclable materials were generated from the covered project, in which case this statement shall be subject to verification by the building official.

        D.    Any deposit posted pursuant to Section 9.65.045 of this chapter shall be forfeited if the applicant does not meet the timely reporting and other requirements of this section. (Ord. 1601; Ord. 1578)

 

9.65.060 Appeals.
        If an applicant is aggrieved by any decision of the building official under this chapter, the applicant may appeal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.15, Enforcement. (Ord. 1578)

Chapter 9.70 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE
9.70.005 Purpose.
        A.     The State Legislature has found that:

        1.     The waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

        2.     The continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

        3.     It is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

        4.     Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;

        5.     Landscape design, installation, maintenance, and management can and should be water efficient; and

        6.     Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served, and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use of water.

        B.     The city hereby finds that:

        1.     Orange County has an established, large reclaimed water infrastructure system;

        2.     Allocation-based and tiered water rate structures allow public agencies to document water use in landscapes;

        3.     Incentive-based water use efficiency programs have been actively implemented within Orange County since before 1991;

        4.     Current local design practices in new landscapes typically achieve the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance water use goals;

        5.     All water services within the city are metered and billed based on volume of use;

        6.     Orange County is a leader in researching and promoting the use of smart irrigation controllers with more than 12,900 installations as of June 2009 and promotion of sustainable landscape transformation with more than 30,000,000 square feet of turf removal;

        7.     All new irrigation controllers sold after 2012 within Orange County will be smart irrigation controllers;

        8.     Landscape plan submittal and review has been a long standing practice in Seal Beach;

        9.     The average rainfall in Orange County is approximately 12 inches per year;

        10.   The city as the local water purveyor has implemented a tiered rate billing program and endorses water waste prohibitions for all existing metered landscaped areas throughout its service area, which includes the City of Seal Beach in its entirety; and

        11.   The city has determined, based upon the written and oral testimony, that this chapter is substantially equivalent to the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

        C.    Consistent with these findings, the purpose of the city’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance is to establish an alternative model acceptable under Governor Brown’s April 1, 2015 Drought Executive Order (B-19-25) as being at least as effective as the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in the context of conditions in the city in order to:

        1.     Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies;

        2.     Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

        3.     Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, and maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects;

        4.     Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

        5.     Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; and

        6.     Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a budget-based tiered-rate structure, providing rebate incentives and offering educational programs. (Ord. 1655; Ord. 1588)

 

9.70.010 Applicability.
        A.     This Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance shall apply to the following landscape projects:

        1.     New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

        2.     Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

        3.     New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Regulations; and

        4.     New or rehabilitated projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater capture on site, any lot or parcels within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape area and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on-site is subject only to Appendix A of the Regulations.

        5.     Cemeteries shall comply with the provisions of the Regulations pertaining to new landscape installations and landscape rehabilitation projects, including, but expressly not limited to, post-installation irrigation scheduling, post-installation landscape maintenance, water efficient landscape worksheet, and landscape documentation package.

        B.     Section 9.70.020(B) of the landscape water use standards of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance shall apply to:

        1.     All landscaped areas installed after January 1, 2010 to which Section 9.70.010(A) is applicable.

        C.    This Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance does not apply to:

        1.     Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;

        2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; and

        3.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 1655; Ord. 1588)

 

9.70.015 Implementation Procedures.
        A.     Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the city for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the city shall comply with the provisions of the Regulations. The Regulations shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and may be revised from time to time to effectuate the authority within this chapter.

        B.     The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a professional appropriately licensed in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and the Regulations.

        1.     Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the city for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations.

        2.     Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process, as provided in the Regulations. (Ord. 1655; Ord. 1588)

 

9.70.020 Landscape Water Use Standards.
        A.     For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to Section 9.70.010(A) of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, except for special landscaped areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the city; as provided in the Regulations.

        B.     Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed upon by the local water purveyor and the city.

        C.    Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Regulations and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the city. (Ord. 1655; Ord. 1588)

 

9.70.025 Delegation.
        The city may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance on behalf of the city. (Ord. 1655; Ord. 1588)

 

9.70.030 Definitions.
        The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

        Aggregate Landscape Areas: pertains to the areas undergoing development as one project or for production home neighborhoods or other situations where multiple parcels are undergoing development as one project, but will eventually be individually owned.

        Applied Water: means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

        Budget-Based Tiered-Rate Structure: means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping.

        Community Aesthetics Evaluation: while not subject to a permit, plan check or design review, the community aesthetics evaluation may be performed to ensure the aesthetic standards of the community and irrigation efficiency intent is maintained.

        Ecological Restoration Project: means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

        Estimated Applied Water Use: means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Regulations. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

        Evapotranspiration Adjustment Factor or ETAF: of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, 2 major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

        Hardscapes: means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

        Irrigation Efficiency: means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance is 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

        Landscape Contractor: means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

        Landscaped Area: means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

        Landscape Documentation Package: means the documents required to be provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Regulations.

        Landscape Project: means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the requirements under Section 9.70.010 of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

        Local Agency: means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized by the city to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance on behalf of the city. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance including, but not limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project.

        Local Water Purveyor: means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

        Maximum Applied Water Allowance or MAWA: means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Regulations. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].

        Mined-Land Reclamation Projects: means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

        New Construction: means, for the purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

        Non-Pervious: means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

        Permit: means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.

        Pervious: means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

        Plant Factor or Plant Water Use Factor: is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

        Recycled Water or Reclaimed Water: means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

        Reference Evapotranspiration or ETo: means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A of the Regulations, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of 4- to 7-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.

        Regulations: refers to the Regulations for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the city, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

        Rehabilitated Landscape: means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 9.70.010(A), where the modified landscape area is greater than 2,500 square feet.

        Smart Irrigation Controller: means an automatic irrigation controller utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data with non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems, recommending U.S. EPA WaterSense labeled devices as applicable.

        Special Landscape Area: means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

        Turf: means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

        Valve: means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

        Water Feature: means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. (Ord. 1655; Ord. 1588)

Chapter 9.75 PREVAILING WAGES
9.75.005 Requirement to Pay Prevailing Wages.
        The provisions of California Labor Code Section 1720 et seq., regarding prevailing wages on public works and related regulations as now existing and as may be amended are accepted and made applicable to the city, its departments, boards, officers, agents, and employees. (Ord. 1644)

 

9.75.010 Automatic Repeal of Chapter 9.75 if Labor Code Section 1782 is Not in Effect.
        If California Labor Code Section 1782 is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise impermissible, and no further appeals of that decision are available or pending, this chapter shall be automatically repealed without further action of the city. (Ord. 1644)

Title 10 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 10.05 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 10.10 SUBDIVISION MAP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 10.15 DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 10.20 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP AND TENTATIVE TRACT MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
Chapter 10.25 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
Chapter 10.30 RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Chapter 10.35 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS, MERGERS, CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE AND REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 10.40 STREETSCAPE
Chapter 10.45 BLOCK STRUCTURE
Chapter 10.50 DEDICATIONS
Chapter 10.55 IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS
Chapter 10.60 SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS

Chapter 10.05 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
10.05.005 Definitions.
A.     Subdivision Map Act Definitions Incorporated by Reference. The definitions contained in Government Code Sections 66414-66424.1 and 66424.5 of the Subdivision Map Act (“Map Act”) are hereby incorporated by this reference unless otherwise indicated herein.

B.     Parcel Map. Subdivision map required pursuant to Section 10.10.005.B: Parcel Map for subdivisions of 4 or fewer parcels.

C.    Final Map; Tract Map. Subdivision map required pursuant to Section 10.10.005.A: Tentative Tract Map and Final Map for subdivisions of 5 or more parcels.

D.    Lot Types. See Figure 10.05.005.D.1: Lot Types, for illustration.

1.     Corner Lot: a lot with 2 or more adjacent sides that face a street or public right-of-way.

2.     Cul-de-sac Lot: a lot located on the curving portion of a cul-de-sac street.

3.     Flag Lot: a lot that does not meet minimum lot width requirements, where access to the public roadway is limited to a narrow private right-of-way.

4.     Interior Lot: a lot with only one front lot line, not located on a street corner and lacking a side lot line adjacent to a street.

5.     Irregular Lot: a nonrectangular parcel or one with its lot width less than one-fourth its depth.

6.     Key Lot: the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot and not separated therefrom by an alley.

7.     Regular Lot: a rectangular or nearly rectangular shaped parcel with lot width not less than one-fourth its depth.

8.     Reversed Corner Lot: a corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

9.     Substandard Lot: a lot which does not meet the minimum requirements for lot size, lot width, and/or lot depth.

10.   Through Lot: a lot which has 2 or more lot frontages which do not intersect to form a corner lot.

11.   Zero Lot: a lot which has a building on a lot in a manner that one or more building edges rest directly on a lot line.

 

 

Figure 10.05.005.D.1

Lot Types



 

E.     Subdivision Map Act or Map Act. Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions. (Ord. 1585; Ord. 1567)

 

10.05.010 Applicable Law.
A.     Subdivision Approval Required. No property in the city shall be subdivided unless the subdivider has complied with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this title, the Map Act, or other provisions of the municipal code, the most restrictive provisions shall control.

B.     Compliance with other Regulations Required. City approval of a subdivision shall not authorize or be deemed to authorize: an exception or deviation from any zoning regulation; or development in violation of city ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.05.015 Administration and Advisory Agencies.
A.     City Officials. The director of development services (“director”) and city engineer shall: administer and enforce the provisions of this title and applicable provisions of the Map Act; recommend the kinds, nature and extent of improvements required to be installed in subdivisions; and recommend the imposition of reasonable conditions upon subdivision applications.

B.     Subdivision Technical Review Committee. In addition to the determinations listed in Table 10.05.015.C: Review Authority for Subdivision Determinations, the subdivision technical review committee, consisting of the director, the city engineer and the building official, shall: investigate and report on the design and improvement of proposed parcel map subdivisions; prescribe the kinds, nature and extent of improvements required to be installed in connection with parcel maps; and impose reasonable conditions thereon.

1.     Recommendations and Decisions. Recommendations and decisions of the committee pursuant to Table 10.05.015.C: Review Authority for Subdivision Determinations shall be determined at a public meeting of the committee and all recommendations and decisions shall be provided in writing to other city advisory and approval bodies set forth in Table 10.05.015.C: Review Authority for Subdivision Determinations and the project applicant.

2.     Meetings Open to Public. Subdivision technical review committee meetings shall be open to the public, and any officer, person, subdivider, owner or interested person may attend such meeting and present any appropriate matters to the committee.

C.    Planning Commission. In addition to the determinations listed in Table 10.05.015C: Review Authority for Subdivision Determinations, the planning commission shall recommend to the council the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of requests for modification of the design and improvement standards of this title pursuant to Section 10.10.010: Exemptions; recommend modifications of the requirements of this title; and perform additional duties in compliance with this title and applicable state law.

 

Table 10.05.015.C

Review Authority for Subdivision Determinations1

 

Role of Review Authority2

Type of Decision

City Engineer

Subdivision Technical Review Committee

Planning Commission

City Council

Acceptance of Property Dedications

 

 

Recommend

Decision

Certificate of Compliance

Decision

 

Appeal

Appeal

Conditional Certificate of Compliance

 

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Final Map

 

 

 

Decision

Lot Line Adjustment

Decision

 

Appeal

Appeal

Merger

Decision

 

 

Appeal

Parcel Map Waiver

 

Recommend

Decision

Appeal

Tract Map - Final

 

 

 

Decision

Tract Map - Tentative

 

Recommend

Decision

Appeal

Tentative Map Time Extension

 

Recommend

Decision

Appeal

Parcel Map - Final

Decision

 

 

Appeal

Parcel Map - Final with Dedications

 

Recommend

 

Decision

Parcel Map - Tentative

 

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Reversion to Acreage

 

Recommend

 

Decision

Exceptions

 

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

Notes:

1.    The review authorities for various planning permits are set forth in Title 11, Zoning.

2.    “Recommend” means that the body makes a recommendation to a higher body.

       “Decision” means that the body makes the final decision on the matter.

       “Appeal” means that the body considers appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.

(Ord. 1567)

 

10.05.020 Enforcement.
A.     Notice of Violation. The city may take the actions described in Map Act Section 66499.36 if property has been divided in violation of this title or the Map Act.

B.     Permit Issuance Prohibited. The city shall not issue any permit or certificate, or grant any approval to develop any property where the property was divided, or was created by a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Map Act. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.10 SUBDIVISION MAP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
10.10.005 Subdivision Approval Required.
A.     Tentative Tract Map and Final Map. Each subdivider proposing to subdivide property into 5 or more parcels shall apply for tentative tract map and final map approval, unless the property is exempt pursuant to Section 10.10.010: Exemptions.

B.     Parcel Map. Each subdivider proposing to subdivide property into 4 or less parcels shall apply for tentative parcel map and parcel map approval unless the property is exempt pursuant to Section 10.10.010: Exemptions, or the city has granted a waiver pursuant to Section 10.25.010: Waiver of Parcel Map. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.10.010 Exemptions.
No subdivision map is required for:

A.     Agricultural Leases. Leases of agricultural land for the cultivation of food or fiber, or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

B.     Cellular Antenna Facilities. The leasing, licensing, granting of an easement or permit for a portion of a parcel, to a telephone corporation defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234, exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities and equipment incidental to such facilities.

C.    Cemeteries. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes.

D.    Commercial/Industrial Financing or Leases.

1.     The financing or leasing of spaces within nonresidential buildings; existing separate nonresidential buildings on a single parcel.

2.     The financing or leasing of any parcel or portion of a parcel, in conjunction with the construction of nonresidential buildings on the same site, if the zoning ordinance requires a use permit for the project.

E.     Condominium Conversions. The conversion of: a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to condominiums, if the conversion satisfies the requirements of Map Act Section 66412(g) or 66412(h); or certain mobile home parks to condominiums in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(1).

F.     Lot Line Adjustments. A lot line adjustment processed in compliance with Chapter 10.35: Lot Line Adjustments, Mergers, Certificates of Compliance and Reversions to Acreage.

G.    Mineral Leases. Mineral, oil or gas leases.

H.    Public Agency or Utility Conveyances. Any conveyance of land, including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way.

I.      Rail Right-of-Way Leases. Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by Public Utilities Code Section 230.

J.     Residential Financing or Leases. The financing or leasing of apartments, or similar spaces within apartment buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; or residential second units created pursuant to Government Code Sections 65852.150 and 65852.2.

K.     Separate Assessments. Any separate assessment under Revenue and Taxation Code Section 2188.7.

L.     Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS). The leasing of, or granting of an easement to a parcel or portion of a parcel in conjunction with the financing, installation, and sale or lease of a WECS, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.10.015 Applications Deemed Approved.
Any subdivision application deemed approved pursuant to Government Code Sections 65956 or 66452 et seq. shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this title, and no land use entitlement or building permit shall be issued until the subdivider satisfies all such regulations. Parcel or final maps filed for recordation after their tentative map is deemed approved shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this title and the Map Act, including Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.15 DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
10.15.005 Design and Improvement Standards.
A.     Required Improvements. Subdividers shall provide all improvements required by this chapter and any additional improvements required by conditions of approval.

B.     Applicable Design Standards, Timing of Installation. Subdividers shall construct all improvements according to standards approved by the city engineer. No final or parcel map shall be presented to the city for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city for the work.

C.    Subdivision Improvement Standards: Conditions of Tentative Map Approval. The city shall list all improvement and dedication requirements as conditions of approval for each approved tentative map. The design, construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the requirements of the city engineer.

D.    Extent of Improvements Required, 4 or Fewer Parcels. Improvements required for subdivisions of 4 or fewer parcels shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of reasonable offsite and onsite improvements for the parcels being created.

E.     Oversizing of Improvements. At the discretion of the city, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be dedicated to the city, in compliance with Map Act Sections 66485 et seq.

F.     Exceptions.

1.     Processing of Application. A subdivider may seek an exception by submitting an application and filing fee established by resolution. The application shall include a description of each standard for which an exception is requested and the basis for the request. A request may be filed concurrently with the tentative map application, or after the tentative map has been approved. The approval of an exception shall not constitute approval of the tentative map and shall not extend any time limits for the expiration of the map.

2.     Council Action and Findings. The council may approve, conditionally approve or deny a request for an exception, provided it makes all of the following findings:

a.     The exception is not used to waive or modify any Map Act requirements;

b.     There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, that warrant the exception;

c.     The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions are not due to any action of the subdivider;

d.     The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and zoning district and denied to the proposed subdivision;

e.     The exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to surrounding property or improvements; and

f.      The exception will not render the subdivision inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

3.     In granting an exception, the council shall secure substantially the same objectives of the regulations for which the exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and convenience, and to mitigate any environmental impacts in compliance with CEQA. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.010 Access, Circulation, Streets.
A.     General Access and Circulation Requirements. Subdividers shall provide a comprehensive street system, designed and constructed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a City street in compliance with the city’s improvement standards, the zoning ordinance and the circulation element of the general plan.

1.     Streets shall be designed for safe vehicular operation at a specified design speed.

2.     Public streets shall be required if:

a.     The proposed street is shown as an arterial or collector street in the circulation element of the general plan or any specific or precise plan.

b.     The proposed street will be used by the general public as a through access route.

c.     Necessary for special needs including bus routes, public service access, bicycle routes and pedestrian access.

d.     Necessary to assure fire safety.

3.     Private streets may be allowed pursuant to subsection F of this section.

B.     Alternative Standards. The city may consider and approve proposed access and street design solutions that differ from the provisions of this section and the city’s improvement standards where deemed necessary to properly address the characteristics of adjacent land uses and/or anticipated traffic volumes, or to maintain neighborhood character. The use of alternative standards may be authorized through the exception procedure in Section 10.15.005.F: Exceptions.

C.    Access to Subdivision. The subdivider shall provide access to a city street in:

1.     The area of the subdivision abutting a city street, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way, and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all required road improvements; or

2.     The area of the subdivision being connected to a city street by a nonexclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility, and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement is:

a.     Offered for dedication;

b.     Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use; and

c.     Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by this section, the city’s improvement standards and conditions of approval.

D.    Access to New Parcels. Subdividers shall design a proposed subdivision as follows:

1.     City Street Access. Each lot shall be located on an existing city street or a new city street designed and improved in compliance with subsection C of this section, or to a private street if allowed by subsection F.

2.     No Direct Access to State Highway or Major Arterial. There shall be no direct access to a state highway or a major arterial. The subdivider shall dedicate reservation strips to the state or city, as appropriate, where required to control access over certain lot lines over the ends of street stubs.

3.     Frontage Roads. The city may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway for lots proposed to front on a major arterial or state highway.

4.     Alleys. Proposed alleys shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission.

E.     Design and Improvement of Proposed Streets. Proposed streets shall comply with the city’s improvement standards and be located and designed as follows:

1.     Alignment, Intersections, Curves. Streets shall be:

a.     Consistent with the circulation element of the general plan and the zoning code;

b.     Aligned with existing adjacent streets by continuation of their centerlines, or by adjustments by curves; and

c.     Located so that all streets intersect at an angle as near to 90 degrees as feasible. The centerline curve radii of all proposed streets shall be subject to approval by the city engineer.

2.     Right-of-Way and Surfaced Width. The width of the right-of-way and improved surface of streets shall be as provided by Chapter 10.40: Streetscape, except where other standards are approved by the council.

3.     Corners. All block corners and “T” alley intersections shall be rounded or cut off as approved by the city engineer.

4.     Access to Unsubdivided Property. The city may require that proposed streets be extended to the boundary of abutting vacant land designated by the general plan for future subdivision and development to provide access to the future development.

5.     Improvements to Existing Streets. The city may require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements in and to existing streets that provide access to, pass through, or is contiguous with a proposed subdivision, if it determines that the proposed subdivision will create the need for the improvements.

6.     Curbs and Sidewalks. Subdividers shall construct concrete curbs and sidewalks upon all streets in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications unless specifically waived in the conditions of approval. The city has the discretion to designate the location of sidewalks.

F.     Private Streets. The planning commission may approve private streets if it determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision. All private streets approved by the commission shall be shown on the subdivision map.

1.     Maintenance Requirements. An owners association or other organization shall maintain and own all private streets and right-of-ways, through a recorded instrument satisfactory to the city engineer and city attorney.

2.     Design and Improvement Standards. Subdividers shall design and improve private streets in compliance with subsections B and C of this section.

3.     Security and Conditions. The city may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this title pertaining to private streets.

4.     Offer of Dedication. The city may require that proposed private streets be subject to irrevocable offers of dedication to the city.

G.    Alternative Circulation Systems. Subdividers shall provide rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the circulation element of the general plan, other applicable general plan provisions, or any specific or precise plan. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.015 Energy Conservation.
The subdivider shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities pursuant to Map Act Section 66473.1. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.020 Fire Hydrants.
The subdivider shall install fire hydrants at locations required by the Orange County Fire Authority in accordance with applicable standards. (Ord. 1567)

10.15.025 Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control.
Subdividers shall incorporate appropriate erosion and sediment control measures as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.030 Landscaping.
A.     Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping shall comply with Chapter 10.40: Streetscape, the zoning code, Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards, and these requirements.

B.     Deferral of Landscape Installation. The installation of required landscaping may be deferred until the development of the subdivided lots through the provisions of Section 10.55.015: Improvement Agreements and Security, provided that interim erosion and sediment control measures are installed in compliance with Section 10.15.025: Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.035 Monuments.
The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with Chapter 10.60: Surveys and Monuments. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.040 Parcel Design.
The size, shape and configuration of proposed parcels shall comply with this section, the zoning code, any applicable specific or precise plan requirement, and any other municipal code provision applicable to the proposed subdivision.

A.     Parcel Area. The minimum area for proposed parcels shall be as required by the zoning code, except as otherwise provided by this section.

B.     Minimum Lot Area Requirements for Common Interest Projects. The minimum lot area requirements of the zoning code shall not apply to the individual units in condominium developments, condominium conversions, planned developments, townhouses or zero lot-line projects, but shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the location of the common interest development.

C.    Dimensions. The dimensions of proposed parcels shall comply with the applicable provisions of the zoning code.

D.    Driveway Standards. Subdividers shall design proposed parcels to accommodate driveways designed in compliance with Title 11: Zoning, Section 11.4.20.030: Driveways. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.045 Public Utilities and Utility Easements.
Public utility connections, including electricity, gas, water, sewer, storm drain, and telecommunications services shall be designed and installed for each parcel.

A.     Underground Utilities Required.

1.     Required Undergrounding. All utility distribution facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) designed to serve a subdivision shall be installed underground. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, and concealed ducts, shall also be underground, unless the city engineer approves an above-ground location. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation. The city may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil, or other conditions make underground installation infeasible.

2.     Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or on a lot line. The city engineer may determine the location and method of installation of lines installed within street rights-of-way.

B.     Utility Easements.

1.     Minimum Width. The city engineer shall determine the minimum width of easements for public or private utilities, sanitary sewers, or water distribution systems. The city engineer may consider the recommendation of the applicable utility company for its utilities.

2.     Overhead Lines. If the city approves overhead utility lines, easements shall be located at the rear of the lot, or, where necessary, on or adjacent to the property line of the lot. Where practical, the poles supporting overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alley, or easement designated for drainage purposes.

C.    Timing of Installation. The subdivider shall install underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains proposed to be located in the street before the street is surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines, and sanitary sewers shall be laid to sufficient lengths to avoid disturbing street improvements when service is connected. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.050 Sewage Disposal.
The subdivider shall provide a connection from each parcel to the Orange County Sanitation District’s sewage collection, treatment, and disposal system, in compliance with the district’s improvement standards and specifications. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.055 Street Lighting.
The subdivider shall provide street lighting facilities designed and constructed in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.060 Street Names and Signs.
A.     Street Name Requirements. The city shall name all streets within a proposed subdivision. Existing street names within the same area shall not be duplicated unless the proposed street is an extension of that street.

B.     Street Name Signs. The subdivider shall provide a minimum of two street name signs in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications at each street intersection. The signs shall be located on the diagonally opposite sides of the intersection. One street name sign shall be provided at each “T” intersection. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.065 Storm Drainage.
A.     Approved Storm Drain System. The subdivider shall design and install an approved storm drain system to collect and convey all storm water run-off from the subdivision. The system shall be designed with adequate capacity to accommodate ultimate development of the drainage area. The system shall provide for the protection of surrounding properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development; the city may require off-site storm drain improvements to satisfy this requirement. Any easement for drainage or flood control shall be improved as specified by the city engineer.

B.     Compliance with Regional Water Quality Control Board Requirements. Discharges into any groundwater or waterways (whether direct or indirect), public or private sewer or sewage disposal system, or into the ground, shall conform with the requirements of the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board, the California Department of Fish and Game, the California Department of Public Health, or such other relevant governmental agency, and in addition to the provisions of Title 9: Public Property, Public Works and Building Regulations; Chapter 9.20: Storm Water Management; Chapter 9.25: Fats, Oil and Grease Management and Discharge Control; Chapter 9.30: Sewerage; and Chapter 9.35: Water, of the municipal code.

C.    City Engineer Approval Required. All storm drainage facilities shall be constructed in compliance with plans approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.15.070 Water Supply.
Each parcel shall be served by the city’s water system. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.20 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP AND TENTATIVE TRACT MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
10.20.005 Tentative Parcel Map and Tentative Tract Map Filing, Initial Processing.
A.     General Filing and Processing Requirements. Subdividers shall submit tentative map applications and all information and other materials required by the city engineer to the city engineer for processing. The city engineer shall review the application for completeness and accuracy in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), this title, the zoning code and applicable provisions of the Map Act.

B.     Referral to Affected Agencies. Within 5 days of the city’s determination that the application is complete, the city engineer shall refer the proposed map to:

1.     Any city department, county, state or federal agency, and other entity affected by the subdivision.

2.     The following agencies, in the event such agency has filed a territorial map with the city pursuant to the Map Act:

a.     California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). For any subdivision located within the area shown on the territorial map filed by Caltrans.

b.     Adjacent Local Agencies. For any subdivision that is located within the area shown on the territorial map filed by that local agency.

3.     Public Utilities. Public utility companies and other service agencies, including providers of gas, electrical, telephone, and cable television services, which will be expected to provide “will serve” letters to the proposed subdivision.

4.     School Districts. The governing board of any elementary, high school, or unified school district within which the proposed subdivision is located.

5.     State Department of Education. For any proposed subdivision that includes a proposed public school site.

Within 15 days after receiving the map, any such agency may submit recommendations to the city.

C.    Review of Tentative Parcel Map. The subdivision technical review committee shall:

1.     Conduct a public meeting within 30 days from the date an application is deemed complete and consider all reviewing agency comments and any public testimony;

2.     Determine whether the subdivider has complied with all applicable provisions of this title, the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Map Act and the map is technically correct; and

3.     Prepare a recommendation to approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative parcel map. Approval or conditional approval shall be granted only if the committee has first made all findings required. The committee may impose conditions of approval in compliance with Section 10.20.025: Conditions of Approval. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.010 Evaluation of Application.
After the city deems the application complete, the director and city engineer shall:

A.     Analyze whether the subdivision is consistent with applicable provisions of this code, the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Map Act;

B.     Analyze whether the proposed subdivision satisfies the findings in Section 10.20.035: Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions; and

C.    Prepare a staff report analyzing the map, and recommending approval, conditional approval, or denial of the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.015 Public Hearing.
The city shall conduct a duly noticed public hearing on a proposed subdivision. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.020 Applicable Law.
In determining whether to approve a tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date the application was determined complete in compliance with Section 10.20.015: Public Hearing, except:

A.     Where the city has initiated general plan, specific plan or subdivision or zoning code changes and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2, in which case the city shall apply those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date it acts on the map; or

B      Where the applicant has requested changes to ordinances, policies, and standards in connection with its map application in which case the city shall apply those ordinances, policies, and standards adopted pursuant to the applicant’s request.

C.    Required Findings. The city shall not approve a tentative map where:

1.     The proposed subdivision, including design and improvements, is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific or precise plan.

2.     The site is not physically suitable for the type or proposed density of development.

3.     The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

4.     The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems.

5.     The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. The city may approve the subdivision if the city finds that the subdivider will provide alternate easements for access or use that are substantially equivalent to the easements previously acquired by the public. This paragraph 5 shall apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the city to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.

6.     The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board.

7.     A preliminary soils report or geological hazard report indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the subdivider can correct such conditions.

8.     The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this title, Title 11: Zoning, any other applicable provisions of the municipal code, and the Subdivision Map Act.

D.    Additional Required Findings. Additional required findings are located at: Section 10.30.015.F: Approval of Conversion, Required Findings; Chapter 10.50: Dedications; and Section 10.25.010: Waiver of Parcel Map.

E.     Timing of Construction of Improvements. The city may require construction of public improvements within a specified time after recordation of the map if it finds it is in the interest of the public health and safety; or it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.025 Conditions of Approval.
A.     Mandatory Conditions. The city shall require the subdivider to:

1.     Provide parcels, easements or rights-of-way for streets, water supply and distribution systems, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, solid waste disposal, and electric, gas and communications services to adequately serve the subdivision.

2.     Mitigate or eliminate environmental impacts identified through the environmental review process.

3.     Comply with the requirements of Chapter 10.15: Design and Improvement Standards and Chapter 10.45: Block Structure.

4.     Comply with all applicable provisions of the municipal code, department of public works standard conditions and the Map Act.

5.     Obtain a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 10.35: Lot Line Adjustments, Mergers, Certificates of Compliance and Reversions to Acreage, prior to the sale or subdivision of any designated remainder parcels.

B.     Discretionary Conditions. The city may require the subdivider to:

1.     Waive direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets.

2.     Reserve sites for public facilities, including schools, park and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, and other public uses pursuant to Map Act Section 66479.

3.     Adhere to time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, where deemed appropriate.

4.     Dedicate land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities (including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, and similar items), solar access easements, and school sites, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3.

5.     Construct public improvements within a specified time after recordation of the map.

6.     Comply with any other conditions deemed necessary by the city to achieve compatibility between the proposed subdivision, its immediate surroundings, and the community, or to achieve consistency with city ordinances or applicable state law. (Ord. 1567)

10.20.030 Effective Date of Tentative Map Approval.
The date of the resolution approving the tentative map is the effective date of the tentative map. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.035 Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions.
A.     Minor Changes. A subdivider may request the following minor changes to an approved tentative map or its conditions prior to recordation of a parcel or final map: minor adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements; reductions in the number of approved lots; and modifications to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection D of this section.

B.     Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the city engineer, using the forms furnished by the city engineer, containing the following information:

1.     The tentative map number;

2.     The changes requested;

3.     Any facts supporting the changes; and

4.     Any information deemed appropriate by the city engineer.

C.    Processing. Proposed changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map, except as otherwise provided by this section.

D.    Findings for Approval. The city shall not modify the approved tentative map or conditions of approval unless it finds the change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval can still be made:

1.     There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval;

2.     There has been a change of circumstances; and

3.     A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant.

E.     Effect of Changes on Time Limits. City approval of changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval does not constitute an approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend any time limits. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.040 Compliance with Conditions of Approval.
Prior to submitting a parcel map or final map, the subdivider shall fulfill the conditions of approval including any time limits specified in the resolution and, where applicable, comply with the provisions of Chapter 10.55: Improvement Plans and Agreements. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.045 Vesting Tentative Maps.
A.     Processing of a Vesting Tentative Map. Pursuant to Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Map Act, a subdivider may file a vesting tentative map. An application for a vesting tentative map shall be in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative map. In addition, the application shall include:

1.     The words “vesting tentative map” printed conspicuously on the face of the map.

2.     Accurately drawn, preliminary floor plans and architectural elevations for all buildings and structures proposed to be constructed on the property after subdivision.

3.     Plans prepared by a registered civil engineer showing all off-site improvements necessary to carry out the design and improvement requirements of Chapter 10.15: Design and Improvement Requirements.

B.     Findings for Approval. The city shall not approve a vesting tentative map unless the city determines the proposed development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing and makes the findings required for tentative map approval set forth in this chapter.

C.    Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting tentative map shall be subject to the time limits set forth in this chapter.

D.    Amendment to Vesting Tentative Map.

1.     A subdivider may apply for an amendment to the map or conditions of approval prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. An amendment request shall be processed as a new application, unless the subdivider is requesting minor changes as defined in Section 10.20.035: Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions.

2.     Pursuant to Map Act Section 66498.2, a subdivider may apply for an amendment prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map to secure a vested right if city ordinances, policies or standards have changed subsequent to the approval of the vesting tentative map.

 

E.     Development Rights Vested.

1.     The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards (excluding fees) in effect at the time the city has determined that the application is complete.

2.     If Map Act Section 66474.2 is repealed, approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the city approves or conditionally approves the map.

3.     Subsequent land use permits, building permits, extensions of time or other entitlements filed on parcels created by the subdivision may be conditioned or denied only if the city determines that:

a.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or

b.     The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

4.     Fees charged for building or land use permits, filed after the approval of a vesting tentative map shall be as required at the time the subsequent permit applications are filed (e.g., sewer/water hookup fees, traffic mitigation fees, etc.). Application contents shall be as required by ordinance requirements in effect at the time the subsequent application is filed.

F.     Duration of Vested Rights. The development rights vested by this section shall expire if a parcel map or final map is not approved before the expiration of the vesting tentative map pursuant to Section 10.20.050: Expiration of Approved Map. If the parcel or final map is approved and recorded, the development rights shall be vested for the following periods of time:

1.     An initial time period of 24 months from the date of recordation of the parcel or final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

2.     The initial 24 months shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if processing exceeds 30 days from the date the application is accepted for processing as complete.

3.     The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial 24 months expires by submitting an application to the city engineer with all required fees. The planning commission shall approve or deny any request for extension.

4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in paragraphs F.1 and F.2 above, the vested rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit, or any extension of that permit.

5.     Upon application, the planning commission may extend any of these time periods to subdividers for projects that require a coastal development permit. (Ord. 1567)

10.20.050 Expiration of Approved Map.
An approved map is valid for 24 months after its effective date, except as otherwise provided by Map Act Sections 66452.6, 66452.11, 66452.13, or 66463.5. At the end of 24 months, the approval shall expire, and the city will terminate processing, unless:

A.     A parcel or final map for the subject subdivision, and related bonds and improvement agreements, have been filed with the city engineer; or

B.     An extension of time has been granted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.055 Extensions of Time for Maps.
A subdivider may apply for a time extension by filing a written application and required filing fee with the city engineer on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension. Upon application, the planning commission may extend any of these time periods to subdividers for projects that require a coastal development permit.

A.     Findings for Extensions. The planning commission may grant extensions to the initial time limit up to a maximum total of 3 years, if there have been no changes:

1.     To the general plan, any applicable specific or precise plan, or this title applicable to the subdivision since the approval of the map;

2.     In the character of the site or its surroundings that adversely affect the policies of the general plan, any applicable specific or precise plan, or applicable standards of this title; and

3.     To the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools so there is insufficient capacity to serve the subdivision.

B.     Tentative Maps with Multiple Final Maps. Where a subdivider is required to expend more on improvements than the amount as specified in Map Act Section 66452.6 and multiple final maps are filed covering portions of a single approved tentative map, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by an additional 36 months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. The total of all extensions shall not extend the approval of the tentative map more than 10 years from its approval. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.20.060 Map Waiver for Mobile Home Parks.
The planning commission shall waive a map where owners of mobile homes have submitted a waiver application that fully complies with Map Act Section 66428.1, unless the city makes one or more of the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66428.1. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.25 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
10.25.005 Parcel Map Required.
A parcel map shall be filed for each subdivision of 4 or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a parcel map is waived as set forth in Section 10.25.010: Waiver of Parcel Map. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.010 Waiver of Parcel Map.
A.     Waiver Permitted. The planning commission may waive a parcel map where any of the following circumstances exist, and the boundaries of the original parcel have been previously surveyed and a map recorded, and are certain as to location.

1.     The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision in compliance with Government Code Section 66418.2.

2.     The subdivision or interests in the subdivision have been created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees.

3.     The subdivision results from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.

B.     Application Processing and Approval. A request for waiver of parcel map shall be submitted with the tentative map application with the required filing fee. The waiver request shall be processed and acted upon concurrently with the tentative map application. The commission may grant a requested waiver if:

1.     The proposed tentative map satisfies all findings required for approval by Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing; and

2.     The proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements of the Map Act and this title as to lot area, improvement and design, drainage, flood control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection.

C.    Expiration of Waiver. A waiver of parcel map shall be subject to the same time limits and opportunities for extension of time as the accompanying tentative map.

D.    Completion of Subdivision. Upon the subdivider satisfying all tentative map conditions of approval, the city engineer shall file with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided and a plat map showing the division. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.015 Parcel Map Form and Content.
A parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the State of California. Parcel map submittal shall include all information and other materials required by the city engineer and Section 66444 et seq. of the Map Act. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.020 Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps.
A.     Filing with the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the tentative parcel map and all data, information and materials required by Section 10.25.015: Parcel Map Form and Content to the city engineer. The application shall be deemed complete on the date the city engineer determines that it complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act.

B.     Review of Parcel Map. If the city engineer has determined that the tentative map has not expired, the city engineer shall:

1.     Determine whether the subdivider has complied with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act and the map is technically correct, and in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and

2.     Verify that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval have been completed.

If the city engineer cannot make such determination or verification, the city shall notify the subdivider and provide it an opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map with all required data. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.025 Parcel Map Approval.
A.     Map without Dedications. After determining that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative parcel map, is technically correct in compliance with this chapter, and that all conditions of approval have been satisfied, the city engineer shall approve the parcel map and execute the city engineer’s certificate. The city engineer shall then transmit the map to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Section 66450 of the Map Act.

If the city engineer cannot make such determination or verification, the city shall notify the subdivider and provide it an opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map with all required data.

B.     Map with Dedications. After determining that the parcel map is technically correct in compliance with this chapter, the city engineer shall refer the map to the city council to accept or reject offers of dedications. The council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, concurrently with its approval of the Map. Following council action, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s certificate. The map shall then be transmitted by the city engineer to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Map Act Section 66450. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.030 Final Map Required.
A final tract map shall be filed for each subdivision of 5 or greater parcels. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.035 Final Map Form and Content.
A final tract map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the State of California. Final tract map submittal shall include all information and materials required by Section 66433 et seq. of the Map Act. A final tract map submittal shall also include a digital copy of the final tract map, prepared using computer software and standards specified by the city engineer. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.040 Filing and Processing of Final Maps.
A.     Filing with City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the final tract map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 10.25.035: Final Tract Map Form and Content, to the city engineer. The application shall be deemed complete on the date the city engineer determines that it complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act.

B.     Review of Final Tract Map. The city engineer shall:

1.     Determine whether the subdivider has complied with all applicable provisions of this title and the map act and the map is technically correct, and in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and

2.     Verify that the final tract map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval have been completed.

If the city engineer cannot make such determination or verification, the city shall notify the subdivider and provide it an opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the map with all required data.

C.    Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple final tract maps as to the approved subdivision if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the tentative map or, if after the filing of the tentative map, the subdivider has obtained the city engineer’s approval of multiple maps submission. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.045 Final Map Approval.
After determining that the final tract map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with Section 10.25.040: Filing and Processing of Final Tract Maps above, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the final tract map to the council for action, as follows:

A.     Review by Council. The council shall approve or disapprove the final tract map at the council meeting it receives the Map or at its next regular meeting.

1.     Criteria for Approval. The council shall approve the final tract map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this title that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

2.     Waiver of Errors. The council may approve a final tract map that fails to meet one or more of the requirements of this title or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, if the council finds a technical or inadvertent error that does not materially affect the validity of the map.

3.     Approval by Inaction. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the map conforms to all applicable requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval on the map.

B.     Map with Dedications. The council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, concurrently with its approval of the final tract map.

C.    Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by the city have not been completed at the time of approval of the final tract map, the subdivider shall execute a completion agreement pursuant to Section 10.55.015: Improvement Agreements and Security, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final tract map.

D.    Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the city council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the city clerk shall transmit the final tract map to the county recorder for recordation in accordance with Map Act Section 66464. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.050 Subsequent Acceptance of Offer of Dedication.
If the city council rejects a subdivider’s offer of dedication, the city may accept the offer after its approval of the final or tract map pursuant to Map Act Section 66477.2. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.055 Supplemental Information Sheets.
In addition to the information previously required by this chapter, the city may require the recordation of additional information as follows:

A.     Preparation and Form. The additional information required by this section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the city engineer prefers a report or other document. Unless otherwise directed by the city engineer, the additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for parcel maps by Section 10.25.015: Parcel Map Form and Content.

B.     Content of Information Sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following information:

1.     Title. The words “Supplemental Information Sheet” and the number assigned to the accompanying parcel or final map;

2.     Explanatory Statement. Statements that the supplemental information sheet is recorded with the subject parcel or final map, and that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record interest;

3.     Location Map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed 1 inch equals 2,000 feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision within the city;

4.     Areas Subject to Flooding. Identification of all lands within the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by water;

5.     Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. When a soils report or geological hazard report has been prepared, the existence of the report shall be noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report; and

6.     Information Required by Conditions of Approval. Any information required by the approval body to be included on the supplemental information sheet(s) because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property, including any other easements or dedications. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.060 Recordation of Maps.
The subdivider shall comply with Map Act Section 66465 at the time of filing the map with the county recorder. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.25.065 Amendments to Recorded Maps.
A recorded parcel or final map may be modified only as forth in this section.

A.     Corrections. A recorded final map or parcel may be amended or corrected pursuant to Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Map Act (Sections 66469 et seq.).

B.     Changes to Approved Subdivision. A subdivider must submit a new subdivision application and obtain city approval for all changes or amendments to recorded maps not governed by subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.30 RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
10.30.005 Condominium Project Constitutes a Subdivision.
Map Act Section 66424 provides that “subdivision” includes common interest development such as a condominium project as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(f); a community apartment project as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(d); and the conversion of 5 or more existing dwelling units into a stock cooperative as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(m). (Ord. 1567)

 

10.30.010 Subdivision Map Required for Residential Condominiums.
An applicant proposing to develop a residential common interest development as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(c) (condominium project; community apartment project, stock cooperative, planned development) must file an application for tentative map approval in accordance with, and such application shall be processed pursuant to, Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing. Either a parcel map or final map is required pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 10.25: Parcel Maps and Final Maps. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.30.015 Subdivision Map Required for Residential Condominium Conversions.
A.     Conversion Defined. A condominium conversion is the conversion of real property to a common interest development.

B.     Application Filing and Processing. An applicant proposing to convert real property to a residential common interest development conversion must file an application for tentative map approval in accordance with, and such application shall be processed pursuant to, Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing. Either a parcel map or final map is required pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 10.25: Parcel Maps and Final Maps. Notwithstanding this provision, the map requirement may not apply pursuant to Section 10.10.010: Exemptions.

C.    Additional Requirements. In addition to the requirements in Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing, an application for a condominium conversion shall include:

1.     Illustration of Airspace Division. An illustration of airspace division to verify legal descriptions on deeds for the transfer of ownership of units.

2.     Verification of Stock Cooperative Vote. Verification of the vote required by Map Act Section 66452.10 for a conversion from a stock cooperative.

3.     Relocation Assistance Program. A program proposed by the applicant that will assist tenants displaced through the conversion in relocating to equivalent or better housing. See Title 11: Zoning; Chapter 11.4.80: Condominium Conversions.

4.     Mobile Home Park Conversion Impact Report. The report required by Map Act Section 66427.4 and Title 12: Mobile Home Park Conversions for a conversion from a mobile home park.

D.    Early Distribution of Staff Report. The city shall provide the staff report for the condominium conversion to the subdivider and each tenant at least 3 days before any public hearing on the tentative map.

E.     Public Notice.

1.     Tenant Notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing or prospective tenants as set forth in Map Act Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9, and shall provide the director satisfactory proof that the notice was given.

2.     Public Hearing Notice. The city shall provide notice of the public hearing on the tentative map in accordance with Map Act Section 66451.3.

F.     Approval of Conversion, Required Findings.

1.     Time Limit, Stock Cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall occur within 120 days of the application being found complete in compliance with Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing. The 120-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city.

2.     Conversion Findings, Residential Projects. The city shall not approve a tentative or final map for the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative unless it makes the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66427.1. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.35 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS, MERGERS, CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE AND REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
10.35.005 Lot Line Adjustments.
A.     No Map Required. Pursuant to Map Act Section 66412(d), lot lines between 4 or fewer existing adjacent parcels may be adjusted, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. For the purposes of this section, an “adjacent parcel” directly touches at least one of the other parcels involved in the adjustment. Parcels containing structures encroaching across original parcel lines shall be considered a single parcel for purposes of an adjustment.

B.     Application and Processing. An applicant shall submit a lot line adjustment application to the city engineer with all information and other materials required by the city engineer and shall be processed in compliance with the procedures specified by Title 11, Zoning; Chapter 11.5.10: Common Procedures, Section 5.10.020: Review of Applications. No environmental review shall be required.

C.    Approval or Denial. The director and city engineer shall determine whether the parcels resulting from the adjustment will conform with the applicable provisions of this title, the zoning code, any other applicable provisions of the municipal code, and the Subdivision Map Act. The city engineer may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the lot line adjustment. Decisions made by the city engineer may be appealed to the planning commission.

1.     Required Findings. A proposed lot line adjustment shall be denied if the city engineer finds any of the following:

a.     The adjustment will have the effect of creating a greater number of parcels than exist before adjustment;

b.     Any parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with any applicable regulations of this title, the zoning code any other applicable provisions of the municipal code, and the Subdivision Map Act; or

c.     The adjustment will result in an increase in the number of nonconforming parcels.

2.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot line adjustment, the city engineer shall impose conditions only as necessary to conform the adjustment and proposed parcels to the requirements of this Title 10; Title 11, Zoning; and Title 9; Chapter 9.60: Building Code of the municipal code, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.

D.    Completion of Adjustment.

1.     Completion by Deed. A lot line adjustment shall not be effective or finally completed until recordation of a grant deed or deeds signed by the record owners. The applicant shall submit deeds to the city engineer for review and approval in compliance with paragraph 2 of this subsection, before recordation of the grant deed. The legal descriptions provided in the deeds shall be prepared by a qualified registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor licensed or registered in the state.

2.     Review and Approval by City Engineer. The city engineer shall:

a.     Examine the deeds to ensure that all record owners and lien holders have consented to the adjustment;

b.     Verify that all conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed and that the deeds are in substantial compliance with the lot line adjustment as approved by the city;

c.     Verify that the property owners have either obtained partial re-conveyances from any mortgagor or other lien holder for any portion of a parcel being transferred to an adjacent parcel, and that any liens covering the adjacent property have been modified to cover the newly created larger parcel;

3.     If satisfied that the deeds comply with the above requirements, place an endorsed approval upon the deeds; and

4.     After approval of the legal descriptions, assemble the deeds and return them to the applicant for recordation.

E.     Expiration. The approval of a lot line adjustment shall expire and become void if the adjustment has not been completed as required by this section within 12 months of approval. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.35.010 Parcel Mergers.
A.     Processing of Requested Merger. Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the city may approve the merger of the property in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.203/4. The request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by data and documents as required by the city engineer.

1.     City Review. The city engineer shall have the authority to review and approve proposed parcel mergers, except that council review and approval shall be required for a proposed merger associated with a project that has not been previously considered by the commission.

2.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a merger, the city engineer may impose reasonable conditions, including a condition that the adjusted lot line(s) shall be monumented. The applicant may appeal to the council any conditions by filing written notice within 10 days of the decision.

3.     Completion of Merger. Upon approval, a notice of lot merger shall be filed with the county recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 1567)

10.35.015 Certificates of Compliance.
A.     Application. A property owner or a purchaser of the property may apply for a certificate of compliance certifying that the subject parcel is a legal lot of record.

B.     Application Contents. An application shall include the form provided by the city engineer, the required filing fee and a chain of title, consisting of copies of all deeds beginning before the division and thereafter, unless the parcels were created through a recorded subdivision map.

C.    City Engineer Review. The city engineer shall review all available information and make a determination whether the real property was divided in compliance with the Map Act, this title, and other applicable provisions of the municipal code. Upon making the determination, the city engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. In the event that the city engineer determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the municipal code or the Map Act, the application shall instead be processed as a conditional certificate of compliance pursuant to Section 10.35.020: Conditional Certificates of Compliance.

D.    Form of Certificate. The certificate of compliance shall: identify the real property, state that the division complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this title; and include all information required by Map Act Section 66499.35.

E.     Effective Date of Certificate. A certificate of compliance shall not become final until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.35.020 Conditional Certificates of Compliance.
A.     Application. An application for a conditional certificate of compliance shall contain the materials required by Section 10.35.015: Certificates of Compliance.

B.     Review and Approval. Upon making a determination that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this title or the Map Act, the subdivision technical review committee shall grant a conditional certificate of compliance, imposing conditions as provided by subsection C of this section.

C.    Conditions of Approval. If the owners of the property for which a certificate is requested are the original subdividers, the subdivision technical review committee may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision, as provided by the Map Act and this title, regardless of when the property was divided. If the owners had no responsibility for the subdivision that created the parcel, the subdivision technical review committee may only impose conditions that would have been applicable at the time the property was acquired by the current owners.

D.    Appeal. The property owner may appeal a conditional certificate of compliance and/or the conditions imposed to the commission.

E.     Completion of Process. Following expiration of the 10-day appeal period after the determination and imposition of conditions by the subdivision technical review committee, the city engineer shall file a conditional certificate of compliance with the county recorder. The certificate shall identify the property, and serve as notice to the property owner or purchaser who applied for the certificate, a grantee of the owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for the development of the property.

F.     Effective Date of Certificate. A conditional certificate of compliance shall not become effective until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.35.025 Reversions to Acreage.
A.     Initiation of Reversion, Application Requirements.

1.     Initiation by Owners. The record owners of the property may apply to revert subdivided property to acreage by filing with the city engineer an application in a form prescribed by the city engineer, all information and materials required by the city engineer, the required filing fee and any other information required by the city engineer.

2.     Initiation by Council. The city council may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage at the request of any person or on its own motion. The council shall direct the city engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings.

3.     Application Requirements. The application shall include:

a.     Evidence of title to the real property;

b.     Evidence of the consent of all of record owners;

c.     Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within 2 years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for recordation, or within the time allowed by an agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

d.     Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within 5 years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for recordation;

e.     A tentative map in the form prescribed by Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing;

f.      A final or parcel map in the form prescribed by Sections 10.20.005: Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing and 10.25.035: Final Tract Map Form and Content, respectively, which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition of reversion. The final or parcel map shall be conspicuously designated with the title, “The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion to Acreage.”

B.     Recommendation to Council. Upon finding that the proposed reversion meets with all the requirements of this title and the Map Act, the city engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage to the council for its consideration.

C.    Notice and Hearing. The council shall hold a public hearing on an application for reversion to acreage after providing written notice to all property owners within 300 feet at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

D.    Findings for Approval. The council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and either:

1.     All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or

2.     None of the improvements required to be made have been made within 2 years from the date final or parcel map was filed for recordation, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements whichever is later; or

3.     No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within 5 years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for recordation

E.     Conditions of Approval. The council may require:

1.     The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements; and

2.     The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this title.

F.     Completion of Process. Upon city council approval of the reversion to acreage, the city engineer will transmit the final or parcel map, together with the council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the map being filed for recordation by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.40 STREETSCAPE
10.40.005 Purpose of Chapter.
Streetscapes are the areas between buildings in Seal Beach that are occupied by the public street right-of-way and related street, sidewalk, and landscaping improvements, and any setback and yard areas on private property. The city’s streetscapes are among our most important urban design features because their appearance, character, and the impressions they evoke create the public image of the city. That image is significant to how residents and visitors think and feel about Seal Beach.

This chapter provides standards and guidelines for the planning and design of the publicly-owned portions of the streetscape, as well as shared private facilities such as private streets and alleys. Standards and guidelines for the privately-owned portions of the streetscape (setbacks/yards, landscaping and buildings) are addressed in Title 11: Zoning: Part II: Base District Regulations and Part IV: Regulations Applying in Some or All Districts. The standards and guidelines of this chapter establish appropriate requirements for the width and uses of public and private street rights-of-way (for traffic, parking, pedestrians, bicycles, and landscaping). (Ord. 1567)

 

10.40.010 Streetscape Standards and Guidelines.
The following standards and guidelines apply to the design and construction of public rights-of-way and right-of-way improvements in conjunction with proposed subdivisions, individual lot development where proposed projects are required to provide right-of-way dedications or improvements and public right-of-way improvements designed and constructed by the city.

A.     Basic Street Design Standard. Streets shall be safe, comfortable and convenient for all travel modes: cars, pedestrians and bicyclists. New streets shall minimize the width of travel lanes, use landscaping to separate sidewalks from the street curb, define the street edge with frequently spaced street trees, and have pedestrian-scaled street lights. Modifications of existing streets may need to occur over time, as streets are re-built or improved. Street design shall not compromise public safety or emergency vehicle access. Final street design approval shall be by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Street Performance. Streets should not be wider than needed to accommodate demonstrated traffic demand. Each street’s design shall be based on its anticipated role within the city and within each neighborhood.

2.     Emergency Vehicle Access. All streets shall have an unobstructed path that may include bicycle lanes of sufficient width to provide adequate emergency vehicle access.

3.     On-Street Parking. On-street parking should be provided on both sides of all streets except for major arterials, such as Seal Beach Boulevard. On-street parking lanes should be no less than 8 feet in width to provide adequate area for door swings.

4.     Bicycle Lanes. On-street bicycle lanes may be provided as determined by the director of public works/city engineer. These lanes shall be built and delineated in compliance with state standards.

5.     Typical Street Standards. Final design standards for any street improvements or rehabilitation shall be approved by the director of public works/city engineer. Figure 10.40.010.A: Typical Street Designs, and Table 10.40.010.A: Street Design Standards, set forth the generally applicable design standards for various roadways within the city.

 

Figure 10.40.010.A

Typical Street Designs





Local Residential Street

Residential Collector and Commercial Street





Commercial Street

Light Manufacturing Street



Divided Street

 

 

Table 10.40.010.A

Street Design Standards

Street Type

Total ROW (ft)

Curb-to-Curb ROW (ft)

Travel Lane Width

No. of Travel Lanes

Parking Lane Width (ft)

Pedestrian ROW (ft)

Supplemental Regulations

Local Residential Street

56-60

36-40

10

2

8

10

(i)

Residential Collector & Commercial Street

60

36-40

10

2

8

12

(ii)

Commercial Street

64

40

12

2

8

12

(ii)

Light Manufacturing Street

64

44

12

2

10

10

(iii)

Divided Street

108-130

84-106

11

4-6

8

12

(iv), (v)

(i)    Narrower parking lanes and bulb outs can be considered on a case-by-case basis.

(ii)   On streets fronting commercial districts solid sidewalks and tree grates are required.

(iii)   Sidewalk may be eliminated and utilized as additional landscaping based on level of anticipated pedestrian activity, unless required pursuant to federal or State law.

(iv)  Where on street parking is not permitted, replace parking lane with additional landscaping and Class 1 bike plan as appropriate.

(v)   Center landscaped median to be provided, no greater than 16 feet wide.

 

B.     Intersections. Intersection design shall not compromise public safety or emergency vehicle access. Final intersection design approval shall be by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Additional Lanes. Streets should have turn lanes or more than one travel lane in each direction only if it can be demonstrated, through modeling or other reliable means, that more than temporary congestion is anticipated (Level of Service E or greater). Where a total of 4 or more travel lanes are planned, a minimum 15-foot wide planted median should be provided to reduce visual impacts of the pavement.

2.     Curb-to-Curb Distances. Curb-to-curb distances at intersections should be minimized to reduce vehicular speeds and pedestrian crossing distances. At typical intersections, on-street parking should be replaced by corner bulb outs that minimize curb-to-curb distances and slow traffic. (See Figure 10.40.010.B.2: Corner Bulb Outs.)

Figure 10.40.010.B.2

Corner Bulb Outs



3.     Curb Radii. Curb radii should not exceed the dimensions in Table 10.40.010.B.3: Curb Radii and should include handicap ramps at each corner.

Table 10.40.010.B.3

Curb Radii

Street Type

Curb Radii (feet)

Local Streets

20

Collector Streets

25

Other Streets

To be determined by city engineer

 

4.     Crosswalks in the Main Street Specific Plan Area. For the safety of pedestrians and to give special identity to the Main Street area, decorative, load-bearing unit pavers should be considered for crosswalks. Please see Figure 10.40.010.B.4: Crosswalks in the Main Street Specific Plan Area.

Figure 10.40.010.B.4

Crosswalks in the Main Street Specific Plan Area



 

C.    Driveways and Alleys. Driveway and alley design shall not compromise public safety or emergency vehicle access. Final intersection design approval shall be made by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Driveway Curb Cuts. Driveway curb cuts should be minimized along collector and arterial roadways by providing vehicular access via side streets or access lanes. Where access from side streets or access lanes is not feasible, on-site turnarounds should be provided and curb cuts should serve multiple parcels whenever possible.

2.     Alleys. Alleys can foster creativity in the design of both commercial and residential projects, and reflect a historic development pattern within the city. Alleys therefore should be encouraged as an option in new development projects. Alleys are intended for vehicle access, a potential location for utilities, and trash service.

a.     Design Standards. Alleys are slow speed, 10 miles per hour, access routes running behind and sometimes between rows of residences or commercial buildings. Alleys typically are 12 to 20 feet in width and can be utilized to provide access to utilities, sanitation, garages, backyards, and secondary access to commercial parking areas. Alleys should clearly be designed as a secondary access way, not a street. Curbs, gutters, mailboxes, sidewalks and streetlights are not allowed on alleys.

(1)    Residential Width. For primary access to residential developments an alley width of 12 to 15 feet is appropriate.

(2)    Commercial Width. For primary access to commercial developments an alley width of 20 feet is appropriate.

(3)    Security Lighting. Security lighting is to be provided by wall-mounted light fixtures. Street lights are not permitted.

(4)    Curb Returns. Curb returns shall be provided where an alley intersects a street right-of-way.

(5)    Public or Private. Alleys may be public or private. The director of public works/city engineer shall make such determinations.

D.    Street Edges. Street edge design shall not compromise public safety or emergency vehicle access. Final street edge design approval shall be made by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Curbs and Gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be provided along all street edges, unless the use of drainage swales is appropriate due to adjacent sensitive natural lands.

2.     Drainage Swales. Drainage swales should be sized to adequately convey runoff and stabilized for erosion. Swale banks shall not exceed a 2:1 slope and be planted with appropriate ground-cover. See Title 11: Zoning; Chapter 4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards; Section 4.30.050: Invasive Plant Species, for additional planting requirements.

E.     Street Lighting. Street lighting design shall not compromise public safety or emergency vehicle access. Final street lighting design approval shall be made by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Street Light Spacing. Street light spacing shall be determined by the appropriate level of light coverage for the area being served by the street.

2.     Lighting Standards. Street lighting should be consistent with the small town character of Seal Beach, and should be designed with as much concern for the pedestrian environment as for vehicular environments. The height of new lighting fixtures should not exceed 20 feet.

3.     Illumination. Street lights should be designed to direct light to appropriate surfaces and to minimize glare into residences. See Figure 10.40.010.E: Street Lighting Illumination.

 

Figure 10.40.010.E

Street Lighting Illumination





Illuminate pedestrians walkways with light standards of appropriate scale

Use appropriate fixtures and landscaping to minimize glare

 

F.     Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along all public streets and shall be located within the public right-of-way. Final sidewalk design approval shall be by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Pedestrian Convenience. Pedestrian convenience and safety shall be considered in the design of sidewalks in the public right-of-way. Avoid encroaching light standards, above ground utility boxes, and other impediments where pedestrians are expected to pass. Meanders in sidewalks may be approved to avoid existing trees or changes in topography.

G.    Bicycle Routes. Streets that are designated as “Bike Routes” in the general plan should be clearly identified through signs, well marked crosswalks, and travel lanes as appropriate. Bike routes within streets should be built in compliance with State standards. Traffic signal detectors for bicycles should be considered at signalized intersections with high traffic volumes.

H.    Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided as required by the director of public works/city engineer.

I.      Traffic Calming. The design of an interconnected street network shall include provisions that discourages fast, through-traffic on neighborhood collector and local streets. Traffic calming measures that restrict traffic at the expense of the overall inter-connectedness of the street system is to be avoided. Final traffic calming design approvals shall be by the director of public works/city engineer.

1.     Appropriate Street Widths. Street widths should be narrow enough to slow traffic, while accommodating demonstrated traffic demand and providing adequate emergency vehicle accessibility. See Section 10.40.010: Streetscape Standards and Guidelines, above.

2.     “T” Intersections. Road alignments are offset at least 150 feet, forcing turning movements. Careful siting can be utilized to create vistas to open spaces and important civic features. See Figure 10.40.010.I.2: “T” Intersection.

 

Figure 10.40.010.I.2

“T” Intersection



 

3.     Median Islands. Median islands can be installed in the center of a street and can serve to narrow and redirect traffic lanes, and provide visual relief with appropriate landscaping.

4.     “Bulb Outs” (“Neckdowns”) and Textured Crosswalks. These design features can be used singly or in combination. Bulb outs slow traffic and reduce pedestrian crossing distances by narrowing the curb-to-curb dimension of the street, either at intersections or at mid-block pedestrian crossing points. Mid-block pedestrian crossing points are only permitted within the “Main Street Specific Plan” area. Crosswalks can be textured by means of special pavers or other treatments, alerting drivers that the area being traversed has a pedestrian-oriented environment and identity. See Figure 10.40.010.B.2: Corner Bulb Outs, in subsection B of this section.

5.     Traffic Circles. Traffic circles are small circular islands placed in the center of an intersection and are typically landscaped. They are normally utilized without stop signs as a means to slow down traffic without requiring vehicles to come to a full stop. See Figure 10.40.010.I.5: Traffic Circles.

 

Figure 10.40.010.I.5

Traffic Circles



(Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.45 BLOCK STRUCTURE
10.45.005 Purpose of Chapter.
This chapter provides City standards for the layout of proposed blocks within new subdivisions. The guidelines and standards set forth in this chapter are intended to:

A.     Promote a connected community and ensure public safety by continuing the historic grid system to the greatest extent possible.

B.     Ensure that new subdivisions emulate historic development patterns in terms of block sizes to the greatest extent possible.

C.    Preserve significant natural features.

D.    Provide adequate parkland and other open space.

E.     Lessen traffic congestion through the creation of alternative routes and reduce traffic speeds in residential settings to the greatest extent possible.

Technical standards for subdivision improvements and infrastructure are found in Chapter 10.15: Design and Improvement Requirements; Chapter 10.50: Dedications; and Chapter 10.55: Improvement Plans and Agreements. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.45.010 Block Design Standards and Guidelines.
Blocks within proposed subdivisions shall be designed in compliance with the following standards, except where different requirements are established for a particular area within the city by an adopted planned unit development, precise plan, or specific plan.

A.     Street Layout. Streets within new subdivisions shall align with and connect to those of adjacent subdivisions, avoiding the tendency for the proposed subdivision to become an enclave apart from the rest of the community. Public streets should be planned to be continuous through adjacent residential developments, where permitted by terrain and other natural features, to weave the community together and simplify traffic circulation patterns. Requirements for street widths and other street cross-section features are established by Chapter 10.40: Streetscape.

B.     Cul-de-sac Streets. The use of cul-de-sac streets is strongly discouraged, except where the location or configuration of the parcel to be subdivided will not permit a through street to be used, or a significant natural or cultural feature can be more effectively preserved through the use of a cul-de-sac. Where a cul-de-sac street is approved, the review authority shall require pedestrian connections from the cul-de-sac bulb to the next adjacent through street wherever feasible. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 500 feet.

C.    Block Length. The block dimension between intersecting public streets should normally not exceed 300 feet, or be less than 200 feet.

D.    Edge Blocks. Subdivisions proposed on sites with significant natural features (for example, creeks, wetlands, or natural open space) shall be designed to provide a single-loaded “frontage road” adjacent to the natural feature, rather than “backing-up” development to the feature. Proposed subdivisions that are located adjacent to the city’s corporate boundary should also be designed to provide the single-loaded frontage road at the edge. See Figure 10.45.010.D: Edge Block Treatment.

Figure 10.45.010.D

Edge Block Treatment



 

E.     Alleys. The use of alleys is encouraged in new subdivisions, in order to provide access to units and parking and loading facilities and to improve the pedestrian orientation of primary streets by reducing or eliminating curb cuts. Locations for the inclusion of alleys in future subdivisions and other developments shall be considered during the subdivision plan design.

F.     Gated Neighborhoods. Gated residential developments isolate parts of the community from others, and are strongly discouraged.

G.    Natural Features. Wetlands, existing healthy mature trees, and other obvious natural features existing on a site proposed for subdivision, should be preserved and incorporated into the project and its landscaping elements to the greatest extent feasible. Additional requirements are set forth in Title 11: Zoning, Chapter 11.2.25: Base District Regulations—Open Space, Parks and Recreation Districts; and Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

H.    Parks and Neighborhood Open Space. Residential subdivisions shall provide dedicated parkland or park in-lieu fees as provided in Section 10.50.010: Park Land Dedications and Fees.

1.     Guidelines for Park Development. The subdivision technical review committee and the reviewing and approving authorities shall make use of the following guidelines in its review of any development within which dedicated parkland is proposed.

a.     Centrally Located. Such facilities should be centrally located within the development and should be located at street frontages rather than behind lot lines (although alternative locations may be considered in order to take advantage of significant natural features).

b.     Incorporation of Significant Natural Features. Where feasible, significant natural features should be incorporated into parks.

c.     Integrated with Open Space Areas. Residential subdivisions should be designed to integrate and connect with proposed park and other open space elements (for example wetland areas) and with existing and proposed trails and pedestrian ways in the site vicinity. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.45.015 Lot Sizes.
Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide parcels that comply with the minimum area and dimensional requirements set forth in Title 11: Zoning; Part II, Base District Regulations; Table 11.2.05.015: Development Standards for Residential Districts, Table 11.2.10.015: Development Standards—Commercial and Mixed Use Districts, and Table 11.2.15.015: Development Standards—Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction Districts. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.50 DEDICATIONS
10.50.005 Dedications.
The city may require dedications through conditions of approval if it:

A.     Identifies the purpose for the dedication; and

B.     Demonstrates there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the dedication and the impacts arising from the subdivision. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.50.010 Park Land Dedications and Fees.
A.     Land Dedication and/or Fee Payment Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreation facilities to serve the subdivision.

B.     Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to industrial or commercial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than 5 years old when no new dwelling units are added, or to any other subdivisions exempted by Map Act Section 66477.

C.    Amount of Parkland Required. The amount of the land to be dedicated shall be 5 acres per 1,000 residents, or a fee in lieu thereof based on the fair market value of 5 acres of land per 1,000 residents, as determined by appraisal. For purposes of determining the required fee, the term “fair market value” shall mean the market value of the land as determined by the city based on an appraisal, and approved by the city, prior to or at tentative map approval. Such appraisal shall be paid for by the subdivider who shall deposit with the city engineer an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the appraisal. The city engineer shall select a licensed appraiser. The appraisal shall be completed prior to approval of the tentative map by the city.

If the subdivider is not satisfied with the values established by the first appraisal, the subdivider may request and shall pay for the preparation of a second appraisal. The subdivider shall deposit with the city engineer an amount sufficient to cover the cost of preparing the second appraisal. The city engineer shall then select a second licensed appraiser to conduct the appraisal. If a second appraisal is conducted, the values established by the 2 appraisals shall be averaged and that amount shall be the value used for determining the in-lieu fee.

 

1.     Standards.

a.     The number of people estimated to reside in a subdivision shall be calculated based on 3.5 persons per single-family residence; 1.8 persons per multiple family unit; or 2.0 persons per mobile home.

b.     Based on the preceding, 762 square feet of land shall be dedicated for each single-family residence; 392 square feet shall be dedicated for each multiple family unit; and 436 square feet of land shall be dedicated for each mobile home. If a fee in lieu of dedication is required, the fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land prescribed above for each unit.

c.     Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivisions, partial credit, not to exceed 50%, may be given against the requirements of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so, and provided that the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successors.

2.     Exception—Residential Subdivisions of 50 or Fewer Lots. For residential subdivisions of 50 or fewer lots the park land fee in lieu of dedication shall be $10,000 per lot created by the subdivision.

D.    Criteria for Requiring Dedication and Fees. In subdivisions of over 50 lots, the city may require the subdivider to dedicate both land and pay a fee, as follows:

1.     Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

a.     The provisions of the general plan, and any applicable specific or precise plans, and the compatibility of dedication with those plans;

b.     Access, size, shape and the location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

c.     Feasibility of dedication; and

d.     Availability of previously acquired park property.

2.     Fees Only. Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions of 50 parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required even though the number of actual parcels may be less than 50.

3.     Procedure for Determining Land or Fee. The city shall determine whether the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay in-lieu fees, or provide a combination of both, at the time of tentative map approval. The determination of the city shall be based on a report and recommendation from the director and city engineer. The recommendation by the director and city engineer, and the action of the city, shall consider the factors in paragraph 1 of this subsection, and shall include the following:

a.     The amount of land required;

b.     Whether a fee shall be charged in lieu of land;

c.     Whether land and a fee shall be required, and/or that a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation facilities;

d.     The location and suitability of the park land to be dedicated or use of in-lieu fees; and

e.     The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

4.     Formula for Land and Fees. When both land dedication and fee payment are required, they shall be subject to the following formula:

a.     When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the general plan or applicable specific plan as the site for a local park, that portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes, and a fee computed as provided by subsection C of this section shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated by subsection C.

b.     When a major part of the local park or recreational site has been acquired by the city and only a small portion site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated, and a fee computed as provided by subsection C of this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land that would otherwise have been required to be dedicated by subsection C. The fees shall be used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility serving the subdivision.

5.     Credit for Improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements on dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any installed equipment shall be a credit against the required fees or land.

6.     Credit for Private Recreation or Open Space. Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision, and will be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed 50%, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city finds all of the following:

a.     Yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of the private open space;

b.     The private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyances, or restrictions;

c.     The use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants, which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city;

d.     The proposed private open space is usable for active recreation; and

e.     Facilities proposed for the private open space are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the open space/recreation/conservation element of the general plan.

E.     Suitability of Land to be Dedicated. Each park site proposed for dedication in compliance with this section shall be physically suited for the intended use.

1.     Land which is made part of a park site for subdivision design purposes, but which is physically unsuited for park use, shall not be considered when calculating the area of the park site provided in compliance with this section. The park space provided shall be calculated from the road rights-of-way and interior property lines abutting the site, and not from any abutting roadway centerline.

2.     If the council determines that any of the land proposed to be dedicated is not suitable for park use, it may reject all or any portion of the land offered, and in that event the subdivider shall instead pay a fee in compliance with subsection D of this section.

F.     Conveyance of Land, Payment of Fees. Real property being dedicated for park purposes shall be conveyed by the parcel or final map in fee simple absolute, to the city by the subdivider, free and clear of all encumbrances except those which, in the opinion of city attorney, will not interfere with use of the property for park and recreational purposes, and which the council agrees to accept. The amount of required fees shall be deposited with the city at the time of submittal of a parcel or final map. The fees shall be held by the city until the map is recorded, or the time for recordation expires. The subdivider shall provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land, and insurance approved by the city attorney in favor of the city in an amount equal to the value of the land.

G.    Use of Collected Fees. Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be used only for the purpose of providing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the proposed subdivision. Any fees collected shall be committed within 5 years after payment, or issuance of building permits on three-fourths of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.50.015 Reservations of Land.
The city may require the subdivider to reserve sites appropriate in area and location for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses, as follows.

A.     Standards for Reservation of Land.

1.     Location of Land. Where a park, recreational facilities, fire station, library, or other public use is shown in the general plan or applicable specific or precise plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as determined by the city in compliance with the standards in the applicable plan.

2.     Configuration. The reserved area shall be of a size and shape that will permit the balance of the property to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The land to be reserved shall be in multiples of streets and parcels that will permit an efficient division of the reserved area if it is not acquired within the period determined by subsection B of this section.

B.     Procedure for Reservation of Land. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the parcel or final map enter into a binding agreement with the subdivider to acquire the reserved area within 2 years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless a longer time is authorized by mutual agreement.

C.    Purchase Price of Reserved Land. The purchase price shall be the market value of the land at the time the tentative map is filed, plus the property taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintaining the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

D.    Termination of Reservation. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement as described in subsection B of this section, the reservation shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.50.020 Right-of-Way Dedications.
A.     Offers of Dedication Required. A subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the city to be needed for public and private streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; drainage; public and private greenways; scenic easements, public utility easements; and any other necessary public and private easements.

B.     Improvements. The subdivider shall construct or agree to construct all improvements approved or required for the subdivision, including access rights and abutters’ rights, in compliance with the city’s improvement standards.

C.    Rights-of-Way, Generally. Rights-of-way shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required improvements. In addition, where parcels front on a city-maintained road of insufficient width as determined by the city engineer, or when the existing right-of-way is not deeded, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient for the ultimate facility.

D.    Bicycle Paths. Any subdivider who is required to dedicate roadways to the public, may be required to dedicate additional land for bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision, if necessary to offset impacts otherwise associated with the subdivision.

E.     Transit Facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision will be required for local transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing paths and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if:

1.     The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for 200 dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the general plan; and

2.     The city finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision.

F.     Alternative Transportation Systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways or other alternative transportation systems in the general plan, applicable specific or precise plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate land as is necessary to provide for these alternative transportation systems. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.50.025 School Site Dedications.
A.     Dedication Requirement. In compliance with Map Act Section 66478, a subdivider may be required to dedicate land as the city determines to be necessary for adequate elementary school facilities for the residents of the subdivision. Dedication may be required only if the subdivider and/or successors in interest to the property:

1.     Have owned the land being subdivided for less than 10 years before filing the tentative map; and

2.     Develop, or complete the development, of a subdivision of more than 400 dwelling units within a single school district, within a period of 3 years or less.

B.     Tentative Map Approval. If the school district responds to the referral of the tentative map application with a report to the city describing the land the district deems necessary and suitable to provide adequate elementary school service to residents of the proposed subdivision, the city shall require the dedication of land as a condition of approval of the tentative map. As required by Map Act Section 66478, the dedication requirement shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible, or exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the State Allocation Board.

C.    Timing of Dedication. The required dedication may occur before, concurrently with, or up to 60 days after the recordation of a final map on any portion of the subdivision. If the school district accepts the dedication, the district shall pay the subdivider the amounts required by Map Act Section 66478, and shall record the certificate required by Map Act Section 66478.

D.    Termination of Dedication Requirement. The requirement of dedication shall automatically terminate unless, within 30 days after the requirement is imposed by the city, the school district makes a binding commitment to the subdivider agreeing to accept the dedication at any time before the construction of the first 400 dwelling units. Upon acceptance of the dedication, the school district shall repay to the subdivider and/or successors the costs specified in Business and Professions Code Section 11525.2.

E.     Reversion of Land, Repurchase. Should the school district find itself unable to accept the dedication for reasons other than specified in the commitment with the subdivider, the dedicated land shall revert to the subdivider. If the dedication is accepted and the school district within 10 years from the date of acceptance offers the property or any substantial part thereof for public sale, the subdivider shall have the first option to repurchase the property for the price paid by the district, plus a sum equal to the amount of property taxes which would have been paid during the period of public ownership. (Ord. 1576)

Chapter 10.55 IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS
10.55.005 Improvement Plans.
After the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any improvements necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval. Improvement shall be defined as any infrastructure including streets, storm drains, sewers, water facilities, utilities, site grading and similar items. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city engineer as follows:

A.     Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall include the following information:

1.     Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports and other information required by the city engineer;

2.     Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control;

3.     The improvement plan checking fees as set forth in the master fee schedule;

4.     The final map of the subdivision.

B.     Submittal of Plans. The subdivider shall submit improvement plans to the city engineer and other reviewing agencies for review and action. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection C of this section, the subdivider shall also submit to the city engineer a detailed cost estimate of all improvements, based on guidelines provided by the city engineer.

C.    Review and Action. The city engineer shall review and act on improvement plans within the time limits provided by Map Act Section 66456.2.

D.    Effect of Approval. The subdivider must obtain final approval of improvement plans before obtaining city approval of the parcel or final map. The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.55.010 Installation of Improvements.
A.     Timing of Improvements. The subdivider shall construct or install required improvements after obtaining city approval of improvement plans in compliance with Section 10.55.005.C: Review and Action, and before the approval of a parcel or final map, except where:

1.     Improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 10.55.015: Improvement Agreements and Security; or

2.     Improvements are required as conditions on the approval of a subdivision of 4 or fewer lots, in which case construction of the improvements shall be required:

a.     Only when a permit for development of an affected parcel is issued by the director; or

b.     At the time the construction of the improvements is required in compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the city, as set forth in Section 10.55.015: Improvement Agreements and Security; or

c.     At the time set forth in a condition of approval, when the city finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by that time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

B.     Inspection of Improvements. The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows.

1.     Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the city. The designated representative shall be present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the city engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required.

2.     Inspection Procedures.

a.     Inspections Required. The city engineer shall make any inspections as deemed necessary to ensure that all construction complies with the approved improvement plans. The developer shall pay the full cost of any inspection services determined to be necessary by the city engineer. The city shall collect an initial deposit and invoice the developer for inspection services at appropriate times during the period of construction of the improvements.

b.     Access to Site and Materials. The city engineer shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in compliance with the approved improvement plans.

c.     Authority for Approval. The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed.

d.     Improper Work or Materials. Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the city engineer. In the event that the city engineer determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications, he or she shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures necessary to resume work. Any work done after issuance of a stop work order shall be a violation of this title.

3.     Notification. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer upon the completion of each stage of construction as outlined in this chapter, and shall not proceed with further construction until authorized by the city engineer. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.55.015 Improvement Agreements and Security.
A subdivider may file a parcel or final map before completion of all the improvements required by this title and conditions of approval of the tentative map, only if the subdivider first obtains council approval of a subdivision improvement agreement and provides the city performance security as required by this section. Improvement agreements and required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act.

A.     Contents of Improvement Agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on a form provided by the city engineer and approved by the city attorney and shall include the following provisions:

1.     Description of Improvements. A description of all improvements to be completed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved subdivision improvement plans.

2.     Time Limit for Construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

3.     Completion by City Provision. A provision that if the subdivider fails to complete all required improvements within the specified time, the city may elect to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including all attorney fees and legal costs associated with enforcement of the agreement.

4.     Surety Requirement. The requirement that the subdivider furnish security to insure full and faithful performance and to insure payment to laborers and material suppliers, as specified in subsection B of this section. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer’s cost estimate submitted by the subdivider as provided by Section 10.55.010.B: Inspection of Improvements and approved by the city engineer. The total cost of improvements to be guaranteed shall be as provided in the approved engineer’s cost estimate.

5.     Phased Construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider, if applicable.

6.     Time Extensions. Provisions for an extension of time under conditions specified therein, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection C of this section.

B.     Security Required to Guarantee Improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney, as follows:

1.     Type of Security. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be secured by all of the following:

a.     A guarantee for “Faithful Performance,” in the amount of 100% of the engineer’s estimate;

b.     A guarantee for “Materials and Labor,” in the amount of 100% of the engineer’s estimate;

c.     A one-year guarantee and warranty for work in the amount of 10% of the engineer’s estimate.

2.     Form of Security. The required surety shall consist of one or more of the following forms selected by the city engineer for the full amounts specified in paragraph 1 of this subsection.

a.     A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

b.     A bond or bonds executed by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;

c.     An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal, or local government when any said agency provides at least 20% of the financing for the act or agreement requiring security or from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment; or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution;

d.     A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the city, where the city finds that it would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than 2 years after the recordation of the Map; or

e.     Any form of security, including security interests in real property, that is acceptable to the city.

C.    Time Extensions. The council may extend the time for completion of improvements governed by a subdivision improvement agreement only if:

1.     Public Works Report. The city engineer notifies the council that either the subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with reasonable diligence or is not yet ready to develop the subdivision, and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to complete all required work within the time of the requested extension.

2.     Agreement by Sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or other surety, or if recommended by the city engineer, at an increased amount.

D.    Council Conditions of Approval. As a condition of granting a time extension, the council may impose whatever additional requirements the council deems reasonable to protect the public interest.

E.     Acceptance of Improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by the council of subdivision improvements, the city engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.55.020 Soils Reports.
A.     Preliminary Soils Report Required. Concurrently with submitting its improvement plans, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer and building official a preliminary soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings.

1.     Form of Report. The preliminary soils report shall include a complete description of the site based on a field investigation of soils matters. The soils matters reviewed shall include stability, erosion, settlement, feasibility of construction of the proposed improvements, description of soils related hazards and problems and proposed methods of eliminating or reducing these hazards and problems.

The investigation and report shall include field investigation and laboratory tests with detailed information and recommendations relative to all aspects of grading, filling and other earthwork, foundation design, pavement design and subsurface drainage.

The report shall also recommend any required corrective action for the purpose of preventing structural damages to the subdivision improvements and the structures to be constructed on the lots. The report shall also recommend any special precautions required for erosion control, and the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.

If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, or environmental impacts, the city engineer and building official may require the subdivider to submit a subsequent soils investigation of each parcel in the subdivision prior to approval of a parcel or final map.

2.     Preliminary Soils Report Waiver. The preliminary soils report may be waived if the city engineer and the building official determine that existing available information on the qualities of the soils of the subdivision makes no preliminary analysis necessary.

B.     Final Soils Report. The subdivider shall submit a final soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer.

1.     The report shall contain sufficient information to ensure compliance with all recommendations of the preliminary soils report and the specifications for the project.

2.     The report shall also contain information relative to soils conditions encountered which differed from that described in the preliminary soils reports, along with any corrections, additions or modifications not shown on the approved plans.

C.    Geologic Investigation and Report. If the city engineer or building official determines that conditions warrant, a geologic investigation and report may also be required. (Ord. 1567)

Chapter 10.60 SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS
10.60.005 Survey Procedure and Practice.
The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a final map or parcel map shall conform to the standard practices and principles of land surveying, the California Land Surveyor’s Act, and the provisions of this chapter. All related documents shall be executed by a California-registered civil engineer authorized to do land surveying or licensed land surveyor. Whenever the city engineer has established a system of coordinates and/or monuments which is within a reasonable distance of the subdivision boundary, as determined by the city engineer, the field survey shall be tied into the system. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.60.010 Monuments.
In surveying a subdivision, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient permanent monuments so that any part of the survey may be readily retraced. Survey monuments shall be set by the engineer or surveyor for all new subdivisions requiring a parcel map or final map, unless waived by the city engineer, in compliance with this section.

A.     Boundary Monuments.

1.     Boundary monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and ends of curves and at intermediate points approximately 1,000 feet apart. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the final map or parcel map.

2.     All exterior boundary monuments shall be set prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map or as certified on the final map.

B.     Interior Monuments. Whenever interior monuments are required, the monuments shall be set at:

1.     All block and lot corners and angle points;

2.     The beginnings and ends of curves;

3.     Points of intersection with centerlines of other existing and proposed streets and alleys; and

4.     The points of intersection with the exterior boundary lines.

C.    Monument Type and Positioning. All monuments set in the course of the survey shall be as specified by the city engineer and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed by the city engineer.

D.    Identification Marks. All monuments shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signs the engineer’s or surveyor’s certificate and under whose supervision the survey is made.

E.     Replacement of Destroyed Monuments. Any monument which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements by the city shall be replaced by the subdivider.

F.     Timing of Monument Installation. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be completely monumented or referenced before the final map or parcel map is submitted to the city engineer for filing. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map or parcel map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes the city a bond, instrument of credit, or cash deposit in a sufficient amount to guarantee payment of the cost of setting the monuments in compliance with Map Act Section 66496.

G.    Notice of Completion. Within 5 days after all monuments have been set, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and the city engineer that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by Title 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer’s estimate for improvements in compliance with Section 10.55.015: Improvement Agreements and Security. If requested, this amount of the bond may be released upon verification of the setting of the monuments by the city engineer.

H.    Inspection and Approval. All monuments shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 1567)

 

10.60.015 Survey Information on Final or Parcel Map.
The subdivider shall show the following survey information on each final map or parcel map for which a field survey was made in compliance with this title.

A.     Stakes, monuments (together with their precise position) or other evidence found on the ground, to determine the boundaries of the subdivision;

B.     Corners of all adjoining properties identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision names, numbers and pages of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation;

C.    All information and data necessary to locate and retrace any point or line without unreasonable difficulty;

D.    The location and description of any required monuments to be set after recordation of the final map, and the statement that they are “to be set”;

E.     Bearing and length of each lot line, block line and boundary line and each required bearing and distance;

F.     Length, radius and angle of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve;

G.    The centerlines of any street or alley in or adjoining the subdivision which have been established by the city engineer, together with reference to a map showing the centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be so stated;

H.    Any other survey data or information as may be required to be shown by the city engineer or by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1567)

Title 11 ZONING
Part I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part II BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Part III OVERLAY DISTRICT AND SPECIFIC PLAN REGULATIONS
Part IV REGULATIONS APPLYING IN SOME OR ALL DISTRICTS
Part V LAND USE AND ZONING DECISIONS
Part VI TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

Part I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 11.1.05 TITLE, COMPONENTS, AND PURPOSES
11.1.05.005 Zoning Code Adoption.
 

ORDINANCE NUMBER 1598

 

AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SEAL BEACH AMENDING THE SEAL BEACH MUNICIPAL CODE BY ADOPTING TITLE 11 (ZONING) AND ADOPTING ZONE CHANGE 10-2 (ZONING MAP)

 

THE SEAL BEACH CITY COUNCIL DOES HEREBY ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:

 

        SECTION 1.    The city council hereby adopts Title 11 (Zoning) to read as set forth in that document titled “Draft Title 11: Zoning, October 11, 2010” as amended in Section 3 of this ordinance. Such document, with the amendments herein, is referred to as “Title 11.” A copy of Title 11 is on file with the city clerk. Title 11 is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.

 

        SECTION 2.    The provisions of Title 11, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not as new enactments.

 

        SECTION 3.    Title 11 does not change or amend the ordinances, rules and regulations governing specific plans in the city. For purposes of recodifying the provisions of former Chapter 28 related to specific plans, Title 11 is hereby amended as follows:

 

a.     Section 11.3.25.010 is hereby added to Title 11 to read as follows:

 

“11.3.25.010 General Provisions.

A.     Such specific plan shall be consistent with and implement the general plan. A specific plan shall provide for the type, location and density of land uses, the development standards and regulations, including but not limited to height, setback, landscaping, and parking requirements, the purpose, type, location and extent of public improvements and facilities, and any other matters considered appropriate or necessary.

B.     With respect to any property for which a specific plan has been adopted, no tentative tract map or tentative parcel map may be approved nor may any permit license or other entitlement for use be granted or issued unless such map, permit, license or other entitlement for use is consistent with such specific plan.

C.    The city council, after adopting a specific plan, may impose a specific plan fee upon persons seeking governmental approvals which are required to be consistent with the specific plan. The fees shall be established so that in the aggregate, such fees (as estimated) defray, but do not exceed the cost of preparation, adoption, and administration of the specific plan, including costs incurred pursuant to Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code. As nearly as can be estimated, the fee charged shall be a prorated amount in accordance with the applicant’s relative benefit derived from the specific plan. In addition, the department of development services may require a person who requests adoption or amendment of a specific plan to deposit a sum of money in an amount equal to the estimated cost of preparing the plan or amendment by the Department of Development Services.”

 

b.     Section 11.5.15.040C of Title 11 is amended to read as follows:

 

“11.5.15.040 C. Special Factors in Determining Specific Plan Standards. Prior to approving a specific plan or an amendment to a specific plan, particular care must be exercised in the establishment of building height development standards for each specific plan under the provisions of Section 11.3.25.010A. Factors to be carefully weighed shall include, but not be limited to, the planning district in which the specific plan is to be located, the former zoning of the specific plan site, height of existing buildings immediately surrounding the specific plan site and the effect of the building height on the areas surrounding the specific plan site. No building within the SPR Zone shall exceed a height of 39 feet, except for nonhabitable architectural features of any proposed buildings, in that portion of the city known as the Coastal Zone as defined by the California Coastal Act, or north of the San Diego Freeway, except such portions thereof which are zoned LM, Light Manufacturing, on October 14, 1985. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any validly existing Specific Plan approved by the city prior to October 14, 1985.”

 

        SECTION 4.    The adoption of this Ordinance does not affect the following matters:

 

a.     Actions and proceedings that began before the effective date of this Ordinance.

b.     Prosecution for ordinance violations committed before the effective date of this Ordinance.

c.     Licenses and penalties due and unpaid at the effective date of this Ordinance.

d.     Collection of licenses and penalties due and unpaid at the effective date of this Ordinance.

e.     Bonds and cash deposits required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, resolution or regulation.

f.      Matters of record that refer to or are connected with an ordinance whose substance is included in Chapter 28.  Such references shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions of Title 11.

 

        SECTION 5.    Any ordinance, including portions of the previously existing Chapter 28 (Zoning) that has not been recodified in Title 11 that is inconsistent with Title 11 is hereby repealed.

 

        SECTION 6.    Nothing in this Ordinance shall in any manner modify or otherwise affect the following subject matters:

 

a.     Corporate or jurisdictional limits of the City.

b.     Contracts to which the City is a party.

c.     City taxes.

d.     City franchises.

e.     Highways, roads, streets or other public right-of-way.

f.      Bonds or indebtedness of the City.

g.     A district, public corporation or other entity established by the City.

h.     Specific public improvements or assessments.

i.      Appropriation or investment of City funds.

 

        SECTION 7.    The Council hereby directs the City Clerk to replace Chapter 28 (Zoning) with Title 11 and to make all necessary, non-substantive conforming revisions, including but not limited to clerical corrections to section numbers, table and figure references and cross references.  Further, the Council directs the City Clerk to make any necessary clerical change to any adopted Specific Plan to conform any reference to zoning designations in the Specific Plan to any new Zoning designation as described in Title 11 and on the zoning map.  Such clerical changes will not confer additional rights or obligations on property owners.

 

        SECTION 8.    The City Council hereby adopts Zone Change 10-2 (Zoning Map).

 

        SECTION 9.    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or any part thereof is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or any part hereof.  The City Council of the City of Seal Beach hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid.

        SECTION 10.  The City Clerk shall certify to the passage and adoption of this Ordinance and shall cause the same or a summary thereof to be published and posted in the manner required by law.

 

PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Seal Beach at a regular meeting held on the 25th day of October, 2010.

 

/s/ David W. Sloan

Mayor

 

ATTEST:

 

_________________________

City Clerk

 

STATE OF CALIFORNIA        }

COUNTY OF ORANGE          } SS

CITY OF SEAL BEACH          }

 

I, Linda Devine, City Clerk of the City of Seal Beach, do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance was introduced for first reading at a regular meeting held on the 11th day of October, 2010 and was passed, approved and adopted by the City Council at a regular meeting held on the 25th day of October, 2010 by the following vote:

 

AYES:             Council Members:   Antos, Levitt, Miller, Shanks, Sloan

 

NOES:             Council Members:   None

 

ABSENT:         Council Members:   None

 

ABSTAIN:        Council Members:   None

 

And do hereby further certify that Ordinance Number 1598 has been published pursuant to the Seal Beach City Charter and Resolution Number 2836.

 

/s/ Linda Devine

City Clerk

 

(Ord. 1598)

 

 

11.1.05.010 Title and Authority.
This Title 11 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the “Seal Beach Zoning Code” or “zoning code.” This zoning code is adopted by the city council, pursuant to the city Charter and applicable laws of the State of California. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.05.015 Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning code is to:

A.     Enhance and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city.

B.     Provide a precise guide for the physical development of the city to promote the growth of the city in an orderly manner and achieve more balanced residential, commercial, and civic uses.

C.    Promote the safety and ease of movement of people and vehicles on public and private thoroughfares.

D.    Define duties and powers of administrative bodies and officers concerned with this zoning code. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.05.020 Structure of Regulations.
This zoning code consists of 6 parts:

        •       Part I:      General Provisions

        •       Part II:     Base District Regulations

        •       Part III:    Overlay District and Specific Plan Regulations

        •       Part IV:    Regulations Applying in Some or All Districts

        •       Part V:     Administrative Provisions

        •       Part VI:    Terms and Definitions

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.05.025 General Rules of Applicability.
A.     Applicability to Property. This zoning code shall apply to all uses and structures within the city including all uses, structures, and land owned by any private person, firm, corporation, or organization, the city, and other local, state, or federal agencies to the extent allowed by law.

B.     Compliance with Regulations. No land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, demolished, or moved in any zoning district, except in accordance with the provisions of this zoning code.

C.    Relation to Other Regulations. The regulations of this zoning code shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the city council, any board, commission, or city department, or any local, state, or federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development authorized by this zoning code. The regulations of this zoning code are minimum requirements. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this zoning code and any other city code, chapter, resolution, guideline, or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall control, unless otherwise specified. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a conflict occurs between the requirements of this zoning code and standards adopted as part of any development agreement or applicable specific plan, the requirements of the development agreement or specific plan shall apply.

D.    Relation to Private Agreements. This zoning code shall not interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement now in effect, provided that where this zoning code imposes greater restriction than imposed by an easement, covenant, or agreement, this zoning code shall control.

E.     Relation to Prior Code. The provisions of this zoning code supersede all prior zoning codes of the city. No provision of this zoning code shall validate any land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of the prior zoning code, unless such validation is specifically authorized by this zoning code and is in conformance with all other regulations and codes.

F.     Application During Local Emergency. The city council may authorize a deviation from a provision of this zoning code during a local emergency declared pursuant to Title 3: Administration, Chapter 3.25: Civil Defense and Disaster of the Seal Beach Municipal Code. The city council may authorize a deviation by resolution. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.05.030 Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.
The city shall be classified into districts or zones, the designation and the regulations of which are set forth in this zoning code and as follows:

A.     Base and Overlay Zoning Districts. The city’s base zoning districts and overlay zoning districts are set forth in Table 11.1.05.030: Zoning Districts.

 

Table 11.1.05.030

Zoning Districts

Zoning Map Symbol

Zoning District Name

General Plan Designation Implemented by Zoning Designation

Base Residential Zoning Districts

 

RLD-9

Residential Low Density - 9

Residential Low Density

RLD-15

Residential Low Density - 15

Residential Low Density

RMD - 18

Residential Medium Density - 18

Residential Medium Density

RHD - 20

Residential High Density - 20

Residential High Density

RHD - 33

Residential High Density - 33

Residential High Density

RHD - 46

Residential High Density - 46

Residential High Density

Base Mixed Use, Commercial, and Industrial Districts

 

L-C/RMD

Limited Commercial/Residential Medium Density

Mixed Use

MSSP

Main Street Specific Plan

Main Street Specific Plan

PO

Professional Office

Professional Office

SC

Service Commercial

Service Commercial

GC

General Commercial

General Commercial

LM

Light Manufacturing

Light Manufacturing

OE

Oil Extraction

Oil Extraction

Base Public and Semi-Public Districts

 

PS

Public and Semi-Public Facilities

Community Facility and School

RG

Recreation/Golf

Open Space - Golf

Base Military, Open Space, and Park Districts

 

MIL

Military

Military

BEA

Beach

Beach

OS-N

Open Space Natural

Open Space

OS-PR

Open Space Parks and Recreation

Park

Overlay District and Specific Plan Zone Regulations

 

RC-O

Residential Conservation - Overlay

All

PUD

Planned Unit Development Overlay

All

C/P

Commercial/Park

All

CZ

Coastal Zone

All

SPR

Specific Plan Regulations

All

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.05.035 Official Zoning Map and District Boundaries.
The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning code are shown on the official map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Seal Beach, California,” a copy of which is on file in the city clerk’s office. The official zoning map and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be incorporated by reference as if the matters and information set forth on such maps were fully described herein. (Ord. 1598)

11.1.05.040 Constitutionality or Invalidity.
If any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this zoning code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this zoning code; it being hereby expressly declared that the ordinance codified herein and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, adopted, approved, and ratified irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.1.10 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND INTERPRETATION
11.1.10.005 Purpose and Applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide precision in the interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in the chapter apply throughout this zoning code, except where the context indicates a different meaning. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.10.010 Rules for Construction of Language.
A.     The particular controls the general.

B.     Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

1.     “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

2.     “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

3.     “Either... or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

C.    The words “activities” and “facilities” include any part thereof of the activity or facility.

D.    In case of conflict between the text and a graphic or diagram, the text controls.

E.     References to departments, commissions, boards, or other offices are to those of the city unless otherwise indicated.

F.     References to a public official in the city are to that person who performs the function referred to and includes a designated deputy of such official.

G.    All references to days are to calendar days, unless otherwise indicated. In the event a date ends on a Saturday, Sunday, or a day when the city offices are closed, the date shall be the next consecutive business day. The end of a period shall be the close of business on the last day.

H.    State Law Requirements. Where this zoning code references applicable provisions of State law (for example, the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, or Public Resources Code), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to time.

I.      Chapter and Section Headings. Chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any section. (Ord. 1598)

11.1.10.015 Rules for Interpretation.
A.     Zoning Regulations. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this zoning code or its application to a specific site, the director shall determine the intent of the provision pursuant to Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determination, Section 11.5.25.010: Zoning Conformance Review Procedures.

B.     Zoning Map. The following rules shall apply to zoning boundary determinations:

1.     Where the exact boundaries of a district cannot be readily or exactly ascertained by reference to the official zoning map, the boundary shall be deemed to be along the nearest street, lot line, or geographic feature, such as a creek or hilltop, as the case may be.

2.     Public streets, utility and other rights-of-ways shall be in the same zoning district as contiguous property. Where contiguous properties are classified in different zoning districts, the centerline of the street or right-of-way shall be the district boundary, unless otherwise depicted on the zoning map.

3.     If any uncertainty remains as to the location of a district boundary or other feature shown on the zoning map, the location shall be determined by the director.

C.    Interpretations. The director shall keep a record of interpretations made pursuant to this section which shall be available to the public.

1.     Procedure for Interpretations. Whenever the director determines, pursuant to state law, that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this zoning code are subject to interpretation generally, or as applied to a specific case, the director may issue an official interpretation. The director may also forward any interpretation of the meaning or applicability of any provision of this zoning code directly to the planning commission for a determination at a public meeting.

2.     Findings, Basis for Interpretation. The issuance of an interpretation shall include findings stating the basis for the interpretation. The basis for an interpretation may include technological changes or new industry standards. The issuance of an interpretation shall also include a finding documenting the consistency of the interpretation with other provisions of this code.

3.     Record of Interpretations. Official interpretations shall be:

a.     Written, and shall quote the provisions of this zoning code being interpreted, and the applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretations, and the determination; and

b.     Distributed to the council, commission, city manager, city attorney, city clerk, and department staff within 3 days of issuing such written interpretation.

Any provision of this zoning code that is determined by the director to need refinement or revision will be corrected by amending this zoning code as soon as is practical. Until an amendment can occur, the director will maintain a complete record of all official interpretations as an appendix to this zoning code, and indexed by the number of the chapter and section that is the subject of the interpretation.

4.     Appeal. An interpretation of the provisions of this zoning code may be appealed in compliance with Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.1.15 RULES OF MEASUREMENT
11.1.15.005 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to explain how various measurements referenced in this zoning code are to be calculated. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.010 General Provisions.
For all calculations, the applicant shall be responsible for supplying drawings illustrating the measurements that apply to a project. These drawings shall be drawn to scale and of sufficient detail to allow easy verification upon inspection by the director. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.015 Fractions.
When calculations result in fractions, the results will be rounded as follows:

A.     General Rounding. Fractions of 0.5 or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions of less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number, except as otherwise provided.

B.     Density Rounding. For purposes of computing the maximum number of residential units allowed on a lot, any fraction shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

C.    Rounding for State Affordable Housing Density Bonus. For projects eligible for bonus density pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 or any successor statute, and Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus, any fractional number of permitted bonus density units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. See Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus, Section 11.4.55.01.C: Calculation of Density Bonuses. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.020 Measuring Distances.
A.     Measurements are Shortest Distance. When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two objects. See Figure 11.1.15.020.A: Shortest Distance.

Figure 11.1.15.020.A

Shortest Distance



 

B.     Distances are Measured Horizontally. When determining distances for setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge of building, structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. These distances are not measured by following the topography or slope of the land. See Figure 11.1.15.020.B: Horizontal Measurement.

Figure 11.1.15.020.B

Horizontal Measurement



 

C.    Measurements Involving a Structure. Measurements involving a structure are made to the closest wall of the structure. Chimneys, eaves, cornices, and bay windows up to 12 feet in length are not included in the measurement. Other features, such as covered porches and entrances, are included in the measurement. Structures or portions of structures that are entirely underground are included in measuring required distances. See Figure 11.1.15.020.C.1: Measurements Involving a Structure, and Figure 11.1.15.020.C.2: Architectural Projections into Setbacks.

 

Figure 11.1.15.020.C.1

Measurements Involving a Structure



 

Figure 11.1.15.020.C.2

Architectural Projections into Setbacks



 

(Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.025 Measuring Height.
A.     General. The height of a structure shall be measured vertically from the average level of the highest and lowest elevation of the ground covered by the structure to the highest point of the structure or to the peak of a gable, pitched, mansard or hipped roof or to the finished roofline of a flat roof or top of a parapet required by California Building Code.

1.     Exceptions for Accessory Building Features. The following listed building features may be erected to a maximum height as follows:

a.     Chimneys. Two feet above roofline as per California Building Code.

b.     Flagpole. Up to 20 feet (10 feet above roofline maximum).

c.     Antennae. Up to 10 feet above roofline. Ground antennae to a maximum of 40 feet if located in the rear yard adjacent to the main structure.

2.     Exception for Surfside. Maximum building height for residential structures, including second dwelling units, shall be measured pursuant to Section 11.2.05.015.A.3: Building Height Limit.

B.     Measuring the Height of Buildings Located Near Retaining Walls. If any portion of a building lies within 5 horizontal feet of an above-ground retaining wall, and the base of the retaining wall is at a lower elevation than the building, the height of the building shall be calculated from the base of the retaining wall (at the lower of natural or finished grade) rather than from the base of the building wall. See Figure 11.1.15.025.B: Measuring the Height of Buildings Near Retaining Walls.

Figure 11.1.15.025.B

Measuring the Height of Buildings Near Retaining Walls



 

C.    Measurement of Fence or Wall Height.

1.     Determination of Height. The height at the property line shall be measured from the owner’s side of the fence or wall. A joint fence or wall on the property line may be measured from either side of the fence or wall. In the case of a joint fence or wall where there is a difference in the ground level between 2 adjoining parcels of less than 2 feet, the height of a fence or wall constructed along the property line shall be determined by using the finished grade at the base of the fence or wall on the highest parcel.

Figure 11.1.15.025.C

Determination of Property Line Fence Height



 

2.     Determination—Ground Level Difference More than 2 Feet. When there is a difference in the ground level between 2 adjoining parcels of 2 feet or more, the height of a fence or wall shall be determined by the provisions of subsection D, Measuring the Height of Combined Fences and Retaining Walls.

D.    Measuring the Height of Combined Fences and Retaining Walls. When a fence is constructed on top of or within 1 foot of the face of an above-ground retaining wall greater than 2 feet in height, and located in a required yard, the height of the fence shall be measured from the top of the fence to the midpoint height of the retaining wall, excluding the uppermost 2 feet of the retaining wall.

Figure 11.1.15.025.D

Fences on Top of Retaining Walls



 

E.     Measuring the Height of Decks. Deck height is measured from grade to the top of the floor of the deck if there is no rail or if the rail walls are more than 50% open, and from the ground to the top of the rails for all other situations. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.030 Measuring Lot Width and Depth.
A.     Lot Width. Lot width is the mean of the distances between the side lot lines as drawn at right angles to the lot depth line at points 20 feet from its front and back.

B.     Lot Depth. Lot depth is measured along an imaginary straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, will be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of establishing setbacks and measuring rear yard depth. Refer also to Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases; Lot Line Types: Rear Lot Line, and Figure 11.6.05.010.L.5: Irregular Lots: Determining Rear Lot Line.

Figure 11.1.15.030

Measuring Lot Width and Depth



 

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.035 Measuring Tree Diameter.
A.     Existing Trees. Existing trees are measured at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. Trees on slopes are measured from the ground level on the lower side of the tree. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk’s diameter is measured at its most narrow point below the split.

B.     New Trees. New trees are measured in caliper inches, which is the diameter of the trunk 6 inches above the ground. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.040 Determining Average Front Setback—RHD-20 District.
A.     Average Front Setback Determination. Average front setback is determined by the following calculations.

1.     Determine Required Setback Area. The required average front setback is determined by multiplying the required minimum setback depth, 12 feet, by the frontage of the lot, minus the width of the required minimum side yard setbacks.

Sample calculations are provided below.

a.     For a 25-foot wide lot: 12 x (25-6) = 228 sq. ft.

(Side yard setback 10% of the lot width and is a minimum of 3 feet)

b.     For a 50-foot wide lot: 12 x (50-10) = 480 sq. ft.

(Side yard setback 10% of the lot width)

2.     Determine Ground Level Setback Area. The ground level setback area is calculated by summing the areas of each area of change of building articulation between the required side yard setback lines. Refer to Figure 11.1.15.040.A: Determination of Average Front Setback Area.

3.     Determine Second Level Setback Area. The second level setback area is calculated by summing the areas of each area of change of building articulation between the required side yard setback lines.

4.     Confirm Required Setback Area. The required setback area is confirmed if the sum of the ground level and second level setback areas equal or exceed the required setback area.

B.     Exclusions for Measurements. Unenclosed porches, balconies and decks are not part of the habitable area of the residence and are included as allowable setback area.

C.    Maximum Depth to Wall Face. Any portion of a residence setback more than 20 feet shall be considered to be setback 20 feet for the purpose of calculating the average front setback.

 

Figure 11.1.15.040.A

Determination of Average Front Setback Area

 



 

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.045 Determining Floor Area.
Floor area is the horizontal area (expressed in square feet) of all floors included within a building or buildings, according to the following rules:

A.     Included in Floor Area. Floor area includes:

1.     The floor of atrium and lobby areas;

2.     Enclosed and roofed storage and equipment spaces;

3.     Enclosed and roofed halls, stairways, and elevator shafts;

4.     Enclosed and roofed porches and balconies;

5.     Portions of basements and attics that meet California Building Code (per Title 9, Chapter 9.60: Building Code of the Seal Beach Municipal Code) height requirements for living space (any area where the wall height is 5 feet or greater is counted as floor area). See Figure 11.1.15.045.A: Floor Area Under Sloping Roof;

6.     The actual floor space of mezzanines, interior balconies, and lofts.

B.     Excluded from Floor Area. Floor area does not include:

1.     Garages, carports, or other areas used for parking and loading, or vehicular access to parking and loading spaces;

2.     Unenclosed balconies, decks, porches, and stairs;

3.     Substandard height portions of attics and basements (per Title 9, Chapter 9.60: Building Code of the Seal Beach Municipal Code);

4.     The area within a building adjacent to, and in an imaginary horizontal plane with, interior balconies, mezzanines, or lofts.

Figure 11.1.15.045.A

Floor Area Under Sloping Roof

 



 

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.050 Determining Floor Area Ratio.
Floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of the floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the lot area. To calculate FAR, floor area is divided by lot area, and typically expressed as a decimal. For example, if the floor area of all buildings on a lot totals 20,000 square feet, and the lot area is 10,000 square feet, the FAR is expressed as 2.0. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.055 Determining Lot Coverage.
Lot coverage is the ratio of the footprint of all structures on a lot to the lot area, typically expressed as a percentage. The footprints of all principal and accessory structures, including garages, carports, and roofed porches, shall be summed in order to calculate lot coverage. See also Section 11.4.05.100: Residential Accessory Uses and Structures. The following structures shall be excluded from the calculation:

A.     Unenclosed and unroofed decks, porches, landings, balconies, and stairways less than 6 feet in height;

B.     Eaves and roof overhangs projecting up to 4 feet from a wall;

C.    Trellises, gazebos, patio covers and similar structures that have over 50% of the perimeter and roofs open;

D.    Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures or decks over 6 feet high;

E.     Non-habitable accessory structures that do not require a building permit. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.060 Measuring Garage Width.
The width of a garage is not limited to the garage door, but is considered the width of that portion of a building façade that is backed by a garage space. It is measured along the entire length of any enclosing walls that lie perpendicular to the garage door or entry. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.1.15.065 Measuring Signs.
Sign height is measured in the same method as other structures. See Section 11.1.15.025: Measuring Height. Calculation of sign area is described in Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations, Section 11.4.25.040.A: Calculation of Sign Area. (Ord. 1598)

Part II BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 11.2.05 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
11.2.05.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the following Zoning Code district designations:

RLD: Single-Unit Residential. To allow single-unit and small, zero-lot line neighborhoods at a base density of up to 15 dwelling units per net acre.

RMD: Medium-Density Residential. To allow duplexes, townhouse projects, apartments, and small-lot, single-unit residential uses, at a density of 15 to 18 dwelling units per net acre. Additional density may be achieved through density bonuses.

RHD: High-Density Residential. To allow for multi-unit residential developments at a base density of 20 to 46 dwelling units per net acre. Additional density may be achieved through density bonuses. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.05.010 Land Use Regulations.
Table 11.2.05.010: Use Regulations—Residential Districts, prescribes the land use regulations for residential districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

“P”  Uses permitted as-of-right that require no discretionary review if in compliance with all standards.

“L”  Uses permitted as-of-right subject to limitations restricting location, size, or other characteristics to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. Limitations are referenced by number designations listed at the end of Table 11.2.05.010.

“M” Uses subject to a minor use permit following discretionary review by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“C”  Uses subject to a conditional use permit following discretionary review and public hearing by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“–”  Uses that are not permitted.

The “Additional Regulations” column includes specific regulations applicable to the use classification, located elsewhere in this zoning code. Use classifications are defined in Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications. Use classifications not listed in Table 11.2.05.010: Use Regulations—Residential Districts, are prohibited.

Table 11.2.05.010

USE REGULATIONS—RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

 

RLD

RMD

RHD

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Types

 

 

 

 

Single-Unit Residential

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.100

Second Unit

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.115

Two-Unit Residential (Duplex)

—

P

P

 

Multiple-Unit Residential

—

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.110

Family Day Care

 

 

 

 

Small Family

P

P

P

 

Large Family

C

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.045.B

Group Housing

—

—

M

 

Senior Citizen Housing

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.125

Single Room Occupancy

—

—

C

See Section 11.4.05.127

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence

L-3

L-3

L-3

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Public, Semi-Public, and Service Use Types

 

 

 

Clubs and Lodges

—

—

C

See Section 11.4.05.080

Community Centers

C

C

C

 

Community Social Service Facilities

—

—

C

 

Day Care Center

—

—

C

See Section 11.4.05.045.C

Hospitals and Clinics

 

 

 

 

Hospitals

—

—

—

 

Clinics

—

—

—

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

M

M

M

 

Public Safety Facilities

M

M

M

 

Religious Facilities

C

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.080

Residential Care Facilities

 

 

 

See Section 11.4.05.105

Residential Care, General

—

—

C

See Section 11.4.85.020.N

Residential Care, Limited

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.85.020.N

Residential Care, Senior

—

—

C

See Section 11.4.05.125

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (lawfully nonconforming private residence)

L-3

L-3

L-3

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Schools, Public or Private

L-1

L-1

L-1

See Section 11.4.05.080

Commercial Use Types

 

 

 

 

Bed and Breakfasts

—

—

C

See Chapter 11.3.05

Food and Beverage Sales

 

 

 

 

General Market

—

—

L-2

 

Home Improvement Sales and Services

—

—

L-2

 

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (lawfully nonconforming private residence)

L-3

L-3

L-3

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Personal Services

—

—

L-2

 

Retail Sales

—

—

L-2

 

Short Term Rental of Residentially Zoned Property

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.05.135

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Use Types

 

 

Communication Facilities

 

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.70

Antennae and Transmission Towers

C

C

C

 

Satellite Dishes less than 39″ in diameter

P

P

P

 

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

 

Other Applicable Use Regulations

 

 

 

 

Accessory Use

See Section 11.4.05.100

 

Home Occupations

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.060

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Temporary Use

See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations

L-1: Public schools are permitted in all districts without city review; private schools require conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

L-2: Must be on the ground floor in a multi-unit development of 150 units or more and must be less than 1,500 square feet in floor area. Larger size facilities require conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

L-3: Limited to indoor marijuana cultivation of no more than 6 live marijuana plants for personal use, to be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured and conducted in accordance with Section 5.70.025 of Chapter 5.70.

(Ord. 1664; Ord. 1627; Ord. 1624; Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.05.015 Development Standards.
Table 11.2.05.015: Development Standards for Residential Districts, prescribes the development regulations for residential districts, including lot dimensions, building form and location, pedestrian orientation, vehicle accommodation and other standards. The “Supplemental Regulations” column indicates more detailed explanations or regulations that follow the table (by letter designation) or that are located elsewhere in this zoning code. The designations “RLD-9” etc. indicate the base residential district designation and the maximum number of residential units allowed per net acre.

 

Table 11.2.05.015

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

 

RLD-9

RLD-15

RMD-18

RHD-20

RHD-33

RHD-46

Supplemental Regulations

Density/Intensity of Use - Lot Dimensions

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum Density

1 unit per 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area, plus an “Accessory Dwelling Unit”

1 unit per 3,000 sq. ft. of lot area, plus an “Accessory Dwelling Unit”

1 unit per 2,500 sq. ft. of lot area

1 unit per 2,178 sq. ft. of lot area

1 unit per 1,350 sq. ft. of lot area

1 unit per 960 sq. ft. of lot area

See Section 11.4.05.115 for Accessory Dwelling Unit standards. See subsection A for Surfside Standards

Maximum Density with State Affordable Housing Bonus (du/ac)

 

 

 

 

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Interior Lots

5,000

3,000

5,000

2,500

5,000

5,000

(W)

See Section 11.4.05.115 for Accessory Dwelling Unit standards.

Corner Lots

5,500

3,000

5,500

2,500

5,500

5,500

(W)

See Section 11.4.05.115 for Accessory Dwelling Unit standards.

Nonresidential Uses

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

 

Minimum Lot Size (ft.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Interior Lots

50 x 100

30 x 80

50 x 100

25 x 100

50 x 100

50 x 100

(W)

Corner Lots

55 x 100

35 x 80

50 x 100

25 x 100

55 x 100

55 x 100

(W)

Minimum Floor Area (sq. ft.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Primary Dwelling Unit

1,200

1,200 (E)

950

950

950

950

L-1

Efficiency Accessory Dwelling Unit

150

150

150

150

150

150

L-1

1-Bedroom Accessory Dwelling Unit

400

400

400

400

400

400

L-1

2+-Bedroom Accessory Dwelling Unit

600

600

600

—

—

—

 

Maximum Floor Area for Accessory Dwelling Units

 

 

 

 

 

Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit

1,200 sq. ft

1,200 sq. ft

1,200 sq. ft

—

—

—

 

Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit

50% of existing living area of primary unit, to maximum of 1,200 sq. ft.

50% of existing living area of primary unit, to maximum of 1,200 sq. ft.

50% of existing living area of primary unit, to maximum of 1,200 sq. ft.

—

—

—

L-4

Maximum Lot Coverage (%)

(B)

67

50

75 (B)

60

80

(B) (W)

Substandard Lot Standards

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(C)

Building Form and Location

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Yards (ft.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Front - Minimum

(D)

(E)

Average 12; minimum 6

Average 12; minimum 6

18

18

(D) (E) (W); L-3

Interior Side - Minimum

(A) (D)

(E)

10% of lot width; 3 ft. minimum; 10 ft. maximum

10% of lot width; 3 ft. minimum; 10 ft. maximum

10% of lot width; 3 ft. minimum; 10 ft. maximum

10% of lot width; 3 ft. minimum; 10 ft. maximum

(A) (D) (E) (W)

Corner Side - Minimum

15% of lot width; 10 ft. maximum

(E)

15% of lot width; 10 ft. maximum

15% of lot width; 10 ft. maximum

15% of lot width; 10 ft. maximum

15% of lot width; 10 ft. maximum

(E) (W)

Rear

10

(E)

5 ft.; but when abutting an alley 24 ft. minus width of the alley

24 ft. minus width of the alley

24 ft. minus width of the alley

 

(E) (W)

Main Building Envelope

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Flood Zone Heights

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(F)

Maximum Height (ft.)

25 (A) (G) (not to exceed 2 stories)

25 (E)

(G)

25

35

35

(A) (G) (E) (W)

Maximum Height of Downslope Skirt Walls (ft.)

6

6

6

6

6

6

(H)

Projections

Yes

Yes (E)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(I) (E) (W)

Minimum Distance Between Buildings on the Same Lot (ft.)

6

6

6

6

6

10-20

(J)

Minimum Court Dimensions (ft.)

—

—

—

—

15

15

 

Building Design

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Exterior Stairways Prohibited

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

L-2

Porches

Yes

—

—

Yes

—

—

(K)

Vehicle Accommodation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Off-Street Parking and Loading

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading

Maximum Number of Curb Cuts for Driveway

1 (L)

1

1

1

1

1

(L)

Maximum Width of Driveway (ft.)

18

—

—

—

—

—

(M)

Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(N)

Landscaping and Open Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Permeable Surface/Maximum Paving in Street-Facing Yards (%)

60/50

60/50

60/50

60/50

60/50

60/50

(O)

Minimum Site Area Devoted to Landscaping (%)

25

15 (E)

15

Yes

15

15

(E), (P); See also Section 11.4.30.015

Planting Required on Downslope Lots

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(Q)

Pedestrian Walkways

—

—

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(R)

Other Development Standards

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Structures

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

See Section 11.4.05.100; (W)

2-Story Cabanas/Manufactured Homes

—

—

—

—

Yes

—

(S)

Roof Decks

Yes

—

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

(T)

Solar Access

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

See Section 11.4.10.045

Walls and Fences

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

See Chapter 11.4.15

General Site Standards

See Chapter 11.4.10: General Site Standards

Landscaping and Buffer Yards

See Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards

Signs

See Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations

Nonconforming Structures

See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Coastal Development Permit

See Chapter 11.4.35: Coastal Development Permit

Reasonable Accommodations

See Chapter 11.5.30: Reasonable Accommodations

L-1: Accessory Dwelling Units are not allowed in the RHD-20 District located in Old Town or the Surfside Colony area of the RLD-9 zone due to fire, access, parking and traffic impacts, except that one accessory dwelling unit per lot may be constructed within the existing space of an existing single-family residence or existing accessory structure within a zone for single-family use if the accessory dwelling unit meets all the requirements set forth in subsection T of this section.

L-2: Exterior stairways providing access from the ground level and/or the first floor to the second floor or above are prohibited when such stairways are not specifically required by the California Building Code. Exterior stairways may be permitted through the building permit process in the RLD-9 district on properties with a second story kitchen existing as of March 9, 1998. In such a case, a covenant shall be recorded on the title of the property stipulating the property is to be used only as a Single-Unit dwelling. Exception: Exterior stairways may be permitted on Single-Unit dwellings located within identified flood zones upon approval of an administrative use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

L-3: Refer to Appendix A - City Council Approved Blanket Setback Variances.

L-4: As used in this section, “living area” means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit including basements and attics but does not include a garage or any accessory structure.

 

A.     Standards for Surfside.

1.     Yard Requirements. Yard requirements for Surfside are set forth in Table 11.2.05.015.A.1: Surfside Yard Requirements.

 

Table 11.2.05.015.A.1

SURFSIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS

 

“A” Row

“B” Row

“C” Row

Front Yard

4 ft. (L-1)

2.5 ft. (L-1)

2.5 ft. (L-1)

Side Yard

10% lot width, minimum 3 ft. - maximum 10 ft. (L-2)

Rear Yard

—

3 ft. (L-3)

3 ft.

L-1: Upper stories may cantilever to the property line.

L-2: A stairway and elevated walkway not to exceed 2.5 feet above grade are permitted to encroach 3 feet into the side yard setback on the northwest side. If a residentially zoned parcel is located to the northwest of a colony pedestrian easement and abuts such easement, a stairway and walkway may be constructed on either the southwest or northwest side of a residential structure. For lots 92A through 118A, this elevated walkway may extend up to a maximum of 9 feet above grade.

L-3: On Lots B-1 through B-70 the upper stories may cantilever to the rear property line.

 

2.     Projections into Side Yards. Cornices, eaves or chimneys may project 1 foot into required side yards beginning above the first story and in no case less than 8 feet above grade.

3.     Building Height Limit. Not subject to 2-story maximum set by Table 11.2.05.015. Maximum building height for residential structures, including Second Dwelling Units, shall be 35 feet, as measured from the crown of Surfside Avenue at the center of the subject property.

4.     Minimum Unit Size. Minimum unit size is set forth in Table 11.2.05.015.A.4: Surfside Minimum Unit Sizes:

 

Table 11.2.05.015.A.4

SURFSIDE MINIMUM UNIT SIZES

Unit Type

Minimum Unit Size (sq. ft.)

Primary dwelling unit

750

Efficiency Second Dwelling Unit

150

1-Bedroom Second Dwelling Unit

400

2 or more Bedroom Second Dwelling Unit

600

 

5.     Parking Requirements. See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading.

6.     Non-Habitable Architectural Features.

a.     Non-habitable architectural features, such as spires, towers, cupolas, belfries, monuments, parapets (not required by Uniform Building Code), domes and covered access to open roof decks may exceed the height limit established pursuant to Section 11.2.05.015.A.3 a maximum of 7 feet if granted pursuant to the procedures contained in this section.

b.     Permit requirement. Minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required for all non-habitable architectural features above the established height limit.

c.     Considerations for approval of a minor use permit. In making the findings required for the approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, the following additional issues shall also be considered.

i.      Whether such variation is appropriate for the architectural style of the building.

(a)    Whether all roofing materials of a covered stairwell to an open roof deck are in substantial conformity with the roofing materials of the remainder of the structure.

(b)    Whether a covered stairwell to an open roof deck is located along peripheral exterior walls of the structure.

(c)    Whether a covered stairwell to an open roof deck is limited to the minimum area, both horizontally and vertically, necessary to cover the stairwell.

ii.     Whether such variation is appropriate for the character and integrity of the neighborhood.

iii.     Whether such variation significantly impairs the primary view from any property located within 300 feet.

iv.    Detailed and complete plans for the proposed work.

7.     General Requirements.

a.     Lot coverage. Lot coverage is determined by the required setbacks as set forth in Table 11.2.05.015.A.1: Surfside Yard Requirements.

b.     Lot area per dwelling unit. No minimum lot area per dwelling unit is required provided all parking requirements are met.

c.     Zero side yards. Upon the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, 2 lots with a common side yard may be developed incorporating a zero side yard setback on the common side yard provided:

i.      Both lots are developed concurrently and that the units are of compatible design;

ii.     An equal or greater amount of open space is provided on each lot than would be provided by the required conventional setbacks.

d.     Stairways, balconies and patio decking. Stairways, balconies or patio decking may encroach into the Surfside Colony leased land southwest of Block “A” as set forth below:

i.      First floor - 10 feet with glass deck enclosure. An additional projection of 3 feet is permitted for required stairways from second floor balconies or landing areas, not to exceed a length of 10 feet;

ii.     Second floor - 5 feet; or 10 feet if the first floor deck is then restricted to 5 feet in depth with a 5-foot high glass enclosure or first floor is an on-grade patio extension to a maximum of 10 feet with no enclosure;

iii.     Third or fourth floor - 5 feet;

iv.    Roof projection/ or sunscreen on any level - 5 feet;

v.     Decks must have guard rails installed as required by the California Building Code. On all decks, a glass enclosure may be added. The glass enclosure shall not exceed 8 feet, measured from the finished floor of the deck and shall maintain a minimum separation of 12 inches from the structure above. All glass above the required guard rails shall be clear, un-tinted glass. No portion of the glass enclosure shall be covered or roofed in any manner.

e.     Minimum lot size: Block B. The minimum lot size for Block B, Anderson Street (Lot 1) northwesterly to Seal Way (Lot 70) is 25 feet by 60 feet.

f.      Required submittals for issuance of building permit. The city shall require the following of any applicant prior to the issuance of any building permits for construction on “A” Row, “B” Row, “C” Row, or Surfside Colony leased land:

i.      Surfside Colony lease for use of Surfside Colony owned land;

ii.     Excavation deposit release from Surfside Colony;

iii.     Street security deposit release from Surfside Colony.

g.     Nonconforming building expansions. General renovation and structural additions to nonconforming buildings may be approved by the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, provided:

i.      No bedrooms or other living quarters are being added;

ii.     The only rooms being added are bathrooms, storage closets, closets or enlargements of existing rooms;

iii.     The building provides at least one conforming parking space;

iv.    General renovation and structural additions to nonconforming buildings which are nonconforming only due to inadequate setbacks may be approved pursuant to Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots, Section 11.4.40.020: Structural Alterations or Additions to Single Unit Residences Require a Conditional Use Permit (All Residential Districts).

B.     Maximum Lot Coverage.

1.     RLD-9 District. In the RLD-9 District the maximum lot coverage is 45%, with an additional 5% lot coverage permitted for patio covers that are at least 50% open. The RLD-9 area along Ocean Avenue, between First Street and Eighth Street, is permitted 60% lot coverage.

2.     RHD-20 District, Old Town. In the RHD District, Old Town, the maximum lot coverage is as set forth in Table 11.2.05.015: Development Standards for Residential Districts. Provided below are the allowable lot coverage for standard size, interior lots, with a 15-foot alley in Old Town, based on a minimum 6-foot front yard in accordance with the average setback provisions applicable to this District, and a maximum allowable 4.5-foot second-story overhang. Please contact the Planning Department to confirm the maximum lot coverage allowable pursuant to Table 11.2.05.015: Development Standards for Residential Districts.

 

 

Lot Size

 

25′ x 100′

37.5′ x 100′

25′ x 117.5′

37.5′ x 117.5′

Minimum Front Yard

6′

6′

6′

6′

Maximum 2nd Story Overhang

4.5′

4.5′

4.5′

4.5′

Minimum Side Yard

3′

3.75′

3′

3.75′

Maximum Allowable Building Coverage Area

89.5′ x 19′

89.5′ x 30′

107′ x 19′

107′ x 30′

Total Lot Area

2,500 sq. ft.

3,750 sq. ft.

2,937.5 sq. ft.

4,406.25 sq. ft.

Maximum Lot Coverage

68.02%

71.6%

69.2%

72.85%

 

C.    Substandard Lots. Any lot or parcel of land of less area or width than that required by the regulations for the district in which it is located may be used as a building site only if it was a lot of record in accordance with Table 11.4.40.065: Minimum Legal Area and Dimensions of Lots of Record, subject to the following standards:

1.     Required Improvements. All lots adjoining a public right-of-way shall install all required improvements in compliance with applicable development standards and use regulations, unless the planning commission approves a variance or waiver in accordance with the provisions of this zoning code.

2.     RLD District. No building, other than a single unit home, shall be constructed on any building site in the RLD District containing less than 5,000 square feet of area.

3.     RMD and RHD Districts. No building, other than a single unit home, may be constructed on any building site in the RMD and RHD Districts containing less than the required minimum lot area, unless the minimum lot area would allow for more than one unit and all applicable development standards can be met.

D.    Minimum Front and Interior Side Yards.

1.     RLD-9 District—Front Yard. In the RLD-9 District the minimum front yard is 18 feet for a front entry garage and 10 feet for a side entry garage except for the RLD-9 District area along Ocean Avenue between First Street and Eighth Street, which is not allowed side entry garages.

2.     RLD-9 District—Interior Side Yard. In the RLD-9 District the minimum interior side yard is 5 feet except for the RLD-9 District area along Ocean Avenue between First Street and Eighth Street, which has a 10% of lot width interior side yard setback and a minimum interior side yard of 3 feet. The RLD-9 District area in Surfside Colony is regulated by Table 11.2.05.015.A.1.

3.     RHD-20 District—Properties Abutting Seal Way. In the RHD-20 District the minimum front yard for properties abutting Seal Way is 0 (zero) feet.

E.     RLD-15 District Development Standards. The development standards for the RLD-15 District are set forth in Table 11.2.05.015.E.1: Specific Tract Development Standards, Tract 6345, Table 11.2.05.015.E.2: Specific Tract Development Standards, Tract 6346, and Table 11.2.05.015.E.3: Specific Tract Development Standards, Tract 9814.

1.     Architectural Committee Approval Required. The city shall not review any plans for a building, fence, wall, swimming pool or structure until an approved building plan approved by the appropriate Architectural Committee for those tracts within the RLD-15 District that have an legally constituted Architectural Committee, as has been submitted to the city.

 

Table 11.2.05.015.E.1

RLD-15 DISTRICT—SPECIFIC TRACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

TRACT 6345

Development Standard

Required Standard

Building Setbacks:

 

Front Yard: First Floor

6 feet - Lot 30 and 31.

 

8 feet - All remaining lots.

Front Yard: Second Floor

50 feet.

Rear Yard

2 feet.

Interior Side Yard

6 feet on 1 side - opposite side yard is 0-foot minimum setback.

Street Side Yard

3 feet.

Maximum Height Limit

25 feet overall - 10 feet at zero side yard for single story portion of residential structure, 12 feet at zero side yard for 2-story portion of residential structure.

Number of Stories

2-story lots - maximum of 24 lots.

Allowable Floor Areas:

 

First Floor

1,250 square feet minimum.

Second Floor

300 square feet minimum; 800 square feet maximum.

Fence Height

3 feet in front yard setback area.

 

8 feet outside of front yard setback area.

Projections:

 

Chimney

2 feet into required interior side yard: not exceeding 6 feet in length (chimney projection not allowed in front, rear, or exterior side yard).

Roof Eaves - Rear Yard

1 foot into public alley (includes garage door in open position).

Required Landscaping

40% of required front yard.

Patio Covers

Not permitted in front, rear, or side yard setback area.

 

Table 11.2.05.015.E.2

RLD-15 DISTRICT—SPECIFIC TRACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

TRACT 6346

Development Standard

Required Standard

Building Setbacks:

 

Front Yard: First Floor

8 feet - All lots except Lots 1 and 6.

 

7 feet - Lot 1; 4 feet - Lot 6.

Front Yard: Second Floor

50 feet.

Rear Yard

2 feet.

Interior Side Yard

6 feet.

Opposite Side Yard

0 feet.

Street Side Yard

3 feet.

Height Limit

25 feet overall - 10 feet at zero side yard for single story portion of residential structure, 12 feet at zero side yard for 2-story portion of residential structure.

Number of Stories

2-story lots - maximum of 38 lots.

Allowable Floor Areas:

 

First Floor

1,250 square feet minimum.

Second Floor

300 square feet minimum; 800 square feet maximum.

Fence Height

3 feet in front yard setback area.

 

8 feet outside of front yard setback area.

Projections:

 

Chimney

2 feet into required interior side yard: not exceeding 6 feet in length (chimney projection not allowed in front, rear, or exterior side yard).

Roof Eaves - Rear Yard

1 foot into public alley (includes garage door in open position).

Required Landscaping

40% of required front yard.

Patio Covers

Not permitted in front, rear, or side yard setback area.

 

Table 11.2.05.015.E.3

RLD-15 DISTRICT—SPECIFIC TRACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

TRACT 9814

Development Standard

Required Standard

Building Setbacks:

 

Front Yard: First Floor

12 feet - Lot 1, 4, 6, 9, 15, 17, 20, 24, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33.

 

10 feet - Lot 2, 5, 8, 10, 12, 16, 19, 21, 23, 26, 30.

 

8 feet - Lot 3, 7, 11, 13, 14, 18, 22, 28, and 32.

 

6 feet - Lot 34, 35.

Front Yard: Second Floor

30 feet except as follows:

 

20 feet - Lot 13, 34, 35.

Rear Yard

2 feet - Lots 1 through 24.

 

8 feet - Lots 25 through 35.

Interior Side Yard (Southwesterly Side)

6 feet.

Interior Side Yard (Northwesterly side)

0 feet - All lots except Lot 12 and 35.

Street Side Yard

6 feet - Lot 1, 24 and 25.

Height Limit

25 feet overall - Lots 12, 13 and 35.

 

25 feet overall - 12 feet within 3 feet of an exterior side yard - All other Lots.

Number of Stories

1-story lots - Lot 1, 3, 7, 11, 18, 22, 24, 25, 28.

 

2-story lots - All remaining lots.

Fence Height

3 feet in front yard setback area.

 

8 feet outside of front yard setback area.

Architectural Projections

2 feet - except no fireplace or chimney structure allowed in first floor front yard setback area or rear yard setback area.

Required Landscaping

Entire front yard setback area except entry walks and driveways.

 

6 square feet minimum in rear yard setback area.

Trash Enclosure

Minimum 2-foot by 4-foot area adjacent to rear yard setback area - all lots except 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35.

Patio Area

240 square foot minimum - adjacent to 6-foot side yard setback area.

Patio Covers

Not permitted in front, rear, or side yard setback area.

 

Must have 50% open roof area and cannot be enclosed.

 

F.     Flood Zone Heights. In special flood hazard zones as defined in Title 9: Public Property, Public Works and Building Regulations, Chapter 9.45: Floodplain Management, the maximum height is increased by the increase in elevation required to reach the base flood elevation.

G.    Building Height—RLD-9 and RMD 18 Districts. Building height in the RLD-9 District in Old Town and the RMD-18 District are:

1.     RLD-9 District—Old Town. Not subject to 2-story maximum set by Table 11.2.05.015. Maximum building height is 25 feet as measured at the finished grade of the wall of the building nearest Ocean Avenue and the height of this roofline shall not be exceeded on the remainder of the lot.

2.     RMD-18 District. The maximum building height for residential structures is:

a.     Lots less than 37.5 feet wide: 25 feet

b.     Lots 37.5 feet wide or greater:       

i.      Front 1/2 of lot:        25 feet

ii.     Rear 1/2 of lot: 35 feet

3.     RLD-9 District—College Park East, College Park West, and The Hill. Maximum building height is 25 feet, not to exceed 2 stories.

H.    Maximum Height of Downslope Skirt Walls. On a downslope lot, the skirt wall which covers the unfinished understory of the home shall not be greater than 6 feet in height if lot slope is 40% or less; and 8 feet if lot slope exceeds 40%. The height of the skirt wall shall be measured from finished grade to the floor level of the lowest floor that is above ground. Greater height may be approved with a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, provided that the wall has an architectural treatment that minimizes the unattractive blank wall surface. Acceptable treatments include but are not limited to: a different but compatible surface material than the rest of the building; a minimum 5-foot projection from the floor above covered with a deck; a minimum 2-foot recess from the floor above; or covering the skirt wall with a trellis on which plant material grows. See Figure 11.2.05.015.H: Special Requirements for Downslope Lots.

 

Figure 11.2.05.015.H

Special Requirements for Downslope Lots



 

I.      Projections. Projections are permitted subject to the following standards:

1.     Projections Into Yards—Architectural Features. Architectural features, such as cornices, eaves, canopies, chimneys, and bay windows not exceeding 8 feet in length may not be located within 3 feet from the side lot line, nor more than 2 feet into any required front or rear setback. On corner lots, street side, such architectural features may not be located closer than 5 feet to the side lot line.

2.     Projections Into Yards—Stairs, Decks and Balconies. Open, uncovered stair landings, decks and balconies 12 feet or less in length and less than 6 feet above grade may not be located within 3 feet from the side lot line, nor project more than 3 feet into the minimum front setback, or 6 feet into the rear setback in any residential area. On corner lots, street side, and beside public paths, such structures may not be located closer than 5 feet to the side lot line.

a.     Low-level wooden decks. Low-level wooden decks, not in excess of 1 foot above natural grade, may project into a required yard to the property line.

b.     RLD-9 District—Old Town. Decks and balconies may extend or project a maximum of 10 feet into or over the rear yard in the area below or at the second floor level (from street). Above the second floor level, eaves may project a maximum of 5 feet over the rear yard.

3.     Projections—RLD-15 District. Refer to Section 11.2.05.010.E: RLD-15 District Development Standards, Table 11.2.05.015.E.1 through Table 11.2.05.015.E.3, for allowable projections in the RLD-15 District.

4.     Projections—RHD-20 District. For lots less than 50 feet in width in the RHD-20 District the projections allowed in subsections 1 through 2, above, may project not more than 2 feet into the required side yard; provided that the required interior side yard shall not be reduced to less than 2 feet in width.

 

Figure 11.2.05.015.I

Projections Into Required Yards—Residential Districts



 

J.     Minimum Distance Between Buildings and Minimum Size of Courts—RMD and RHD Districts. In the RMD and RHD districts courts within or between buildings that have parking, front doors to units, or primary living room windows shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet.

K.     Porches. Front porches may extend into the front setback up to 6 feet if all of the following standards are met.

1.     The porch is open on 2 or more sides.

2.     The porch enclosure, including roof, parapets, and railings, does not exceed 14 feet in height.

3.     The porch does not exceed 50% of the front building width measured at the front façade. Greater width may be approved pursuant to a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

4.     Stairs leading up to a porch, which are less than 2 feet above grade, may project an additional 4 feet into the required front yard setback.

 

Figure 11.2.05.015.K

Front Porch Projections



L.     Curb Cuts and Driveways—RLD-9 District. For lots less than 15,000 square feet a maximum of 1 curb cut for a driveway entrance to parking is permitted, except that for single-unit homes on lots with at least 80 feet of street frontage, 2 curb-cuts for circular driveways are permitted. The edge of the circular driveway nearest the public roadway shall not be located within the required front setback. Exceptions may be approved with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. See Figure 11.2.05.015.L: Limits on Multiple Curb Cuts, Driveways, and Front Yard Paving—RLD-9 District.

 

Figure 11.2.05.015.L

Limits on Multiple Curb Cuts, Driveways, and Front Yard Paving—RLD-9 District



 

M.    Maximum Driveway Width—RLD-9 District. In a street-facing yard, the maximum width of a driveway leading to parking facilities is 18 feet. This does not apply to the size of the associated curb cut on public or private streets. See Figure 11.2.05.015.M: Limits on Curb Cuts, Driveways, and Front Yard Paving—RLD-9 District.

Figure 11.2.05.015.M

Limits on Curb Cuts, Driveways, and Front Yard Paving—RLD-9 District



N.    Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage. The following standards apply to parking and garage frontage.

1.     Detached Garages. Detached garages are subject to the standards set forth in Table 11.2.05.015.N.1: Detached Garage Standards.

Table 11.2.05.015.N.1

Detached Garage Standards

District

Maximum Height (ft.)

Lot Coverage (sq. ft.)

Location

RLD

15

600

Rear one-half of lot. Detached garages for one or two unit projects may be on front one-half of lot with approval of a minor use permit.

RMD

15

500

 

RHD

15

—

 

Garages for more than 3 vehicles require conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

 

2.     Maximum Width of Garages and Carports. Garages and carports within 30 feet of a front or street-facing side lot line shall be no more than 20 feet in width. In addition, all attached garages and carports located within 30 feet of a front or street-facing side lot line shall not exceed 50% of the width of the residential façade. Exceptions may be allowed by minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

Figure 11.2.05.015.N.2

Residential Districts—Limitations on Garage Frontage



 

3.     Required Garage, Carport, or Uncovered Parking Location to the Side or Rear of a Residence in Certain Cases. Garages, carports, or any uncovered parking spaces shall be located to the rear or side of any principal residential structure, and at least 30 feet from the front lot line, if at least 60% of the buildings in the immediate context have garages, carports and uncovered parking located at a depth of at least 30 feet from the front lot line. The immediate context shall consist of the 5 closest lots on each side of the project site plus the 10 closest lots on the opposite side of the street.

4.     Required Garage Exception—RLD-9 District. The number of garage parking spaces required pursuant to Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking, for single-unit dwellings in the RLD-9 District shall be reduced by one space for single-unit dwellings of 6 bedrooms or more if the driveway provides a clear area of 18 feet by 18 feet in front of a garage equipped with a roll-up door to accommodate vehicles parked off the street.

5.     Required Garage Exception—Surfside. The number of garage parking spaces required pursuant to Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking, for single-unit dwellings in the Surfside District shall be reduced by one space for single-unit dwellings of 6 bedrooms or more if the subject property provides a minimum clear area of 9 feet by 22 feet between the private street property line and the face of a 2-car garage equipped with a roll-up door to accommodate vehicles.

6.     Required Garage Exception—RHD-20 District. The number of garage parking spaces required pursuant to Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking, for single-unit dwellings in the RHD-20 District shall be reduced by one space for single-unit dwellings of 6 bedrooms or more if the subject property provides a minimum clear area of 9 feet by 22 feet between the alley property line and the face of a 2-car garage equipped with a roll-up door to accommodate vehicles.

7.     Location of Parking for Multi-Unit Dwellings. For projects with 3 or more residential units, no open parking or structured parking more than 4 feet above grade shall be located within 30 feet of a front or corner side property line. Exceptions may be approved with a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. See Figure 11.2.05.015.N.7: Location of Parking for Multi-Unit Dwellings.

 

Figure 11.2.05.015.N.7

Location of Parking for Multi-Unit Dwellings



 

O.    Minimum Permeable Surface—Maximum Paving in Street Facing Yards. A minimum of 60% of the required street facing yards shall have a permeable surface that permits water absorption directly into the soil. No more than 50% of the required front or corner side yard may be covered with a paved surface.

P.     Minimum Site Area Devoted to Landscaping. In all residential districts except the RLD-9 District and the RHD-20 District no less than 15% of any site shall be devoted to landscaping. With the exception of areas for entry and exit, all required front and street side setbacks shall be landscaped and such areas shall be credited to the required landscaping. A minimum of 25% of any lot in the RLD-9 District shall be devoted to landscaping. Also refer to Section 11.4.30.015: Areas to be Landscaped for additional landscaping standards.

Q.    Required Planting on Downslope Lots. On all downslope lots with a ground slope greater than 10%, a minimum of 3 trees and 3 shrubs shall be planted in the yard adjoining the downslope wall. Trees shall be of a species that is not highly flammable, and that does not have low branches close to the ground that could pose a fire hazard. Shrubs shall be located away from the base of the wall and tree trunks to minimize fire danger. See Figure 11.2.05.015.H: Special Requirements for Downslope Lots.

R.    Pedestrian Walkways. Where more than 4 units are provided on a lot, a walkway which is distinct, separate, and physically protected from any adjacent driveway or parking area, shall be required to provide access from the public right-of-way to the dwelling units.

S.     Development Standards for 2-Story Cabanas/Manufactured Homes.

1.     Purpose and Intent. In order to ensure the compatibility and safety of 2-story cabanas or a 2-story manufactured home within a mobile home park or trailer park, the following development standards and procedures are established.

2.     Permit Requirement. Minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required to establish a 2-story cabana or a 2-story manufactured home. Determination that the proposed construction complies with the requirement of this section and all applicable laws including the provisions in Title 25 of the California Administrative Code shall be made by the building official.

3.     Size Limitation—2-Story Cabana. The size of a 2-story cabana, including any existing or proposed single-story cabanas, shall be less than the size of the mobile home or travel trailer located on the trailer space.

4.     Height Limits. 

a.     The maximum permitted building height shall not exceed 2 stories or 25 feet in overall height.

b.     The area between 20 feet and 25 feet in overall height shall consist exclusively of roofing.

5.     Decks and Balconies. No decks or balconies shall be permitted above the floor level of a second story.

6.     Safety Requirements.

a.     Sprinkler system. A life safety sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the trailer and cabana or the 2-story manufactured home in accordance with the requirements set forth in the California Building Code, Section 1004.2.3.2, as locally amended by City of Seal Beach Ordinance No. 1488, Section 5-30.12, Exception 7, as may be amended.

b.     Fire-rated construction. The exterior of the cabana shall be constructed of stucco, or one-hour fire-rated material shall be installed under wood siding.

c.     Title 25 compliance—Setbacks. The setbacks and clearances of Title 25, California Administrative Code shall be applicable to all 2-story cabanas and 2-story manufactured homes.

T.     Roof Decks. Roof decks are allowed in the residential districts pursuant to Table 11.2.05.015: Development Standards for Residential Districts. Detached canopies are permitted on roof decks provided that canopies are permitted only if they are collapsible, and maintained below the height limit when not in use. In addition, all required roof deck railings in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code shall not exceed the height limit provisions of Table 11.2.05.015. The provisions of Section 11.2.05.015.I: Projections, are not applicable to roof decks.

U.    Old Ranch Towne Center Development Plan Overlay. There is established in the Residential Medium Density (RMD) Zone the Old Ranch Towne Center Development Plan Overlay. All development designated as “Development Area D,” as revised by the city council, in the Bixby Old Ranch Towne Center Development Plan approved on November 23, 1998 shall be in conformance with, and limited to, the plans, specifications and proposed uses so approved. All land uses subject to the overlay shall comply with the otherwise applicable development standards of the RLD-9 and OS/PR District.

V.     Exception. On lots of less than 37.5 feet in width, an encroachment into the exterior side yard for the length of the required garage will be permitted, provided that a setback of 3 feet is maintained. The intent of this provision is to provide an interior garage width of 18 feet.

W.    Hellman Ranch Specific Plan Development. There is established in the Residential Low Density-9 (RLD-9) Zone the Hellman Ranch Specific Plan, originally adopted by the city council as Ordinance 1097 on June 22, 1981. Specifically, all development in Development Planning Area 8 as designated in the Hellman Ranch Specific Plan and as amended and approved by the city council through adoption of Ordinance 1420 on October 27, 1997, shall be in conformance with the plans, specifications, designated uses, development standards and proposed uses so approved. (Ord. 1673; Ord. 1669; Ord. 1666; Ord. 1647; Ord. 1646; Ord. 1625; Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.05.020 Review of Plans.
All development is subject to development review under the city’s administrative provisions, found in Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions of this zoning code. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.2.10 COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
11.2.10.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the following zoning code district designations:

LC-RMD: Limited Commercial/Residential Medium Density Zone. To allow limited commercial and office uses in conjunction with residential uses.

PO: Professional Office. To allow office, medical and related uses that may also serve as a buffer area between residential areas and more intensive commercial areas.

MSSP: Main Street Specific Plan. To allow visitor-serving and resident-serving office, retail, restaurant, and personal service uses with upper floors devoted to office uses along Main Street.

SC: Service Commercial. To allow neighborhood-serving commercial areas that provide retail, restaurant, and personal service uses.

GC: General Commercial. To allow sub-regional and regional centers of commercial activity and may include both pedestrian- and auto-oriented development. Other typical uses are auto service stations, auto repair, and sales. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.10.010 Land Use Regulations.
Table 11.2.10.010: Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts prescribes the land use regulations for commercial and mixed-use districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

“P”  Uses permitted as-of-right that require no discretionary review if in compliance with all standards.

“L”  Uses permitted as-of-right subject to limitations restricting location, size, or other characteristics to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. Limitations are referenced by number designations listed at the end of Table 11.2.10.010: Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts.

“M” Uses subject to a minor use permit following discretionary review by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“C”  Uses subject to a conditional use permit following discretionary review and public hearing by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“—” Uses that are not permitted.

The “Additional Regulations” column includes specific regulations applicable to the use classification, that are located elsewhere in this zoning code. Use classifications are defined in Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications. Use classifications not listed in Table 11.2.10.010: Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts are prohibited

Table 11.2.10.010

USE REGULATIONS—COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS

 

LC/RMD

PO

MSSP

SC

GC

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Types

 

 

 

 

 

 

Single Unit Residential

P

—

L-1

—

—

See Section 11.2.10.015 and Section 11.4.05.060

Second Unit

—

—

—

—

—

 

Two-Unit Residential (Duplex)

P

—

 

L-1

—

—

Multiple Unit Residential

P

—

L-1

—

—

 

Family Day Care

 

 

 

 

 

 

Small Family

P

—

—

—

—

 

Large Family

C

C

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.045

Group Housing

—

C

—

—

—

 

Senior Citizen Housing

—

—

—

—

—

 

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (legally nonconforming private residence)

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Public, Semi-Public, and Service Use Types

 

 

 

 

 

Clubs and Lodges

—

—

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.080

Community Center

C

C

—

C

C

 

Community Social Service Facilities

—

C

—

C

C

 

Cultural Institutions

—

C

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.080

Day Care Center

C

C

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.045

Government Offices

A

A

A

A

A

 

Hospitals and Clinics

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hospitals

—

C

—

C

C

 

Clinics

—

C

—

C

C

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

 

Parking Facilities, Public

C

C

C

C

C

See Chapter 11.4.20

Public Safety Facilities

A

A

A

A

A

 

Religious Facilities

—

C

—

C

C

 

Residential Care Facilities

 

 

 

 

 

See Section 11.4.05.105

Residential Care, General

—

C

—

C

C

 

Residential Care, Limited

P

C

—

C

C

 

Residential Care, Senior

—

C

—

C

C

 

Schools, Private

C

C

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.080

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (legally nonconforming private residence)

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Commercial Use Types

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Business Establishments

—

—

—

—

P

See Chapter 11.4.50

Animal Sales and Services

—

—

A

A

A

 

Artists’ Studios

P

P

P

P

P

 

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile Rentals

—

—

—

A

A

 

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing

—

—

—

—

P

 

Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Major

—

—

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.040

Automobile Service Stations/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor

—

—

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.035

Automobile Washing

—

—

—

A

A

 

Large Vehicle Sales, Services and Rental

—

—

—

—

A

 

Bakery

L-4

—

L-4

L-4

L-4

 

Banks and Other Financial Institutions

—

P

P

P

P

 

With Drive-Through Facilities

—

C

C

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.050

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)

—

A

A

A

A

See Section 11.4.05.030

Building Materials and Services

—

—

—

—

C

 

Business Services

P

P

L-2, L-3

P

P

 

Commercial Recreation

 

 

 

 

 

 

Large-scale

—

—

—

C

C

 

Small-scale

—

—

—

A

A

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bars

—

—

C

C

C

 

Coffee House/ Dessert Shop

—

—

P; L-5; L-6

P

P

 

Restaurants, Fast Food

—

—

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.050

Restaurants, Full Service

—

—

P, C

P, C

P, C

See Section 11.4.05.015

Restaurants, Limited Service

—

—

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.015

Restaurants, Take Out Only

—

—

P

A

A

 

With Drive-Through Facilities

—

—

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.050

With Outdoor Eating Areas

—

—

A, C

A, C

A, C

See Section 11.4.05.090

Extended Hour Business

C

—

—

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.055

Food and Beverage Sales

 

 

 

 

 

 

Catering Services

—

—

—

—

P

 

Convenience Market

—

—

—

P, C

P, C

See Section 11.4.05.015

General Market

—

—

P, C

P, C

P, C

See Section 11.4.05.015

Liquor Stores

—

—

C

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.070

Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries

—

—

—

—

P

 

Home Improvement Sales and Services

—

—

—

—

C

See Sections 11.4.05.090 and 11.4.05.140

Hotels and Motels

—

—

—

—

C

 

Kennel

—

—

—

C

C

 

Kiosks

—

—

—

A

A

See Section 11.4.05.065

Laboratories

—

P

L-2, L-3

P

P

 

Maintenance and Repair Services

P

—

—

P

P

 

Massage Establishment

P

P

L-2, L-3

P

P

See Chapter 5.45, Massage and Massage Establishments

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (legally nonconforming private residence)

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Offices, Business and Professional

P

P

L-2, L-3

P

P

 

Walk-in Clientele

P

P

L-2, L-3

P

P

 

Offices, Medical and Dental

P

P

L-2, L-3

P

P

 

Parking Facilities, Commercial

—

—

C

—

C

See Chapter 11.4.20

Personal Services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Retail Sales

P

—

P

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.090

Large Format

—

—

—

P

P

See Section 11.4.05.140

Smoke Shop

—

—

—

C

C

See Chapter 5.75

Tattoo Establishments

—

—

—

—

C

See Chapter 11.4.65

Theaters

—

—

C

—

C

 

Light Manufacturing Use Types

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contractors’ Yards

—

—

—

—

—

 

Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing

P

P

P

P

P

 

Industry, Limited

—

—

—

—

—

 

Industry, General

—

—

—

—

—

 

Warehousing and Storage

 

 

 

 

 

 

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (legally nonconforming private residence)

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Indoor Commercial Storage

—

—

—

—

—

 

Outdoor Storage

—

—

—

—

—

 

Personal Storage

—

—

—

—

—

 

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Use Types

 

 

 

Wireless Communication Facilities

 

 

 

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.70

Antennae and Transmission Towers

C

C

C

C

C

 

Satellite dishes less than 79″ in diameter

P

P

P

P

P

 

Recycling Facilities

 

 

 

 

 

See Section 11.4.10.025

Recycling Collection Point

—

—

—

C

C

 

Recycling Processing Facility

—

—

—

—

C

 

Reverse Vending Machines

P

P

P

P

P

 

Utilities, Major

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hazardous Waste Facility

—

—

—

—

C

See Chapter 11.4.60

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

P

P

 

Agriculture Use Types

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nurseries

—

—

P

P

P

 

Commercial Marijuana Uses

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.A and C; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Outdoor Cultivation

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 11.4.100.010.B; and Section 5.70.025

Marijuana—Indoor Cultivation at Private Residence (legally nonconforming private residence)

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

See Section 11.4.100.010.C.1 and C; and Section 5.70.025

Other Applicable Use Regulations

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Use

See Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Temporary Use

See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations

L-1  Permitted if an existing use; new uses are prohibited. See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots.

L-2  Not allowed on the ground floor along Main Street without a conditional use permit; allowed on side streets as a permitted use.

L-3  If on the ground floor along Main Street permitted if an existing use; new uses are prohibited. See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots.

L-4  Bakery production sold at retail on-premises.

L-5  Permitted use if less than 1,000 square feet and less than 10 seats.

L-6  Minor use permit required if 1,000 square feet or more and 10 seats or more.

L-7  Limited to indoor marijuana cultivation of no more than 6 live marijuana plants for personal use, to be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured and conducted in accordance with Section 5.70.025 of Chapter 5.70.

(Ord. 1664; Ord. 1638; Ord. 1630; Ord. 1617; Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.10.015 Development Standards.
Table 11.2.10.015: Development Standards—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts prescribes the development standards for the commercial and mixed use districts. The “Additional Regulations” column indicates more detailed explanations or regulations that follow the table (by letter designation) or that are located elsewhere in this zoning code.

 

 

Table 11.2.10.015

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS

 

LC/RMD

PO

MSSP

SC

GC

Additional Regulations

Lot Size and Density

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.)

2,500

7,000

2,750

7,000

10,000

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio

0.90

—

—

—

—

 

Maximum Residential Density - lot area per unit (sq. ft.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Base Density

2,500

—

—

—

—

(A)

Density for Mixed Use Development

2,000

—

—

—

—

(A)

Density - Affordable Housing Bonus

See Additional Regulations

—

—

—

—

See Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus

Building Form and Location

 

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum Building Height (ft.)

35

35

25, two-story maximum

35

35

(B)

Building Setback on Street Frontages

varies

varies

varies

varies

varies

(C)

Minimum Yard Requirements

 

 

 

 

 

 

Interior Side

varies

varies

varies

varies

varies

(C)

Rear

varies

varies

varies

varies

varies

(C)

Building Transition Zone Adjacent to R Districts

Yes

 

 

 

 

(D)

Landscaping and Open Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

Public Open Space

Yes

 

 

 

 

(E)

Minimum lot area to be landscaped

5%

10%

0%

10%

10%

See Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards

Minimum required front yard area to be landscaped

60%

—

—

—

—

 

Circulation and Parking

 

 

 

 

 

 

Limitations - Location of Parking

 

 

Yes

 

 

(F)

Limitations on Curb Cuts

 

 

Yes

 

 

(G)

Limitations - Location of Truck Docks; Loading and Service Areas

 

 

Yes

 

 

(H)

Off-Street Parking and Loading

 

 

Yes

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading

Reduced Parking Requirements

 

 

Yes

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading

Building Design

 

 

 

 

 

 

Building Orientation

 

 

Yes

 

 

(I)

Design Provisions

—

—

Yes

—

—

(J)

Special Requirements for Residential Development

 

 

 

 

Open Space (sq. ft. per unit)

100

—

—

—

—

(K)

Side and Rear Yard Setbacks

Yes

—

—

—

—

(L)

Other Applicable Development Standards

 

 

 

 

 

Consistency with Council Adopted Design Guidelines, Area Plans, or Specific Plans

(M)

Pedestrian Access to Buildings Setback from the Street

(N)

Projections into Required Yards

(O)

General Site Standards

See Chapter 11.4.10: General Site Standards

Fencing

See Chapter 11.4.15: Fences, Hedges, and Walls

Parking and Loading

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading

Signs

See Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations

Landscaping and Buffer Yards

See Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards

Coastal Development Permit

See Chapter 11.4.35: Coastal Development Permit

Nonconforming Structures and Lots

See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

 

A.     Maximum Residential Density/Development Standards.

1.     Calculation of Residential Density and FARs for Mixed Use Projects. Permitted residential densities for mixed-use projects shall be in addition to floor area ratios permitted for commercial uses in Table 11.2.10.015, above, within the limits of all required yard, height and other developments standards.

a.     FAR for Nonresidential Development. The FAR for nonresidential development in the LC-RMD District is set forth in Table 11.2.10.015.A: Nonresidential FAR—LC-RMD District.

Table 11.2.10.015.A

NONRESIDENTIAL FAR—LC-RMD DISTRICT

Lot Size

Maximum FAR

5,000 sq. ft. or less

0.90

More than 5,000 sq. ft.

0.75 - minimum 4,500 sq. ft.

 

2.     Density Bonus for Mixed Use Projects. See Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus regarding allowable density bonus programs.

3.     Residential Development Standards. The residential development standards for the LC-RMD district are as follows.

 

a.     Mixed Use Project. May only be located on the second floor in compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.

b.     Residential Project. A residential development shall comply with all other applicable development standards for the RHD-20 district.

B.     Building Height. Building height requirements are set forth in Table 11.2.10.015.B: Building Height—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts.

Table 11.2.10.015.B

BUILDING HEIGHT—COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS

Commercial District

Height

LC-RMD District

 

Lots less than 37.5 feet in width

30 feet

Lots greater than 37.5 feet in width

 

Front ½ of lot

25 feet, 2-story maximum

Rear ½ of lot

35 feet, 3-story maximum

PO District

 

District I

30 feet

District II

35 feet

MSSP District

25 feet, 2-story maximum

SC District

 

District I

30 feet, 3-story maximum

District II

35 feet, 3-story maximum

 

1.     Additional Height. Additional height may be allowed at specific locations designated in design guidelines, planned unit developments, or specific plans adopted by the city council.

2.     Accessory Commercial Structures. Accessory commercial structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height. See also Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities.

C.    Building Setbacks. Building Setbacks from street and alley frontages and interior lot lines are set forth in Table 11.2.10.015.C.1: Building Setbacks from Street Frontages—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts, Table 11.2.10.015.C.2: Building Setbacks from Alleys—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts, and Table 11.2.10.015.C.3: Building Setbacks from Interior Lot Lines—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts.

 

 

Table 11.2.10.015.C.1

BUILDING SETBACKS FROM STREET FRONTAGES—

COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS

Commercial District

Street Frontage Building Setback

LC-RMD District

 

Commercial Use

6 foot average; 3 foot minimum

Side Street

10% lot width; 5 foot maximum

Residential Use

12 foot average; 6 foot minimum

Side Street

10% lot width; 8 foot maximum

PO District

 

District I

10 feet minimum

Side Street

15% lot width; 3 foot minimum; 10 foot maximum

District II

18 feet minimum

Side Street

15% lot width; 5 foot minimum; 15 foot maximum

MSSP District

0 feet

SC District

 

District I

0 feet

District II

35 feet, 3 story maximum

Side Street

15% lot width; 6 foot maximum

Rear Street

6 feet minimum

GC District

 

District I

0 feet

District II

35 feet, 3 story maximum

Side Street

15% lot width; 6 foot maximum

Rear Street

6 feet minimum

District VI

18 feet minimum

 

 

Table 11.2.10.015.C.2

MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACKS FROM ALLEYS—

COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS

Commercial District

Minimum Setback Distance from Alley

LC-RMD District

 

Commercial Structure

 

Rear Alley

22 feet

Side Alley

4 feet

Residential Structure (includes garage)

 

15 foot wide alley

9 feet

12 foot wide alley

12 feet

13 foot wide alley

11 feet

Second Story and Above

May encroach ½ the required first floor setback

PO District

 

District I

 

15 foot wide rear alley

9 feet

12 foot wide rear alley

12 feet

13 foot wide rear alley

11 feet

Side alley

4 feet

District II

 

Rear alley

0 feet

Side alley

0 feet

MSSP District

 

Rear Alley

22 feet

Side Alley

4 feet

SC District

 

District I

 

Rear alley

22 feet

Side alley

4 feet

District II

 

Rear alley

4 feet

Side alley

4 feet

GC District

 

District I

 

Rear alley

22 feet

Side alley

4 feet

District II

 

Rear alley

4 feet

Side alley

4 feet

District VI

 

Rear alley

4 feet

Side alley

4 feet

 

Table 11.2.10.015.C.3

BUILDING SETBACKS FROM INTERIOR LOT LINES—

COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS

Commercial District

Setback Distance from Interior Lot Lines

LC-RMD District

 

Commercial Structure

0 feet

Residential Structure (includes garage)

3 feet minimum, 10 feet maximum

PO District

 

District I

 

Side yard

10% lot width; 10 feet maximum

Rear yard

10 feet minimum

District II

 

Side yard

10% lot width; 15 feet maximum

Rear yard

18 feet minimum

MSSP District

 

Side yard

0 feet

Rear yard

10% lot width; 10 feet maximum

SC District

 

District I

 

Side yard

0 feet

Rear yard

10% lot width; 5 feet minimum, 10 feet maximum

District II

 

Side yard

0 feet

Rear yard

6 feet minimum

GC District

 

District I

 

Side yard

0 feet

Rear yard

0 feet

District II

 

Side yard

0 feet

Rear yard

6 feet minimum

District VI

 

Side yard

10% lot width; 10 feet maximum

Rear yard

18 feet minimum

 

1.     Building Setbacks and Landscaping Adjacent to Front Property Line.

a.     LC-RMD and MSSP Districts. Buildings in the LC-RMD and MSSP districts shall be located between zero and 10 feet from property lines facing a street, for at least 80% of the linear street frontage of the property. See Figure 11.2.10.015.C.1.a: Building Setback on Streets—LC-RMD and MSSP Districts. Up to 25% of the area between the property line and the building may be landscaped, subject to the following standards; all other setback areas shall be paved for public use.

i.      Landscaping along the building frontage shall not exceed a depth that prevents pedestrian access up to building windows or detracts from a pedestrian street frontage, generally 2 feet.

ii.     All landscaping shall be integrated into the building; the use of planter boxes at windows is encouraged.

b.     PO District. Buildings in the PO district shall be located between zero and 10 feet from property lines facing a street and for at least 70% of the linear street frontage of the property. See Figure 11.2.10.015.C.1.b: Building Setback on Streets—PO District. In the PO district, the area between the property line and the building shall be landscaped, except for pedestrian access walkways.

Figure 11.2.10.015.C.1.a

Building Setback on Streets—LC-RMD and MSSP Districts



Figure 11.2.10.015.C.1.b

Building Setback on Streets—PO District



D.    Minimum Yard Requirements: Building Transition Zone Adjacent to Residential Districts.

1.     Residential Setback Shall Apply. For any portion of a structure adjacent to an adjoining residential district boundary along a common side yard boundary the minimum required setbacks of the residential district shall apply.

2.     Daylight Plane Requirements. To protect privacy and minimize sunlight blockage, structures shall not intercept a 45-degree daylight plane inclined inward starting from a height of 35 feet above existing grade at the setback line.

3.     Exceptions for Parking Structures. Exceptions to the above requirements are permitted for a one-story parking or garage structure that does not exceed 10 feet in height in a side or rear yard that does not front on a street.

E.     Public Open Space. For buildings over 25,000 square feet outdoor open space which is accessible to the public during daytime hours shall be provided at a ratio of 25 square feet per 1,000 square feet of building. An open space area shall only be counted toward meeting the public open space requirement if it is possible to inscribe a rectangle within such area that has no side less than 15 feet in dimension. Open space(s) shall be visible from a public street and shall be located within 40 feet of the street-facing property line.

1.     Exceptions: Minor Use Permit Required. A minor use permit is required pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits for a public open space that is not visible from a public street and not located within 40 feet of the street-facing property line.

F.     Limitations on Location of Parking.

1.     Parking Location Generally. Commercial and mixed-use buildings shall be placed as close to the street as possible, with parking located either behind habitable space, on the interior side or rear of the site, underground, or in parking structures. See Figure 11.2.10.015.F: Limitations on Parking and Curb Cuts.

2.     Parking Location—LC-RMD, PO, and MSSP Districts. Above ground parking may not be located within 40 feet of a street facing property line in the LC-RMD, PO, and MSSP districts.

a.     Exceptions. Exceptions may be granted with the approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits for projects that do not meet this standard, including projects with parking on upper levels.

b.     Additional Findings. Additional findings for approval of a minor use permit for exceptions to this regulation are as follows:

i.      The design incorporates habitable space built close to the public sidewalk to the maximum extent feasible; and any parking within 40 feet of the street facing property line is well screened with a wall, hedge, trellis, and/or landscaping.

ii.     The site is small and constrained such that underground parking or surface parking located more than 40 feet from street frontages is not feasible.

3.     Additional Parking Facility Requirements. See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading for additional parking facility requirements.

Figure 11.2.10.015.F

Limitations on Parking and Curb Cuts



G.    Limitations on Curb Cuts.

1.     Curb cuts are limited to a maximum of 25 feet of linear frontage for property that does not exceed 10,000 square feet in area. This may be achieved through a combination of 1 or 2 separate curb cuts. See Figure 11.2.10.015.F: Limitations on Parking and Curb Cuts.

2.     Curb cuts are not allowed on lots that have alley access.

3.     Curb cuts shall be located in the location least likely to impede pedestrian circulation.

4.     Additional areas for curb cuts are allowed for properties over 10,000 square feet where it can be demonstrated that additional cuts are necessary to protect pedestrian safety or accommodate total vehicular traffic.

H.    Limitations on Location of Truck Docks, Loading, and Service Areas. Truck docks, loading, and service areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any residential district boundary or within 40 feet of a street-facing property line. These facilities shall be located at the interior side of buildings or on the rear of the site and be screened so as not to be visible from public streets. Facilities within 150 feet of a residential district shall provide screen walls and sounds attenuation to comply with a noise level of 55 CNEL at the residential district boundary. Exceptions may be granted with approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, if an alternative location for the truck dock, loading and/or service area better protects the pedestrian environment of the commercial district and/or better shields adjoining residential neighborhoods from noise and visual impacts.

1.     Exception—MSSP District. Truck docks are not permitted in the MSSP District. All loading and service shall be accomplished from either Main Street or the alleyways in such a manner as to not impede traffic to the maximum extent practicable.

I.      Building Orientation.

1.     Primary Entrance Toward Public Street. All buildings located along a public street shall be oriented toward, and have their primary entrances toward, the public street.

Exception: Minor Use Permit Required. A minor use permit is required pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits for a building located along a public street that is not oriented toward, and does not have their primary entrances toward, the public street.

2.     Interior Buildings—Entrance from Sidewalk. All buildings and dwelling units located in the interior of a site shall have entrances from sidewalks that are designed as an extension of the public sidewalk and connect to a public sidewalk

J.     Design Provisions—Main Street Specific Plan District. All buildings in the Main Street Specific Plan District shall meet the following criteria:

1.     Transparency. At sidewalk level, buildings shall be primarily transparent. A minimum of 50% of all first floor façades with street frontage shall consist of pedestrian entrances, display windows or windows affording views into retail, offices, gallery or lobby space. The building wall subject to transparency requirements shall include the portion between 3 feet and 10 feet above the sidewalk. Blank walls should be avoided and lively façades encouraged.

2.     Glass. All glass in windows and doorways shall be clear for maximizing visibility into stores. A minimal amount of neutral tinting of glass to achieve some sun control is acceptable if the glass appears essentially transparent when viewed from the outside. Opaque and reflecting glass shall not be used.

3.     Window Security Bars. Window security bars shall only be allowed if installed on the interior of the window area.

4.     Façade Set-Back. Buildings shall be located on or within 4 feet of the street property line. Exceptions shall be: (a) outdoor restaurant seating areas or (b) areas where abutting buildings are, as of the effective date of this title, set back creating in effect continuous store frontages with a wider sidewalk. In the latter case, the abutting buildings’ set back shall be considered the equivalent of the property line.

5.     Façade Continuity. Building street façades shall be continuous from lot line to lot line. Parking or loading areas shall not abut Main Street or Ocean Avenue frontages.

6.     Façade Width. Façades of interconnecting buildings should retain their individual identity. Buildings should not be remodeled or painted to give the appearance of a single building. Any street side building façade exceeding 50 feet in width shall be segmented into individual designs not exceeding 50 feet in width.

7.     Trademark Buildings. Trademark buildings used to house a franchise operation shall be prohibited.

K.     Open Space Requirements for Residential Uses. A minimum of 100 square feet of open space is required per residential unit and may be provided as common or private open space.

L.     Required Side and Rear Yards for Residential Uses. In order to provide light and air for residential units, the following minimum setbacks apply for any side or rear yard not fronting a street. When the site is adjacent to a residential district, the standards of subsection 11.2.10.015.D—Minimum Yard Requirements: Building Transition Zone Adjacent to Residential Districts, above also apply, and the project must comply with whichever standard is stricter. The length of the required setbacks must be at least the width of the window plus 3 feet on either side and never less than 10 feet:

1.     5 feet for any wall with windows.

2.     10 feet for any wall with bedroom or kitchen windows.

3.     15 feet for any wall with living room or other primary windows.

4.     The building shall be set back 1 foot for every 2 feet of height above 35 feet. See Figure 11.2.10.015.L: Required Side and Rear Yards for Residential Uses in Mixed Use Zones.

 

Figure 11.2.10.015.L

Required Side and Rear Yards for Residential Uses in Mixed Use Zones



 

M.    Consistency with Design Guidelines, Specific Plans, or Area Plans Adopted by the City Council. All projects shall be consistent with any design guidelines, planned unit developments, specific plans, or other similar documents that give specific guidance for development on private property and public improvements.

N.    Pedestrian Access to Buildings Set Back from the Street. If a minor use permit is approved for buildings in the LC/RMD or MSSP Districts set back farther than the minimum 10-foot setback requirement, the following standards shall apply:

1.     To Neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided from commercial and mixed-use projects to adjoining neighborhood residential and commercial areas. These connections shall remain accessible at all times and not be gated.

2.     To Street Network. Pedestrian access from the public right-of-way to the primary uses on the site shall occur as often as necessary to connect the on-site walkways and the public sidewalk. Landscape strips shall be crossed for pedestrian access at regular intervals. When pedestrian access to a site is in the same location as automobile entries (i.e., at driveways), the auto and pedestrian paths shall be separated from each other by a curb. The pedestrian access shall be integrated with the parking lot landscaping so as to provide a shaded walkway.

3.     To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from transit stops to building entrances with public sidewalk and pedestrian walkways. Sidewalk “bulb-outs” or bus “pull-outs” may be required at potential bus stops.

4.     Pedestrian Walkway Design.

a.     Primary pedestrian routes and access points shall be specially treated and include trees at regular intervals, adequate lighting, and paving that distinguishes pedestrian from automobile areas. A minimum 5-foot wide clear walkway is required to ensure pedestrian safety.

b.     All dedicated pedestrian routes, including those through parking areas, shall be separated from automobile routes by a curb.

O.    Projections.

1.     Projections into Required Yards. Projections into required yards are permitted subject to the following standards:

a.     Architectural Features. Architectural features, such as bay windows not exceeding 10 feet in length, cornices, eaves, canopies, and chimneys may not extend closer than 3 feet to any side lot line or more than 4 feet into any required front or rear setback.

b.     Stairs, Decks, and Balconies. Open uncovered stair landings, decks, and balconies 12 feet or less in length and less than 6 feet above grade may not extend closer than 3 feet to any side lot line or more than 4 feet into any required front or rear setback. (Ord. 1658; Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.10.020 Review of Plans.
All development is subject to review under the city’s administrative provisions, found in Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions, of this title. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.2.15 LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND OIL EXTRACTION DISTRICTS
11.2.15.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the following zoning code district designations:

LM: Light Manufacturing. To allow sites in a business park environment for moderate- to low-intensity commercial services and light manufacturing uses.

OE: Oil Extraction. To allow for oil extraction and related production storage and processing, maintenance facilities, and related operational and maintenance facilities. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.15.010 Land Use Regulations.
Table 11.2.15.010: Use Regulations—Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction Districts prescribes the land use regulations for the Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

“P”  Uses permitted as-of-right that require no discretionary review if in compliance with all standards.

“L”  Uses permitted as-of-right subject to limitations restricting location, size, or other characteristics to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. Limitations are referenced by number designations listed at the end of Table 11.2.15.010: Use Regulations—Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction Districts.

“M” Uses subject to a minor use permit following discretionary review by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“C”  Uses subject to a conditional use permit following discretionary review and public hearing by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“—” Uses that are not permitted.

The “Additional Regulations” column includes specific regulations applicable to the use classification, and specifies regulations located elsewhere in this zoning code. Use classifications are defined in Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications. Use classifications not listed in Table 11.2.15.010: Use Regulations—Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction Districts are prohibited.

 

Table 11.2.15.010

USE REGULATIONS—LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND OIL EXTRACTION DISTRICTS

 

LM

OE

Additional Regulations

Light Manufacturing Use Types

 

 

 

Contractors’ Yards

C

—

 

Drilling Operations

—

C

Limited to the extraction of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon products

Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing

P

—

 

Manufacturing, Light

P

—

 

Manufacturing, Medium

P

—

 

Maintenance Yards, Outside

C

C

See Section 11.4.05.090

Separation Facilities

—

C

Limited to oil and gas separation facilities.

Storage Tanks

M

C

 

Veterinary Hospital

M

—

 

Warehousing and Storage

P

—

 

Indoor Commercial Storage

P

—

 

Outdoor Storage

C

—

See Section 11.4.05.090

Personal Storage

C

—

 

Transportation, Communication and Utility Use Types

Wireless Communication Facilities

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Antennae and Transmission Towers

C

C

 

Satellite dishes less than 79″ in diameter

P

P

 

Recycling Facilities

 

 

 

Recycling Collection Point

C

—

 

Recycling Processing Facility

C

—

 

Reverse Vending Machines

P

—

 

Utilities, Major

M

M

See Chapter 11.4.60: Hazardous Waste Facilities

Hazardous Waste Facility

C

—

 

Utilities, Minor

 

M

M

Wireless Communication Facilities

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Agriculture Use Types

 

 

 

Nurseries

P

—

 

Other Applicable Use Regulations

 

 

 

Accessory Use

See Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities

Temporary Use

See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.15.015 Development Standards.
Table 11.2.15.015: Development Standards—Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction Districts prescribes the development standards for the light manufacturing and oil extraction districts. The “Additional Regulations” column indicates more detailed explanations or regulations that follow the table (by letter designation) or that are located elsewhere in this zoning code.

Table 11.2.15.015

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—LIGHT MANUFACTURING

AND OIL EXTRACTION DISTRICTS

 

LM

OE

Additional Regulations

Lot Size and Density

 

 

 

Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.)

10,000

—

 

Width

100

 

 

Depth

100

 

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio

5.0

 

 

Building Form and Location

 

 

 

Maximum Building Height (ft.)

 

—

 

Site less than 10 acres

35

 

 

Site more than 10 acres

75

 

 

Accessory Structure (ft)

 

—

 

Site less than 10 acres

15

 

 

Site more than 10 acres

20

 

 

Minimum Yard Requirements (ft)

 

 

 

Front Yard

15

 

 

Side Yard

 

 

 

Abutting Street

15

 

 

Interior Lot Line

15

 

 

Rear Yard

 

 

 

Abutting Street

15

 

 

Interior Lot Line

15

 

 

Landscaping and Open Space

 

 

 

Minimum lot area to be landscaped

10%

10%

 

Minimum required front yard to be landscaped

70%

—

 

Other Applicable Development Regulations

 

 

 

Accessory Use

See Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities

Temporary Use

See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations

 

A.     Use Permit Development Standards. If a use permit is required, the minor use permit or conditional use permit shall establish all final development standards.

B.     Consistency with Design Guidelines, Specific Plans, or Area Plans Adopted by the City Council. All projects shall be consistent with any design guidelines, planned unit developments, specific plans, or other similar documents that give specific guidance for development on private property and public improvements.

C.    Projections.

1.     Projections into Required Yards. Projections into required yards are permitted subject to the following standards:

a.     Architectural Features. Architectural features may not extend closer than 3 feet to any side lot line and not more than 4 feet into any required front or rear setback.

b.     Stairs, Decks, and Balconies. Open uncovered stair landings, decks and balconies 12 feet or less in length and less than 6 feet above grade may not extend closer than 3 feet to any side lot line and not more than 4 feet into any required front or rear setback.

D.    Other Applicable Development Regulations. The following regulations shall also apply:

     General Site Standards: See Chapter 11.4.10.

     Fences, Hedges, and Walls: See Chapter 11.4.15.

     Off-Street Parking and Loading: See Chapter 11.4.20.

     Sign Regulations: See Chapter 11.4.25.

     Landscaping and Buffer Yards: See Chapter 11.4.30.

     Coastal Development Permit: See Chapter 11.4.35.

     Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots: See Chapter 11.4.40. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.15.020 Review of Plans.
All development is subject to development review under the city’s administrative provisions found in Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions, of this zoning code. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.2.20 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICTS
11.2.20.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the following Zoning Code district designations:

PS: Public and Semi-Public. To allow appropriate public uses, including private utilities (electrical, gas, water, and telecommunications), schools (both private and public), and other city, county, state, or federal facilities.

RG: Recreational Golf. To allow golf courses and associated club houses, maintenance facilities, accessory concession sales, and related plant nurseries. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.20.010 Land Use Regulations.
Table 11.2.20.010: Use Regulations—Public and Semi-Public Facilities Districts, prescribes the land use regulations for the public and semi-public facilities districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

“P”  Uses permitted as-of-right that require no discretionary review if in compliance with all standards.

“L”  Uses permitted as-of-right subject to limitations restricting location, size, or other characteristics to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. Limitations are referenced by number designations listed at the end of Table 11.2.20.010: Use Regulations—Public and Semi-Public Facilities Districts.

“M” Uses subject to a minor use permit following discretionary review by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“C”  Uses subject to a conditional use permit following discretionary review and public hearing by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“—” Uses that are not permitted.

The “Additional Regulations” column includes specific regulations applicable to the use classification and specifies regulations located elsewhere in this zoning code. Use classifications are defined in Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications. Use classifications not listed in Table 11.2.20.010: Use Regulations—Public and Semi-Public Facilities Districts are prohibited.

 

Table 11.2.20.010

USE REGULATIONS—PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICTS

 

 

PS

RG

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Types

 

 

 

Single-Unit Residential

—

C

See Chapter 11.2.05 and only in conjunction with a golf course

Multiple-Unit Residential

—

C

See Chapter 11.2.05 and Section 11.4.05.110 and only in conjunction with a golf course

Public, Semi-Public, and Service Use Types

Cemeteries

C

—

 

Clubs and Lodges

C

—

Limited to facilities for nonprofit organizations and governmental buildings and uses.

Community Center

C

—

 

Community Social Service Facilities

—

—

 

Cultural Institutions

C

—

 

Day Care Centers

C

P

P - Only in conjunction with a golf course facility

Government Offices

C

—

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

P

 

Parking Facilities, Public

L-1

L-2

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading

Public Maintenance and Service Facilities

M

—

 

Public Safety Facilities

M

—

 

Commercial Use Types

 

 

 

Driving Range

—

C

Only as an accessory use, when in connection with a private golf course.

Eating and Drinking Establishments

—

 

 

Restaurants, Full Service

C

C

Only as an accessory use, when in connection with a club, lodge, or private golf course. See also Sections 11.4.05.015 and 11.4.05.090.

Restaurants, Limited Service

C

C

Restaurants, Take Out Only

C

C

Golf Course, Private

—

C

 

Clubhouse

—

C

 

Conference Facilities

—

C

 

Parking Facilities

—

P

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading

Personal Improvement Services

—

C

Only as an accessory use, when in connection with a club, lodge, or private golf course.

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Use Types

Communication Facilities

 

 

See Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Utilities, Major

C

C

 

Utilities, Minor

C

C

 

Other Applicable Use Regulations

Accessory Use

See Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Temporary Use

See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations

L-1: Limited to facilities related to, and in conjunction with, authorized public and semipublic facilities; otherwise requires a use permit.

L-2: Limited to facilities related to, and in conjunction with, authorized private golf course; otherwise requires a use permit

 

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.20.015 Development Standards.
A.     Applicable Base District.

1.     Generally. The regulations of the surrounding base district shall serve as a guide for establishing appropriate development regulations.

2.     Use Different From Base District Uses. In cases where structures or components of the proposed use are not addressed by the regulations of the base district, the director may require compliance with development standards from other base districts.

3.     Multiple Base Districts. In cases where there is more than one base district surrounding or abutting the property, the director shall determine which base district regulations shall apply.

4.     Director Determination. Applicants should request a Director Determination of the applicable base district, pursuant to Section 11.5.25.010: Zoning Conformance Review Procedures, prior to preparing an application for development. Applicants may also request an optional pre-application review as described in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures.

B.     Use Permit Development Standards. If a use permit is required, the minor use permit or conditional use permit shall establish all final development standards.

C.    Other Applicable Development Regulations. The following regulations shall also apply:

     General Site Standards: See Chapter 11.4.10.

     Fences, Hedges, and Walls: See Chapter 11.4.15.

     Off-Street Parking and Loading: See Chapter 11.4.20.

     Sign Regulations: See Chapter 11.4.25.

     Landscaping and Buffer Yards: See Chapter 11.4.30.

     Coastal Development Permit: See Chapter 11.4.35.

     Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots: See Chapter 11.4.40. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.20.020 Review of Plans.
All development is subject to development review under the city’s administrative provisions found in Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions of this zoning code. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.2.25 OPEN SPACE, PARKS, AND RECREATION DISTRICTS
11.2.25.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the following zoning code district designations:

OS-N: Open Space—Natural. To preserve publicly owned parklands, environmentally sensitive lands and habitats in their natural state. Uses permitted shall be limited to those that maintain the property in its natural state.

OS-PR: Open Space—Parks and Recreation. To provide appropriately located areas for recreation and recreational uses. Uses permitted shall be limited to those that are devoted to public recreation including parks, playgrounds, swimming centers, tennis and basketball courts, golf courses, community centers within the facilities, and accessory concession sales. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.25.010 Limits on Calculation of Parks.
No privately owned parks located in the OS-PR District shall be counted towards parklands or other publicly accessible open space areas required by the general plan. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.25.015 Land Use Regulations.
Table 11.2.25.015 prescribes the land use regulations for open space and parks districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

“P”  Uses permitted as-of-right that require no discretionary review if in compliance with all standards.

“L”  Uses permitted as-of-right subject to limitations restricting location, size, or other characteristics to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. Limitations are referenced by number designations listed at the end of Table 11.2.25.015: Use Regulations—Open Space and Parks Districts.

“M” Uses subject to a minor use permit following discretionary review by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“C”  Uses subject to a conditional use permit following discretionary review and public hearing by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

“—” Uses that are not permitted.

The “Additional Regulations” column includes specific regulations applicable to the use classification and specifies regulations located elsewhere in this zoning code. Use classifications are defined in Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications. Use classifications not listed in Table 11.2.25.015: Use Regulations—Open Space and Parks Districts are prohibited.

 

Table 11.2.25.015

USE REGULATIONS—OPEN SPACE AND PARKS DISTRICTS

 

 

OS - N

OS - PR

Additional Regulations

Public, Semi-Public, and Service Use Types

Cemeteries

—

C

 

Clubs and Lodges

—

—

 

Community Center

—

L-1

 

Cultural Institutions

—

C

See Section 11.4.05.080

Day Care Centers

—

C

See Section 11.4.05.045

Park and Recreation Facilities

L-2

P

 

Parking Facilities, Public

L-1

L-1

See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-street Parking and Loading

Public Safety Facilities

M

M

For the accommodation of operations which are essential to the maintenance of public safety, including fire stations.

Commercial Use Types

 

 

 

Commercial Recreation

 

 

 

Large-Scale (Greater Than 20,000 Sq. Ft.)

—

C

 

Small-Scale (Less Than 20,000 Sq. Ft.)

—

M

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

 

 

Restaurants, Full Service

Restaurants, Limited Service

Restaurants, Take Out Only

—

M

Limited only to concessions for snacks and beverages as an accessory use in connection with any other authorized use. See also Section 11.4.05.090: Outdoor Dining, Display and Sales Standards

Food and Beverage Sales

 

 

 

Convenience Market

General Market

—

M

Limited only to concessions for snacks and beverages as an accessory use in connection with any other authorized use.

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Use Types

Communication Facilities

—

C

See Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Utilities, Major

C

C

 

Utilities, Minor

M

M

 

Agricultural Use Types

 

 

 

Crop Raising

M

M

 

Nurseries

L-1

L-1

 

Other Use Types

 

 

 

Accessory Use

See Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities

Temporary Use

See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations

L-1: Limited to facilities related to and in conjunction with park and public recreational facilities. Otherwise, requires a conditional use permit.

L-2: Limited to trails, wildlife preserves, and open space uses that maintain the property in its natural state. No building, structure, or improvements shall be constructed in these areas, except for those required for public access, public restrooms, interpretative and educational facilities, public signage, trash containers, parking facilities, and facilities needed for protecting environmental resources and general upkeep and maintenance of the property.

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.25.020 Development Standards.
A.     Applicable Base District.

1.     Generally. The regulations of the surrounding base district shall serve as a guide for establishing appropriate development regulations.

2.     Use Different From Base District Uses. In cases where structures or components of the proposed use are not addressed by the regulations of the base district, the director may require compliance with development standards from other base districts.

3.     Multiple Base Districts. In cases where there is more than one base district surrounding or abutting the property, the director shall determine which base district regulations shall apply.

4.     Director Determination. Applicants should request a director determination of the applicable base district pursuant to Section 11.5.25.010: Zoning Conformance Review Procedures prior to preparing an application for development. Applicants may also request an optional pre-application review as described in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures.

B.     Use Permit. If a use permit is required, the minor use permit or conditional use permit shall establish all final development standards.

C.    Other Applicable Development Regulations. The following regulations shall also apply:

     General Site Standards: See Chapter 11.4.10.

     Fences, Hedges, and Walls: See Chapter 11.4.15.

     Off-Street Parking and Loading: See Chapter 11.4.20.

     Sign Regulations: See Chapter 11.4.25.

     Landscaping and Buffer Yards: See Chapter 11.4.30.

     Coastal Development Permit: See Chapter 11.4.35.

     Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots: See Chapter 11.4.40. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.2.25.025 Review of Plans.
All development is subject to development review under the city’s administrative provisions, found in Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions of this zoning code. (Ord. 1598)

Part III OVERLAY DISTRICT AND SPECIFIC PLAN REGULATIONS
Chapter 11.3.05 RESIDENTIAL CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.3.05.005 Purpose and Intent.
The city council has determined that the spirit, character, and history of the city are reflected in the historic structures located within the city, and that in the face of ever increasing pressures of modernization, locally-significant historic structures are threatened with alteration, removal, or demolition. Locally-significant historic structures are those residential structures constructed prior to 1925. This part is enacted on the basis of public policy that supports the preservation of locally-significant residential structures within the city and the need to provide incentives for owners to continue to occupy and maintain locally-significant historic structures as “bed and breakfast” facilities within appropriate areas of the city.

These locally-significant historic structures represent the city’s unique historical, social and cultural foundations and should be preserved as living parts of community life and development in order to build a greater understanding of the city’s past and give future generations the opportunity to appreciate, understand and enjoy the city’s remaining historic heritage.

This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by:

A.     Integrating the preservation of locally-significant historic structures into the public and private land use management and development process at appropriate locations within the city.

B.     Encouraging preservation and complimentary new development within the existing “Old Town” area of the city.

C.    Preserving diverse architectural styles reflecting the city’s history and encouraging a more livable urban environment.

D.    Stabilizing neighborhoods through the preservation of locally-significant historic structures.

E.     Encouraging the rehabilitation and continued use of existing structures, rather than their demolition, as bed and breakfast facilities at appropriate locations within the city.

F.     Preserving, protecting, and enhancing streetscapes and locally-significant historic structures. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.05.010 Permitted Uses.
A.     Any use permitted or conditionally permitted in the underlying base district.

B.     The following use subject to issuance of a conditional use permit and approval of a site development plan: bed and breakfast facility. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.05.015 General Provisions.
A.     Base District Uses. The uses specified in Section 11.3.05.010.A: Permitted Uses are permitted in the Residential Conservation Overlay Zone subject to the standards enumerated in the underlying base district zoning provisions.

B.     Overlay Zone Use. The uses specified in Section 11.3.05.010.B are permitted in the Residential Conservation Overlay District subject to compliance with the following standards:

1.     Structure Qualifications. A residential structure may qualify for such use if it meets either of the following standards:

a.     Is a residential structure constructed prior to 1925.

b.     Is a residential structure that has been reconstructed to replicate a previously existing residential structure that was constructed prior to 1925 on the same lot.

2.     Minimum Lot Size. The subject property shall have a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.

3.     Owner/Operator Requirement. The recorded owner of the property shall be the operator of the bed and breakfast facility and reside on the premises. No resident managers shall be allowed to operate a bed and breakfast facility.

4.     Maximum Stay. The maximum stay for any occupants of a bed and breakfast facility shall be 10 consecutive days within a 30-day period.

5.     Maximum Number of Guestrooms. The maximum number of guestrooms shall not exceed 6 for any separate bed and breakfast structure.

6.     Check-In/Check-Out Hours. Guests shall check in and out only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

7.     Single Kitchen on Property. There shall be only one kitchen within each separate structure. The kitchen shall not be remodeled into a commercial kitchen. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in the guestrooms.

8.     Food Service Restricted. Breakfast shall be served to registered overnight lodgers only. No other meals shall be served. Incidental food and beverage service to registered overnight lodgers is permitted.

9.     Apartments Prohibited. Bed and breakfast facilities shall not have a separate apartment on the subject property.

10.   Interior Stairways Required. There shall only be interior stairways to serve all habitable living spaces within the entire dwelling, including any basement or attic areas, except as may be approved through the conditional use permit process pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits to preserve the architectural integrity of an existing structure.

11.   Record Keeping. Each bed and breakfast facility operator shall keep accurate financial records and a current guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests. Upon reasonable notice such information shall be available for examination by city officials and auditors.

12.   California Existing Building Code. Any exterior alteration made to a bed and breakfast facility for the rehabilitation, restoration, or relocation of such structure shall be made according to the current California Existing Building Code.

13.   Additional Housing Units Prohibited. No bed and breakfast facility shall be located in an attached dwelling unless said interior is modified to eliminate any attached dwelling units, exclusive of the resident operator living unit.

14.   Allowable Area for Rental Units. Bedroom rental units shall not occupy more than 60% of the living space of the subject structure.

15.   Required Number of Parking Spaces. A minimum of 1 off-street parking space shall be provided for each guestroom, and a minimum of 1 off-street parking space shall be provided for the resident owner.

16.   Required Type and Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking shall be provided within a garage for the owner’s unit only; guest parking spaces may be provided in a carport, driveway, or open parking area.

a.     Where feasible, parking areas shall be provided at the rear or side of the property, but in no case shall parking be provided within the established front yard.

b.     When unenclosed parking spaces are located next to a residence, the unenclosed parking spaces shall be screened and maintained with dense planting or other appropriate screening to buffer the parking area from abutting properties.

c.     No more than 25% of said required parking may be located upon a separate parcel as specified in Section 11.4.20.025.B: Property on Which Parking and Loading Must be Provided. Said parking to be provided on a separate parcel shall require conditional use permit approval, including a parking management plan, prior to any utilization of said parking areas. Upon reasonable notice such off-site parking availability may be confirmed by visual inspection by city officials.

d.     The required on-site parking requirements for a bed and breakfast facility may be met by the provision of additional on-street parking spaces as a result of the closure of existing curb cuts, not to exceed a maximum of 1 space.

17.   Sign Standards. Signage shall be limited to a single sign affixed to the structure not exceeding 6 square feet in area identifying the name of the establishment. No internally illuminated or luminous tube signs shall be permitted. External lighting is permitted and shall be turned off no later than 10:30 p.m.

18.   Incidental Sales of Goods and Services. Incidental sales of goods and services shall be permitted, but shall be limited to registered guests only.

19.   Private Reception Standards. No receptions, private parties, or similar activities for which a fee is paid shall be permitted.

20.   Compliance with Other Agency Requirements. All requirements of the Orange County Fire Authority and Orange County Health Department shall be met, except as may be modified in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 12 of this subsection.

21.   Compliance with Municipal Code Provisions. Bed and breakfast facilities shall be subject to the same use and occupancy taxes levied for motels and hotels within Title 4: Revenue and Finance, and Title 5: Business Licenses and Regulations of the Seal Beach Municipal Code.

22.   Americans with Disabilities Act. All structures shall fully comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

23.   Property Tax Abatements Prohibited. The property owner agrees to not seek any property tax abatements that may be applicable in federal, state, or local law.

24.   Addition to Structure Limitations. Any addition to a structure shall constitute no more than 50% of the total square footage of the original floor plan as provided by as-built plans of the existing structure, verified through review of site development plans and field inspections.

25.   Conversion to Multifamily Dwelling Prohibited. A bed and breakfast facility shall not be permitted to be converted to a multifamily dwelling as defined in Chapter 11.6.05: Terms and Definitions. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.05.020 Development Standards.
The RC-O District includes additional regulations and uses over and above the base zoning of a particular property to encourage preservation of existing locally-significant residential structures. To permit orderly development and preservation of these locally-significant residential structures, the following standards shall apply:

A.     Relocated Structures. Relocated structures shall comply with current open space, bulk, and yard standards of the base zone.

B.     Exception. Relocated structures may be permitted without a variance approval for side yard setbacks as long as a minimum 3-foot side yard setback is maintained and the deviation does not exceed 25% of the size of the setback required by the base zoning provision. Relocated structures exceeding the height and main building envelope requirements shall be permitted without modification to the structure in order to preserve the historical significance and architectural integrity of the structure. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.05.025 Roof-Mounted Mechanical Equipment.
Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be architecturally screened and approved by the conditional use permit. See Section 11.4.10.015: Mechanical Equipment Screening. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.05.030 Adoption of RC-O Overlay District.
The adoption of the RC-O Overlay District in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.5.15: Legislative Actions and Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures of this title to a specific property shall be required before any property in the RC-O District may be developed or used for the purpose set forth in Section 11.3.05.010: Permitted Uses, of this chapter. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.3.10 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (–PD)
11.3.10.005 Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Development Overlay District (–PD) is to provide for detailed and substantial review of development that warrants special review and deviations from underlying development standards. This overlay district is also intended to provide opportunities for creative development approaches that will achieve superior design solutions to that which would be possible if the project were built in full compliance with the required standards of the base district, and will not cause a significant adverse impact on residences to the side, rear, or directly across a street with respect to solar access, privacy and compatibility. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.10.010 Procedure.
The approval of a planned development plan, and amendment thereto and the corresponding amendment to the official zoning map to create or amend the “–PD” Planned Development Overlay District are legislative acts. See also Chapter 11.5.15: Legislative Actions.

A.     Land Use and Density Regulations. The land use and density requirements within a –PD Planned Development Overlay District shall be those of the underlying base district.

B.     Process. An application for a planned development and any amendment to the plan shall be processed in accordance with the procedure for conditional use permits set forth in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures and Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. Any corresponding amendment to the official zoning map shall be processed concurrently in accordance with the procedure for zone changes set forth in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures and Chapter 11.5.15: Legislative Actions.

C.    Modification of Standards. The city council may approve a planned development plan that deviates from the minimum lot area, yard requirements, building heights, and other physical development standards defined in the base district, while ensuring compliance with the land use and density requirements of the base district. Physical development standards may be modified if the planned development plan includes examples of superior community design, environmental preservation and/or public benefit amenities, and the city council makes the findings required by Section 11.3.10.020: Required Findings. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.10.015 Additional Requirements.
A.     Required Pre-Application Study Session. Prior to submitting an application for a planned development plan an applicant proposing a project over 1 acre in gross area or that includes publicly-owned land shall schedule a pre-application study session with the planning commission to discuss the general acceptability of the project proposal, issues that need to be addressed, and the need, if any, for any interagency coordination. Such preliminary consultations shall be considered advisory in nature and shall not constitute a recommendation of approval.

B.     Supplemental Application Material. The applicant shall submit additional information as required by the director including the following items:

1.     Project Boundaries. A map showing the proposed project boundaries, the perimeter of the ownership, location and dimensions of any existing property lines and easements within the site, the location of buildings, roads, parking, trees and open areas designated for retention or removal, and the locations and capacities of existing utilities in the vicinity of the site and any proposed extensions to the site. A tentative map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property. Any tentative map shall comply with the provisions of Title 10: Subdivisions; Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing.

2.     Topographic Map. A topographic map showing the existing and proposed changes in topography of the site with contours at not more than 2-foot intervals, including the degree of land disturbance, the location of drainage channels or water courses, and the direction of drainage flow.

3.     Site Plan. A site plan showing the precise dimensions and locations of proposed structures, buildings, streets, parking, yards, pathways, open spaces, and other public or private facilities. The site plan shall also indicate all proposed uses or activities to be conducted on the site, with related floor area or calculations of site area to be devoted to such uses.

4.     Architectural Concepts. Plans showing architectural concepts of the proposed building including heights, design, exterior materials of proposed buildings, other structures, fencing, and signage.

5.     Development Schedule. A preliminary development schedule, indicating the sequence and timing of development and the priorities of any phased development.

6.     Open Space Plan. A proposed open space plan including landscape concept and type of plant materials, recreation area, parking, service and other public area used in common on the property, and a description of intended improvements to the open space areas of the proposed planned development.

7.     Preliminary Engineering Plans. Preliminary engineering plans showing site grading, and amount of cut and fill, including finished grades, and proposed water retention/drainage facilities.

8.     Statement Regarding Compliance with Findings. Written statement and illustrations to demonstrate how the planned development will fulfill the intent of the zoning code and the general plan, meet the required findings and provide superior community design, environmental preservation, and/or public benefit amenities.

9.     Other Information. Any other information deemed necessary by the director to ascertain if the project meets the required findings for a planned development plan. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.10.020 Required Findings.
The city shall approve a –PD Overlay District zoning map amendment and planned development plan only if all of the following findings are made:

A.     The project meets all of the findings required for a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings and the finding that the approved plan is consistent with the purposes of the district where it is located and conforms in all significant respects with the general plan and any specific plan.

B.     Development within the –PD Overlay District is demonstratively superior to the development that could occur under the standards applicable to the underlying base district and will achieve superior community design, environmental preservation, and/or substantial public benefit. In making this determination, the following factors shall be considered:

1.     Appropriateness of the use(s) at the proposed location.

2.     The mix of uses, housing types, and housing price levels.

3.     Provision of units affordable to persons and families of low and moderate income or to lower income households.

4.     Provision of infrastructure improvements.

5.     Provision of open space.

6.     Compatibility of uses within the development area.

7.     Quality of design, and adequacy of light and air to the interior spaces of the buildings.

8.     Overall contribution to the enhancement of neighborhood character and the environment of Seal Beach in the long term.

9.     Creativity in design and use of land. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.10.025 Conditions of Approval.
In approving a planned development plan, the city may impose any reasonable conditions to:

A.     Ensure that the proposal conforms in all significant respects with the Seal Beach General Plan and with any other applicable specific plans.

B.     Achieve the general purposes of this zoning code or the specific purpose of the zoning district in which the project is located.

C.    Achieve the findings for a planned development listed in Section 11.3.10.020: Required Findings.

D.    Mitigate any potentially significant impacts. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.10.030 Effective Date, Extensions, and Modifications.
Planned development plans become effective on the day the ordinance adopting the plan becomes effective. The code provisions relating to amendments and modifications in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures applicable to specific plans apply to planned development plans subject to the following limitations:

A.     Tentative Map. Where a tentative map has been approved in conjunction with a –PD Overlay District project, the planned development plan shall expire upon the expiration of the tentative map pursuant to the provisions of Title 10: Subdivisions.

B.     Phased Development. In the event that the city approves phased development, the planned development plan shall remain in effect so long as not more than 1 year lapses between the end of a phase and the beginning of the next phase. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.3.15 COMMERCIAL/PARK OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.3.15.005 Conditional Use Permit Required.
An applicant may apply for a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits and Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures to develop hotel and/or service commercial uses on property within the Commercial/Park Overlay District. Seventy percent of any parcel within this zone shall be devoted to park uses with unrestricted access to the public. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.3.20 COASTAL ZONE OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 11.3.25 SPECIFIC PLAN REGULATION
11.3.25.005 Permitted Uses.
All property in the Specific Plan Regulation (SPR) Zone shall be used only for the purposes permitted by the general plan and the specific plan adopted for such property. The adoption of a specific plan in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.5.15 (Legislative Actions) of this title shall be required before any property in the SPR Zone may be developed or used for any purpose. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.3.25.010 General Provisions.
A.     Such specific plan shall be consistent with and implement the general plan. A specific plan shall provide for the type, location and density of land uses, the development standards and regulations, including but not limited to height, setback, landscaping, and parking requirements, the purpose, type, location and extent of public improvements and facilities, and any other matters considered appropriate or necessary.

B.     With respect to any property for which a specific plan has been adopted, no tentative tract map or tentative parcel map may be approved nor may any permit license or other entitlement for use be granted or issued unless such map, permit, license or other entitlement for use is consistent with such specific plan.

C.    The city council, after adopting a specific plan, may impose a specific plan fee upon persons seeking governmental approvals which are required to be consistent with the specific plan. The fees shall be established so that in the aggregate, such fees (as estimated) defray, but do not exceed the cost of preparation, adoption, and administration of the specific plan, including costs incurred pursuant to Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code. As nearly as can be estimated, the fee charged shall be a prorated amount in accordance with the applicant’s relative benefit derived from the specific plan. In addition, the department of development services may require a person who requests adoption or amendment of a specific plan to deposit a sum of money in an amount equal to the estimated cost of preparing the plan or amendment by the department of development services. (Ord. 1598)

Part IV REGULATIONS APPLYING IN SOME OR ALL DISTRICTS
Chapter 11.4.05 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
11.4.05.005 Applicability.
This chapter establishes standards applicable to specific uses listed in Part II: Base Districts, that are in addition to standards listed in this zoning code including, but not limited to, development standards in the base zoning districts, Chapter 11.4.10: General Site Standards, Chapter 11.4.15: Fences, Hedges and Walls, Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading, Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations, Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards, and Chapter 11.4.35: Coastal Development Permit. Where a standard of this chapter conflicts with another provision of this zoning code, the stricter standard shall apply. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.010 Accessory Business Uses and Activities.
This section establishes minimum standards for the development and operation of accessory manufacturing, and accessory retail sales and services that are located within, and incidental to a primary commercial use. Examples of these uses include the manufacture of small products in support of an on-site retail business that is the primary use of the site, food service businesses within office complexes, pharmacies and gift shops within hospitals, and other similar uses. The intent of these standards is to provide for accessory business activities that will support the primary use, but will not supplant the dominance of the primary use.

A.     Relationship to Primary Use.

1.     Exterior Appearance. Accessory uses are allowed, provided there will be only minor external evidence of the accessory commercial activity, so that the appearance of the site is defined by the primary use.

2.     Public Access. Public access to the accessory use shall only be from within the structure which houses the primary use.

3.     Floor Area Limitation. The floor area of the accessory use shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or 20% of the total floor area of the primary use, whichever is less.

B.     Commercial Zoning Districts.

1.     Restaurants and retail sales are allowed in the commercial zoning districts incidental and accessory to offices, hotels, hospitals, and other medical facilities, to serve the needs of employees and guests, and pharmacies are allowed within hospitals and other medical facilities. A restaurant that is proposed to serve other than office, hotel, hospital or medical facility guests shall require separate approval as a restaurant in compliance with Section 11.4.05.120: Restaurant—Alcohol Sales.

2.     Light assembly or manufacturing is allowed in the commercial zoning districts for the creation or manufacture of small clothing, art and craft products (e.g., apparel, jewelry, sculpture), accessory to on-site retail sales. The use of toxic or otherwise hazardous chemicals or materials shall comply with all state and federal requirements.

C.    Criteria for Approval. An accessory manufacturing, retail, or service use shall be allowed only where the director first determines that the use will not result in harm to adjoining existing or potential residential use due to excessive noise, traffic, or other adverse effects generated by the accessory use.

D.    Allowable Incidental Business Activities.

1.     Allowed Uses. The following activities with or without using amplified equipment or instruments are allowed when deemed incidental to a legally established commercial business, when approved at the time of issuance of the business license, and when conducted in compliance with the operational standards identified in paragraph 3.a of this subsection:

a.     Book or poetry readings in a cafe, restaurant, or bar;

b.     Fashion show in a cafe, restaurant, or bar;

c.     Parlor games or party games in a cafe, restaurant, or bar;.

d.     Live, amplified or unamplified tableside entertainment performed by no more than 4 individuals (including, but not limited to, a singer, musician, instrumentalist, magician, balloon entertainer, face painter or comedian) in a retail store, gallery, restaurant, café, or any other business or use; and

e.     Other uses as determined by the director to be of the same general character as those listed above, and not objectionable or detrimental to surrounding properties and the neighborhood.

2.     Prohibited Uses. The following entertainment activities are prohibited as incidental business activities:

a.     Dancing;

b.     Karaoke; and

c.     Performances by singers, musicians, comedians, actors, magicians, or other entertainers of any kind, from a stage.

3.     Compliance with Zoning and Land Use Approvals. All incidental business activities shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the zone in which they are located, and in compliance with all conditions and provisions of any conditional use permit or other permit, approval or entitlement issued for the subject property, and all other applicable requirements of this code.

a.     Compliance with Operational Standards. In order to ensure that the entertainment shall be only accessory and incidental to the primary use, and that the entertainment does not interfere with any other business, use or activity in surrounding areas, all incidental business activities shall comply with all of the following operational standards:

i.      Duration: Expiration Date. The approval of incidental business activities shall expire on the same date that the business license expires. No incidental business activities shall be conducted at any business that does not have a valid business license.

ii.     Location. The incidental business activities shall take place only within the enclosed interior area of the business or other use, and only during the primary business activity without replacing the primary business activity at any time.

iii.     Hours of Operation. Except as otherwise provided in any conditional use permit or other land use entitlement, all incidental business activities shall be limited to the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 9:45 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 10:45 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.

iv.    Outside Promoters. The incidental business activities shall be part of the primary business use and shall not be sponsored by an outside promoter or other outside person, entity, or organization; however, the entertainment may benefit a non-profit organization directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts.

v.     Admission Charges. There shall not be admission charges to enter the business or any other cover charges based on the incidental business activities.

vi.    Noise Impacts. All incidental business activities shall comply with Section 11.4.10.020.B: Noise and all sound and noise requirements set forth in this chapter.

vii.    Traffic and Parking. The incidental business activities shall not generate enough additional traffic to warrant the need for additional off-street parking on a regular basis.

viii.   Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Areas: Public Nuisance. The incidental business activities shall not cause any additional adverse impacts on neighboring residential or commercial property owners or tenants, including, but not limited to, loitering, consumption of alcoholic beverages in any parking lot or on any other private or public property, public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, littering, obstruction of free access on any public sidewalk or public street, fighting, or any other conduct that constitutes a public nuisance.

ix.    Freedom of Speech. No condition may be imposed pursuant to this chapter that suppresses or regulates expression in any manner contrary to law.

x.     Stage. No stage shall be allowed.

xi.    Occupancy Limit. The occupancy limit established for the business or other use shall be clearly posted at the front and rear of the interior building and shall not be violated at any time.

xii.    Display of Conditions. A copy of the approval of the incidental business activities and all restrictions and conditions of approval shall be kept on the premises at all times and made available to any code enforcement officer, city peace officer or other city employee upon request. The approval shall also be displayed along the front window facing the public right­of-way.

xiii    Acceptance of Conditions. Approval of incidental business activities shall not be effective for any purpose until the applicant signs and returns a notarized “City Acceptance of Conditions” form confirming their agreement to abide by all provisions of this section.

xiv.   Maximum Noise Level Near Residentially Zoned Property. Live and amplified music shall not exceed a maximum noise level Lmax of 50 dBA when measured at any residentially-zoned property exterior location (front, side and rear yard, property line, patio and or balcony).

b.     Land Use Permits or Approvals—Compliance Required. Approval of incidental business activities pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute approval or modification of any conditional use permit, variance or other land use permit, entitlement or approval required under Title 11 or any other provision of this Code. At all times the business operator and property owner shall comply with all applicable requirements and conditions of any other permit, entitlement or approval applicable to the property and/or use, and all other requirements of this Code in conducting the incidental business activities in the building or other premises. Violation of any provision of this section, any other permit, entitlement, or approval, or any provision of the Code, may result in imposition of an administrative citation, revocation and/or nonrenewal of the city’s approval of incidental business activities, or such other civil and criminal remedies as provided in this Code. No business license shall be issued which includes incidental business activities except upon written business license zoning clearance from the director confirming that incidental business activities are allowed by the underlying zoning and any applicable conditional use permit, variance or other land use permit, entitlement or approval issued under this title.

c.     Approval Not Transferable. The city’s approval of incidental business activities pursuant to this chapter is not transferable to any other person, use, building, premises, or location. (Ord. 1659; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.015 Alcoholic Beverage Establishments.
A.     Permit Requirement. Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required for all alcoholic beverage establishments.

B.     Compliance with City Council Policy. The conditional use permit shall include all appropriate conditions of City Council Policy 600-1: Standard Conditions for Alcohol Related Land Uses.

C.    Display of Permit Required. The conditional use permit issued for the alcoholic beverage establishment and a copy of the conditions of approval for the permit shall be displayed on the premises of the establishment in a place where it may readily be viewed by any member of the general public.

D.    Considerations for Approval of a Conditional Use Permit. In making the findings required for the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, the following additional issues shall also be considered.

1.     Undue Concentration. Whether the proposed use will result in an undue concentration of establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages, pursuant to the regulations of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC).

2.     Distance to Sensitive Land Uses. The distance of the proposed use from the following:

a.     Residential uses;

b.     Religious facilities, schools, libraries, public parks and playgrounds, and other similar uses; and

c.     Other establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages.

3.     Noise Levels. Whether the noise levels generated by the operation of the establishment would exceed the level of background noise normally found in the area or would otherwise be intrusive.

E.     Nonconforming Uses and Structures. Alcoholic beverage retail establishments that were legally operating prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1348, January 27, 1992, may continue to operate as nonconforming uses in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots. In addition to those provisions, nonconforming establishments shall be required to apply for a conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, if any of the following occur:

1.     The existing establishment requests permission from the ABC to allow the serving of distilled spirits in addition to its original license to sell or serve beer and wine only;

2.     The establishment’s liquor license is revoked;

3.     The establishment’s liquor license is suspended for more than 45 days by the ABC; or

4.     There is a proposed expansion of the area within the establishment that is designated for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.020 Animal Keeping.
Where allowed by Part II: Base District Regulations, animal keeping shall comply with the regulations of this section.

A.     Type and Number of Animals Allowed. The keeping of animals and birds for non-commercial purposes shall be limited to the following number of animals. Any animal or number of animals other than the following shall be prohibited.

1.     Four or less weaned cats and dogs in any combination;

2.     Six parakeets, parrots, canaries, or similar birds kept indoors; and

3.     Six reptiles (turtles, lizards or snakes and the like).

B.     Reptile Location Requirements. Reptiles maintained on a property out of doors shall be kept in a fully enclosed structure located a minimum distance of 10 feet from any lot line, 50 feet from any dwelling unit, and 100 feet from any school, hospital, or similar institution. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.025 Assisted Living Facilities.
A.     Applicability. The following criteria apply to all assisted living facilities, including congregate care, board and care, and skilled nursing facilities. Congregate care housing facilities are multi-unit residential projects reserved for senior citizens, where each dwelling unit has individual living, sleeping, and bathing facilities, but where common facilities are typically provided for meals and recreation. See also Section 11.4.05.125: Senior Citizen Apartments and Independent Living Facilities.

B.     Permit Requirement. Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required to construct and operate assisted living facilities, including congregate care, board and care, and skilled nursing facilities.

C.    General Standards. All assisted living facilities are subject to the following standards:

1.     Compatibility with Surrounding Properties. The use does not create impacts on surrounding properties and neighborhoods that are more significant than would be caused by standard multi-unit rental projects.

2.     Provision of Common Areas. Common indoor business, recreational, and social activity areas of a number, size, and scale consistent with the number of living units shall be provided, with not less than 5% of the total indoor floor area devoted to educational, recreational, and social facilities (e.g., library, multi-purpose common room, recreation room, TV room).

3.     Laundry Facilities. Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility, consistent with the number of living units.

4.     Residency Limitations. Residents shall be limited to those in need of an assisted living environment, together with a spouse or partner in each unit.

5.     Conversion to Other Residential Living Type. If a congregate care/assisted living facility approved in compliance with this section is changed to another use (for example, the project converts to a conventional unrestricted multi-unit project), the project shall be modified to meet all applicable standards of this zoning code.

6.     Required Safety Equipment. Indoor common areas and living units shall be provided with necessary safety equipment (e.g., safety bars), as well as emergency signal/intercom systems, subject to the approval of the director and building official.

7.     Security Lighting. Adequate internal and external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The external lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting.

8.     Premises Security. The entire project shall be designed to provide maximum security for residents, guests, and employees.

9.     Allowable Common Facilities. The project may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents:

a.     Beauty and barber shop;

b.     Central cooking and dining rooms (may also be used by guests);

c.     Exercise rooms; and

d.     Small scale drug store and/or medical facility as an ancillary use only.

10.   Transit Facilities. Transit facilities shall be provided as follows:

a.     A bus turnout and shelter along the street frontage shall be provided if the facility is on an established bus route, and is coordinated with the transit authority.

b.     Facilities with 50 or more dwelling units shall provide private dial-a-ride transportation shuttles, with the exact number and schedule to be determined by the review authority. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.030 Automated Teller Machines (ATMs).
A.     Permit Requirement. Minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required to establish an ATM on the exterior of a structure.

B.     Location Requirements. ATMs proposed on the exterior of structures shall be:

1.     Set back from an adjacent street curb by a minimum of 8 feet;

2.     Located a minimum of 30 feet from any property line corner at a street intersection;

3.     Located to not eliminate or substantially reduce any landscaped areas;

4.     Drive-through access to an ATM from a vehicle shall comply with Section 11.4.05.050: Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities; and

5.     Be approved by the director or the city engineer to ensure safety and adequate circulation area around the ATM.

C.    Architectural Design. All construction and modifications to the exterior of the structure pertaining to the installation of an ATM shall be completed in a manner consistent with the architectural design of the structure.

D.    Trash Disposal. Each exterior ATM shall be provided with a receptacle sufficient in size and design to safely accommodate daily trash and any smoking materials discarded by users of the ATM.

E.     Lighting. Each exterior ATM shall be provided with security lighting in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting, or state law, whichever is most restrictive. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.035 Automobile Service Station.
Requirements for the establishment, reconstruction, and operation of automobile service stations shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

A.     Permit Requirement. The establishment of a new service station, or the reconstruction, enlargement or alteration of an established service station may be approved only through the granting of a conditional use permit. In addition to all other application materials required for the conditional use permit the applicant shall also provide a photo-simulation showing the new or remodeled service station facilities in place on the project site, together with its relationship to existing surrounding land uses. The commission shall make the following findings in addition to the findings required by Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits:

1.     The proposed use will not substantially increase vehicular traffic on any public rights-of-way in the immediate vicinity, especially those serving residential uses;

2.     The proposed use will not create increased traffic hazards to pedestrians when located near a religious institution, school, theater, or other place of assembly; and

3.     The products offered for sale will be displayed with consideration to their visual impacts.

B.     Automobile Service Station Development and Operational Standards. New and reconstructed service stations shall comply with the following standards:

1.     Major Intersections. Service stations shall be allowed only at the intersections of either 2 major streets or at the intersections of a major street and a primary, secondary or minor street.

2.     Maximum Number of Stations at an Intersection. A maximum of 2 service stations shall be allowed at an intersection.

3.     Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area for automobile stations shall be 22,500 square feet.

4.     Minimum Frontage. The minimum frontage shall be 150 feet on each street.

5.     Minimum Street Setbacks. Structures shall be set back at least 30 feet from a street property line.

6.     Minimum Side and Rear Setbacks Adjacent to Residential Districts. Structures shall be set back at least 30 feet from the side and rear property lines where the adjoining parcels are located in a residential zoning district.

7.     Minimum Side and Rear Setbacks Adjacent to Nonresidential Districts. The setback shall be determined by the conditional use permit when structures are adjacent to nonresidential zoning districts.

8.     Vehicular Access Points. There shall be no more than 2 vehicular access points to/from each public right-of-way;

9.     Distance between Curb Cuts. There shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet of full height curb between curb cuts along a public right-of-way.

10.   Location of Driveways. Driveways shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the end of a curb corner; closer than 25 feet to a common property line when adjacent to a residential district; and at a location approved by the reviewing authority when the adjoining property is located in a commercial or industrial district.

11.   Driveway Widths. The width of a driveway shall not exceed 25 feet, measured at the sidewalk.

12.   Parking. On-site parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one space for each pump island; plus one space for each service bay; and if a convenience market is provided, additional parking to serve the convenience market shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading.

13.   Pump Islands.

a.     Pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any residential property line to the nearest edge of the pump island. A canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to 12 feet within this distance.

b.     Pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any nonresidential property line to the nearest edge of the pump island. A canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to 12 feet within this distance, but no closer than 8 feet to the property line.

c.     When the property line is a public right-of-way line, an area of at least 4 feet in width along the line shall be landscaped in compliance with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

14.   Cashier Location. The cashier location shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands and the vehicles parked adjacent to the islands.

15.   Canopies. Canopy height shall be limited to a maximum of 18 feet.

16.   Signs. All on-site signs shall be in compliance with Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

17.   Landscaping. Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of 15% of the service station site area, exclusive of required setbacks, and shall be provided and permanently maintained in compliance with the following regulations, as well as those identified in Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards:

a.     A minimum 4-foot wide, inside dimension, and 6-inch high curbed landscaped planter area shall be provided along the street property lines, except for openings to facilitate vehicular circulation, and along side and rear property lines adjoining residentially zoned properties;

b.     Where the planter area(s) is adjoining a peripheral wall, trees planted not more than 16 feet apart shall be included in the planter area(s) which shall be a minimum of 6 feet wide, inside dimension;

c.     An on-site planter area of not less than 200 square feet shall be provided at the corner of the two intersecting streets. Landscaping shall not exceed a height of 42 inches at this location;

d.     A minimum of 50 square feet of planter area shall be located along those portions of the main structure fronting on public rights-of-way;

e.     Additional landscaping may be required to screen the service station from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties, in compliance with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards; and

f.      Street trees shall be planted as approved by the city engineer.

18.   Exterior Lighting.

a.     All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed within the roof canopy to ensure that all light is directed away from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties.

b.     Lighting shall not:

i.      Be of a high intensity to cause a traffic hazard;

ii.     Be used as an advertising element; or

iii.     Adversely affect adjoining properties, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting.

19.   Service Bays.

a.     Openings of service bays shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining public rights-of-way and properties.

b.     Service bay doors shall not directly face an existing residential development or zoning district.

20.   Peripheral Wall.

a.     Where a service station adjoins property in a residential zoning district, a solid decorative masonry wall shall be constructed along the common property line. The height of the wall, which shall be between 8 and 10 feet in height, shall be measured from the finished grade of the residential property. Colors, design, materials, and textures of the wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjoining properties and subject to the approval of the director.

b.     When the wall reaches the established front or street side setback line of a residentially zoned parcel adjoining the service station, the height of the wall shall be between 36 and 42 inches, inclusive.

c.     Where a service station adjoins property in a commercial zoning district, the provision of peripheral walls shall be determined through the conditional use permit approval.

21.   Location of Activities. All activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within the enclosed service station structure(s), except as follows:

a.     The dispensing of petroleum products, air, and water from pump islands;

b.     The provision of emergency service of a minor nature;

c.     The sale of items via vending machines which may only be placed next to the main structure in a designated area not to exceed 32 square feet and which shall be roofed and screened from public view;

d.     The display of allowed automotive merchandise on each pump island, provided that the aggregate display area on each island shall not exceed 12 square feet and that the products shall be located in a specially designed enclosed case; and

e.     Motor vehicle products displayed along the front of the structure shall be within 36 inches of the structure, and limited to 5 feet in height and not more than 5 feet in length.

22.   Vehicle Parking.

a.     Outside storage of motor vehicles is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, outside storage shall mean the parking of a motor vehicle in an unenclosed area of the service station for longer than 24 hours, unless the vehicle is in the process of being serviced, in which case it may be parked for a maximum period of 72 hours.

b.     Vehicles shall not be parked on alleys, driveways, parkways, or sidewalks.

c.     Vehicles shall not be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering same for sale.

d.     Parking shall be located and screened to minimize visibility of parked vehicles from adjoining public rights-of-way.

e.     Vehicles shall not be parked on any public street or public right of way in a commercial area for a period greater than 72 hours and must abide by all posted rules and regulations.

f.      Vehicles shall not be parked on any public street in a noncommercial area.

23.   Tow Services. Tow service operations may only be conducted upon the approval of a conditional use permit and in compliance with all appropriate conditions of the approved conditional use permit, which shall establish conditions for operations to not create a public nuisance for adjoining properties. Conditions may be imposed regarding the following operations:

a.     Hours for drop-off of towed vehicles;

b.     Location for storage of any towed vehicles; and

c.     Allowable routes for tow service vehicle operations between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

24.   Sale of Beer and Wine. No alcohol shall be sold at an automobile service station convenience market, except as follows:

a.     The service station convenience market shall comply with all requirements for off-sale retail applications in City Council Policy 600-1: Standard Conditions for Alcohol Related Land Uses, including but not limited to the maximum proximity to residences, the proscription of an undue concentration of alcohol uses, and the prohibition on onsite consumption; and the conditional use permit shall contain the applicable Standard Conditions for Alcohol Related Land Uses, pursuant to City Council Policy 600-1.

b.     The service station convenience market shall be located in a zone permitting an automobile service station use.

c.     The business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a park, religious institution or school, whether such use is within or outside of the city.

d.     The distances specified in this section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard for intervening structures, from the property line of the lot containing the service station convenience market to the property line of the lot containing the residence, park, religious institution, school, or business.

e.     The determination on whether to permit the sale of beer and wine at a service station convenience market shall be supported by written findings, based on substantial evidence in view of the whole record.

25.   Site Maintenance.

a.     Used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or permanently disabled junked or wrecked vehicles shall not be located outside of the main structure.

b.     A waste collection and disposal storage area, completely enclosed with a masonry wall not less than 6 feet high with a solid gated opening, and large enough to accommodate standard-sized commercial trash bins, shall be located on the rear portion of the property in a manner which is accessible to refuse collection vehicles.

c.     Driveways and service areas shall be maintained and kept free of grease, oil, and other petroleum products in addition to litter. These areas shall be periodically cleaned with equipment that dissolves spilled grease, oil, and other petroleum products without washing them into the drainage, gutter, or sewer systems.

26.   Public Service Facilities. All service stations shall:

a.     Provide restrooms on-site, at no charge, for public use during normal business hours. The restrooms shall be continuously maintained in compliance with the standards of the county health department;

b.     Provide and maintain in usable and good working order, an air pump and radiator water hose for public use.

27.   Restroom Screening. Restroom entrances viewable from adjoining rights-of-way or properties shall be concealed from view by planters or decorative screening subject to the approval of the director.

28.   Noise. Service station noise (e.g., bells, loudspeakers, tools, etc.) shall not be audible from residentially zoned or occupied parcels between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and nationally recognized holidays. All operations shall also comply with the noise requirements of Section 11.4.10.020.B: Noise.

29.   Oil Collection Centers. All new service stations which have on-site service bays where routine auto maintenance tasks are performed shall:

a.     Become a certified used oil collection center and accept used oil for recycling from patrons; and

b.     Comply with all requirements for certified used oil collection centers as specified by the California Integrated Waste Management Act.

30.   Pollution Prevention. Permit applications for new or modified service stations shall include plans to implement best management practices to eliminate discharge into storm drains in compliance with the city’s NPDES criteria.

31.   Hazardous Materials. All necessary permits for the storage and use of hazardous materials shall be obtained. All automotive fluids shall be recycled or removed according to applicable state and federal standards.

32.   Prohibited Uses. The storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle painting, body or fender work, or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces is prohibited. (Ord. 1672; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.040 Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services.
Automobile/vehicle sales and services shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.     Minimum Lot Size. Automobile/vehicle sales and services may not be located on any lot smaller than 10,000 square feet in area.

B.     Landscaping and Buffer Yards. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards, which apply to any commercial use adjacent to a residential use, the following buffer and landscaping requirements apply to any automobile/vehicle service and repair use:

1.     For parking and other unenclosed areas along street-facing yards, a solid wall, 2.5 to 3.5 feet in height shall be provided, located between 6 and 10 feet from the back of the sidewalk. Landscaping between the sidewalk and wall is required. Landscaped areas shall be enclosed by a 6-inch high concrete curb to prevent damage from automobiles. Chain-link fencing is prohibited.

2.     Notwithstanding any provision in Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards to the contrary, landscaping shall comprise a minimum of 15% of the site area. All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained in compliance with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards. Additional landscaping may be required where necessary to prevent visual impacts to adjacent properties.

 

C.    Buildings. All new sales buildings shall be built abutting the sidewalk and must have views into the building or window displays at least 3 feet deep.

D.    Exterior Lighting.

1.     All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed to ensure that all light is directed away from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties.

 

 

 

2.     Lighting shall not:

a.     Be of a high intensity to cause a traffic hazard;

b.     Be used as an advertising element; or

c.     Adversely affect adjoining properties, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting.

E.     Tow Services. Tow service operations may only be conducted upon the approval of a conditional use permit and in compliance with all appropriate conditions of the approved conditional use permit, which shall establish conditions for operations to not create a public nuisance for adjoining properties. Conditions may be imposed regarding the following operations:

1.     Hours for drop-off of towed vehicles.

2.     Location for storage of any towed vehicles.

3.     Allowable routes for tow service vehicle operations between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

F.     Noise. All body and fender work, or similar noise-generating activity, shall be enclosed in a masonry or similar building with sound buffers to absorb noise. Automobile/vehicle sales and services shall comply with the noise requirements in Section 11.4.10.020.B: Noise.

G.    Work Areas for Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair Uses. All automobile/vehicle service and repair activities, including disassembly and assembly activities, shall be performed within an enclosed building. Vehicle bays shall not directly face an existing residential development or zoning district and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining public rights-of-way and properties.

H.    Litter. The premises shall be kept in an orderly condition at all times. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside a building.

I.      Hazardous Materials. All necessary permits for the storage and use of hazardous materials shall be obtained. All automotive fluids shall be recycled or removed according to applicable state and federal standards.

J.     Vehicle Storage. All vehicle storage areas shall be in the rear of buildings and shall not front sidewalks. Vehicle storage areas shall be screened by a solid, 6-foot high masonry wall. All vehicles associated with the business must be stored on-site, and shall not be stored in the public right-of-way.

K.     Signs. All signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations. Subject to those requirements, the use of signs and advertising displays may be permitted for occasional special events or temporary sales.

L.     Vehicle Dismantling. Dismantling of vehicles for purposes other than on-site repair is prohibited. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.045 Child Day Care Facilities.
Child day care facilities shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following standards, in compliance with state law and in a manner that recognizes the needs of child care operators and minimizes effects on adjoining properties. These standards apply in addition to the other provisions of this zoning code and licensing by the California State Department of Social Services.

A.     Permit Requirement. Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required to establish and operate large family day care homes and child day care centers.

B.     Large Family Day Care Homes. Large family day care homes shall comply with the following standards.

1.     Incidental to Residential Use of Property. The home shall be the principal residence of the child care provider, and the child care use shall be incidental to the residential use.

2.     No Change to Appearance of Structure. No exterior structural alterations shall occur that would change the character or appearance of the single-unit residence. Proposed exterior structural alterations to a currently approved home require approval of a minor use permit.

3.     Separation Standards. No more than one large family day care home shall be permitted within 500 feet of any other large family day care home, nor closer than one per block, whichever distance is greater. The 500-foot separation shall be measured as a straight line between the nearest points on the property lines of each affected parcel.

4.     Drop Off/Pick Up Location Requirements. A safe area for picking up and dropping off children shall be provided. This activity shall only be allowed in a driveway, in an approved parking area, or in an area with direct access to the facility.

5.     Noise—Neighborhood Compatibility. Noise from the operation of any large family day care may not exceed that which is customary in residential neighborhoods during daytime hours. Prolonged and abnormally loud noises shall not be considered customary, while the periodic sounds of small groups of children at play shall be considered customary in residential neighborhoods during the daytime hours.

6.     Wall Requirements—Outdoor Play Area. A 6-foot high, solid fence or substantially equivalent barrier shall be required to separate the outdoor play area of a large family day care home from adjacent residential properties. The fence shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

7.     Operator Information. The current name(s) and telephone number(s) of the operator(s) shall be on file with the department of development services at all times.

C.    Child Day Care Centers. Child day care centers shall comply with all standards of large family day care homes set forth above. In addition, the minimum parcel size for a child day care center shall be 7,500 square feet. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.050 Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities.
A.     Permit Requirement. Drive-in and drive-through facilities shall be allowed only through a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     Development Standards. Any eating and drinking establishment, retail use, bank or financial institution, or other use providing drive-in or drive-through facilities shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following standards:

1.     Drive-In and Drive-Through Aisles. Such facilities shall be designed to allow safe, unimpeded movement of vehicles at street access points and within the travel aisles and parking space areas. A minimum 15-foot interior radius at curves and a minimum 12-foot width shall be required. Each drive-in and drive-through entrance and exit shall be set back at least 100 feet from an intersection of public rights-of-way, measured at the closest intersecting curbs; exceptions may be allowed with approval by the city engineer, so long as exceptions will not increase the risk of pedestrian or automobile accidents. Each entrance to an aisle and the direction of flow shall be clearly designated by signs and/or pavement markings or raised curbs outside of the public right-of-way.

2.     Drive-In and Drive-Through Queue Area. Each drive-through aisle shall provide a sufficient queue area based on an interior traffic study modeling prepared by the applicant and reviewed and approved as part of the conditional use permit. The queue area shall not interfere in any manner with public rights-of-ways or streets, or on-site and off-site circulation and parking.

3.     Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards. Each drive-through aisle shall be appropriately screened with a combination of decorative walls and landscaping to prevent headlight glare and direct visibility of vehicles from adjacent streets, parking lots, and adjacent properties.

4.     Menu Boards. Menu boards shall not exceed 20 square feet in area, with a maximum height of 6 feet, and shall face away from public rights-of-ways unless located at least 35 feet from the street and adequately screened therefrom. Noise levels measured at the property line of a drive-in or drive-through service facility shall not increase the existing ambient noise levels in the surrounding area. Noise shall comply with the standards in Section 11.4.10.020.B: Noise. All outdoor speakers shall be directed away from any residential district and shall provide volume controls which can be operated and controlled by the business operator and which automatically adjust to ambient noise levels.

5.     Pedestrian Walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall not intersect drive-in or drive-through aisles, unless no alternative exists. In such cases, pedestrian walkways shall have clear visibility, emphasized by enhanced paving, markings or signage.

6.     Exterior Lighting.

a.     All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed to ensure that all light is directed away from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties.

b.     Lighting shall not:

i.      Be of a high intensity to cause a traffic hazard;

ii.     Be used as an advertising element; or

iii.     Adversely affect adjoining properties, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.055 Extended Hour Businesses.
A.     Permit Requirement. Extended hour businesses shall be allowed through a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     Traffic Impacts. The facility shall be designed, developed, and operated to minimize impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods resulting from late night or early morning vehicle or pedestrian traffic generated by the business.

C.    Crime Prevention. The facility shall be designed, developed, and operated to provide the maximum feasible patron and employee security and crime prevention. Specifically, the design, installation, and maintenance of landscaping, fences, walls, hedges, outdoor displays and storage, security lighting, and solid waste storage areas shall promote customer, neighborhood, and employee security and minimize opportunities for crime to the greatest extent feasible. A minimum of one armed security guard, P.O.S.T. certified, shall remain on duty during all hours from 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. that the business is open. The commission may waive or modify the security guard requirement if an alternative method is determined to be acceptable in meeting the intent of this subsection and upon the recommendation of the Police Chief.

D.    Light and Glare. On-site screening shall be installed and maintained, to the satisfaction of the director, to minimize light and glare on adjoining residential properties and dwelling units, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting.

E.     Noise. Precautions shall be taken to minimize the noise impacts of entertainment, music sources, employees and patrons (both within and outside of motor vehicles) on adjoining residential properties in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.B: Noise. No deliveries shall occur during extended hours.

F.     Number of Employees on Duty. A minimum of 2 employees (in addition to the guard specified in subsection C of this section) shall be on duty at all times between the hours of 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. that the business is open or employees are present. The commission may authorize 1 employee after determining that the employee will operate the business from an adequately secured facility and upon the recommendation of the Police Chief.

G.    Parking. Existing on-site parking spaces adjoining residential properties and dwelling units shall not be used between the hours of 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., except for employee parking. This standard shall not be construed or interpreted so as to encourage on-street parking within or immediately adjacent to any adjoining residential neighborhoods. The design, installation, and maintenance of on-site parking areas shall comply with Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards.

H.    Complaints. Upon receiving any combination of 3 substantiated complaints from 3 different residences within 300 feet of the extended hour business within 1 calendar year concerning noise, hours of operation, and traffic control as specified in subsections B, E and G of this section, or at the discretion of the director or the planning commission, the planning commission shall review the extended hour business operation at a noticed public hearing conducted in accordance with the procedures outlined in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures of this zoning code.

1.     Complaint Procedures. Before submitting a complaint to the city pursuant to this subsection, a complainant shall first submit to the operator of the extended hour business a written complaint, signed by the complainant and setting forth the complainant’s address and telephone number. If after 10 calendar days from the submittal of a complaint to the operator, the complainant remains dissatisfied with the performance of the extended hour business, the complaint may then be submitted to the planning department, including the original complaint letter, and documentation of any and all contact with the operator to resolve the issues identified in the original complaint. The department of development services shall investigate complaints within 14 calendar days of receipt of the complaint to determine their validity.

2.     Substantiated Complaint. A complaint shall be considered substantiated if the director determines that the operator has failed to respond appropriately to a complaint concerning hours of operation, traffic control, or noise. Complaints shall be limited to alleged violations of the standards for hours of operation, traffic control, and noise, and may originate only from residences within 300 feet of the applicable extended hour business. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.060 Home Occupations.
A.     Permit Requirement. Home occupations shall be allowed as a permitted use or through a minor use permit, as set forth in this section below and pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the operation of a large family day care home in a single-unit dwelling is instead subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.05.045: Child Day Care Facilities.

B.     Basic Operating Standards. All home occupations shall comply with the following operating standards:

1.     Main Residence. The location of the business shall be the main residence of the person(s) conducting the business and shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes;

2.     Outdoor Storage Prohibited. Storage shall not occur out-of-doors, within a carport, or within an accessory structure;

3.     Garage Conversion Not Allowed. Any required garage parking area shall not be converted into a work area or storage area for the home occupation;

4.     Exterior Appearance. There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation activity from the adjoining public rights-of-way or from surrounding properties;

5.     Alterations Prohibited. The home occupation shall not require any alteration(s) or modification(s) to the dwelling incompatible with residential use or that would change its occupancy classification in compliance with the California Building Code;

6.     Displays or Signs Prohibited. The home occupation shall not display window or advertising sign(s), merchandise, products, or stock in trade, or other identification of the home occupation on the premises;

7.     Equipment. Mechanical or electrical equipment shall not be installed or maintained other than that which is compatible with domestic residential use;

8.     Articles Offered for Sale. Articles offered for sale shall be limited to those produced on the premises, or direct product distribution;

9.     Vehicles. Only 1 vehicle, with a capacity not exceeding 1 ton, may be used and kept on the premises by the occupant directly or indirectly in connection with a home occupation;

10.   Fire Safety. Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises;

11.   Nuisances. The home occupation shall not cause or create offensive or objectionable levels of hazards or nuisances (e.g., cold, dirt, dust, electrical interference, fumes, heat, humidity, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke, solid waste, toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, etc.), in excess of that customarily associated with similar residential uses;

12.   Traffic Generation. The home occupation shall not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic substantially greater than that normally associated with residential uses in the surrounding area;

13.   Allowable Deliveries. The home occupation may receive up to 2 deliveries each day;

14.   Maximum Hours of Operation. The home occupation shall not be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (except for child day-care facilities);

15.   Employees. Only family members or persons living full-time on the property shall be permitted to work at a home-based business;

16.   Compliance with all city noise ordinance requirements; and

17.   Allowable On-site Visits. The home occupation may allow up to 6 clients, patients, or pupils to be present at any one time (except for child day-care facilities); provided that there are no more than 2 groups of visitors per week.

C.    Limitations on Director Approval for Home Occupations. Home occupations approved by the director as a permitted use shall be subject to the provisions of subsection B, Basic Operating Standards, of this section and the following limitations:

1.     Location. Conduct of the home occupation shall be confined completely to the residential dwelling unit, and not within an accessory structure(s). A home occupation shall not impair the use of a garage in terms of providing required parking;

2.     Maximum Allowable Floor Area. A home occupation shall not be allowed which requires more than one room and may not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the residence;

3.     Access. Access to the space devoted to a home occupation shall only be from within the main residential dwelling unit;

D.    Home Occupations Requiring a Minor Use Permit. The following list identifies home occupation activities that may be allowable subject to the approval of a minor use permit, in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits:

1.     Use of an accessory structure;

2.     Use requiring more than one room or 20% of the gross floor area of the residence;

3.     Uses which entail food handling, processing, or packing;

4.     Musical performance or instruction in the use of musical instruments when either amplification is used or when 2 or more persons are receiving instruction or performing at a time;

5.     Specified additional uses: pet grooming, or any other use or occupation which the director determines is similar in nature to the previously listed uses;

6.     Having more than one home occupation in a dwelling unit;

7.     Having an employee on-site who is not a resident; and

8.     Having on-site visitors in excess of that allowed under paragraph B.17 of this section.

E.     Terms of the Home Occupation Permit.

1.     Permit Nontransferable. A home occupation permit shall only be in effect as long as the approved business is operated by the original resident applicant at the address of the property appearing on the application.

2.     Change(s) Requires New Permit. Any change in ownership or tenancy from that appearing on the approved application shall result in the home occupation permit being deemed void.

F.     Business License Required. A business license is required for the establishment and operation of a home occupation.

G.    Prohibited Home Occupations.

1.     Criteria. A home occupation is prohibited if it would result in any of the following conditions:

a.     Not comply with the standards and criteria identified in the basic operating standards set forth above;

b.     Be inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

c.     Threaten the health and safety of the citizens of the city; or

d.     Represent a use that would clearly conflict with the normal residential quality of the surrounding neighborhood.

2.     Examples of Prohibited Home Occupation Uses. The following is a nonexclusive list of examples of nonresidential uses that are not incidental to or compatible with residential activities, and are therefore prohibited as home occupations:

a.     Adult businesses;

b.     Animal hospitals or the boarding, caring, harboring, raising, training, or treatment of animals or birds for profit;

c.     Beauty shops and barber shops;

d.     Catering;

e.     Dance or night clubs;

f.      Maintenance and storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories for the construction and service trades;

g.     Massage therapy;

h.     Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories (not including chiropractors and counselors/psychotherapists);

i.      Mini self-storage;

j.      Retail sales, except for artist’s originals or products individually made-to-order on the premises;

k.     Vehicle repair or storage (body or mechanical, including boats and recreational vehicles), upholstery, automobile detailing and painting and the display and sale of any vehicle(s);

l.      Welding and machining; and

m.    Other uses determined by the director not to be incidental to or compatible with residential activities. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.065 Kiosks.
A.     Permit Requirement. Kiosks or a kiosk program for multiple kiosks shall require approval of a minor use permit in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits and shall be developed in compliance with an approved site plan, elevations, and materials board. The materials board shall include specifications for any security panels.

B.     Location Requirements. Kiosks shall be:

1.     On private property in commercial zones only as identified in Table 11.2.10.010: Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts;

2.     In multi-tenant projects of greater than 20,000 commercial square feet with outdoor spaces of greater than 1,000 square feet;

3.     If a kiosk is proposed within 10 feet of the public right-of-way, the applicant must have the site plan reviewed and approved by the city engineer;

4.     Located in a manner that allows for proper handicap access around the entire kiosk area; and

5.     Kiosks shall be stationary in an area designated by the approved site plan.

C.    Architectural Design. All construction and modifications to the kiosks shall:

1.     Require review by the director to ensure high quality and consistent design, compatible with the architectural character of the project; and

2.     Be limited in size to no more than 9 feet high (including all projections) by 4 feet wide by 7 feet long.

D.    Parking. There shall be no off-street parking required for this use per Section 11.4.20.015.E: Uses Not Specified.

E.     Trash Disposal. Each kiosk shall provide a receptacle sufficient in size to accommodate trash and any smoking materials (where applicable) discarded by users of the kiosk or be provided receptacles in designated areas by the management of the property where the kiosk(s) are located.

F.     Lighting. Each kiosk shall be provided with lighting in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting or state law, whichever is most restrictive.

G.    Signs. Each kiosk may provide signage of 3 square feet or less in size that shall be permitted on 2 sides of the kiosk that is exempt from the sign permit per Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations. Kiosk signage may be provided on the roof or at the roof line. All other signage that does not meet this dimension requires issuance of a sign permit.

The owner or operator of a kiosk shall display, in a place readily visible to the public, a telephone number and address where the owners may be reached. Such display shall not count as signs for the purposes of this section.

H.    Noise. No music or amplified noise shall be permitted to emit from the kiosk.

I.      Location of Merchandise. All items for sale shall be stored and displayed on the kiosk only. No ancillary shelving units for display or storage may be placed adjacent to the kiosk. Each side of the kiosk must have items for display and sale.

J.     Food Sales. Any kiosk supplying food for sale shall obtain proper health department licensing.

K.     Business Licensing. Any kiosk engaging in a business that requires a business license must also obtain that license prior to operation of the kiosk.

L.     Building Permits Required. Kiosks must obtain any applicable building permits.

M.    Outdoor Dining. Any outdoor seating accessory to a food kiosk(s) shall meet the requirements of Section 11.4.05.090: Outdoor Dining, Display and Sales Standards.

N.    Performance Bond. Submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, satisfactory to the director, is required to ensure that upon abandonment of the use and removal from the site that the property will be cleaned of debris, or other evidence of the structure, and the site restored to its former condition. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.070 Liquor Stores.
A.     Permit Requirement. Liquor stores shall require a conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, and as identified in Table 11.2.10.010: Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts.

Liquor stores shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following standards and the conditional use permit shall contain the applicable standard conditions for alcohol related land uses, pursuant to the City Council Policy 600-1. These standards apply only to establishments selling alcohol for off-site consumption and do not apply to full-service eating and drinking establishments.

B.     Standards.

1.     Location.

a.     Minimum distance from a residential district boundary: 500 feet.

b.     Minimum distance from other liquor stores: 1,000 feet.

c.     Minimum distance from educational, religious, or cultural institutions and public parks: 500 feet.

2.     Hours of Operation. Operating hours will be determined by approval of a conditional use permit.

3.     Litter. One permanent, non-flammable trash receptacle shall be installed in the parking area adjacent to the entrance/exit of the store.

4.     State License. Liquor stores shall comply with all provisions of any license required for such stores by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.075 Manufactured Housing.
A.     Required Certification. A manufactured home shall constitute a permitted use in all residential districts, provided that any such manufactured home is certified under the standards set forth in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1976 (42 USC 5401 et. seq.), as amended at the time of any application for placement of such manufactured home.

B.     General Requirements. A manufactured home developed in a residential district outside a mobile home park shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.     Site Requirements. The site, and the placement of the unit on the site shall comply with all zoning, subdivision, and development standards applicable to a conventional single-unit dwelling on the same parcel.

2.     Permanent Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation in accordance with the standards set forth in the California Building Code and Health and Safety Code Section 18551.

3.     Age of Home. No more than 5 years may elapse between the date of the manufacture of the manufactured home and the date of the application for issuance of a permit to install a home on a residential lot in the city.

4.     Exterior Materials. Manufactured homes are to be covered with an exterior material compatible with residential structures in the surrounding area, and shiny or metallic finishes are prohibited. The exterior covering material must extend to finished grade. If a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend more than 3 inches below the top of the foundation. Alternative skirting materials, customarily used in conventional residential structures, are permitted.

5.     Roofing. All roofs on manufactured homes shall be comprised of asphalt tile, shingles or other materials and shall comply with the most recent edition of the California Building Code for fire rating for residential structures. Eave overhangs shall be at least 12 inches, but not more than 16 inches, and the roof pitch shall be no less than 5:12.

6.     Utilities. Each manufactured home shall be provided permanent hookups for electricity, gas, water, and sewer connections in the same manner applicable to permanent buildings. Gas shutoff valves, meters, and regulators shall not be located beneath the manufactured home, in compliance with the requirements of the California Building Code for comparable residential structures.

C.    Surrender of Registration/Taxation. A mobile home which has been placed on a foundation pursuant to this section shall be subject to local property taxation pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code and Section 109.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

1.     Surrender of Registration Prior to Certificate of Occupancy. Prior to occupancy, the owner shall request a certification from the Seal Beach Building Department that a certificate of occupancy be issued pursuant to Section 18551(b)(2) of the California Health and Safety Code. Thereafter, for an existing mobile home, any vehicle license plate, certificate of ownership and certificate of registration issued by a state agency is to be surrendered to the appropriate state agencies.

2.     DMV Statement when not Previously Registered. Where the mobile home is new and never has been registered with DMV, a statement to that effect from the dealer selling the mobile home shall be submitted to the city.

3.     Mobile Home Taxation and Exemptions. Mobile homes placed on a permanent foundation pursuant to this section become exempt from vehicle license fees and become subject to property tax laws. Such mobile homes become eligible for exemptions. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.080 Meeting Facilities, Private Schools, and Similar Institutional Uses.
Where allowed by Part II: Base District Regulations, public and private meeting facilities, private schools, and similar institutional uses shall comply with the regulations of this section.

A.     Permit Requirement. Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits shall be required to establish and operate such uses, except for public schools.

B.     Allowable Accessory Uses. Only the uses specifically identified in and authorized by an approved conditional use permit shall operate on the same site as the principal use. For example, a day care center or private school located on the site of a meeting facility used for other purposes must be identified as an authorized use in the conditional use permit for the facility. Otherwise, any additional use shall require an amendment to the original conditional use permit.

C.    Parking Restrictions in Neighborhoods. When a new meeting facility is established in a new building in any residential zone, the required front yard setback shall not be used for parking purposes.

D.    Compatibility with Surrounding Uses. Conditional use permit approval shall require that the commission first make the following findings in addition to those required by Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings:

1.     That all buildings, structures, and landscaping will be developed in a manner compatible with the desired character of the surrounding neighborhood;

2.     That exterior parking areas will be screened with landscaping in a manner that ensures compatibility with and an enhancement to surrounding land uses and in compliance with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards; and

3.     That all exterior lighting will be designed, oriented, and constructed to shield adjacent properties from adverse glare effects and in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.085 News and Flower Stands.
A.     Permit Requirement. Minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits shall be required to establish a news or flower stand.

B.     Location Requirements. A news or flower stand shall:

1.     Be located parallel and adjacent to the wall of a structure. A freestanding news or flower stand is allowed only as a roofed kiosk; and

2.     Not be located:

a.     Within 3 feet of a display window of any structure abutting the sidewalk, or so as to interfere with or restrict the reasonable use of the window for display purposes;

b.     Within 100 feet of any residential use within a residential zoning district;

c.     Within 1,000 feet of another news or flower stand, or florist, provided that this distance may be reduced by the director if the proposed use is determined not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare; or

d.     So that the sidewalk is reduced to less than 8 feet on secondary and major highways and 6 feet on other streets. This requirement may be modified by the director where the clear passage provided is safe and adequate, as determined by the city engineer.

C.    Design and Construction Requirements.

1.     A stand shall be soundly constructed of wood, metal, or other suitable permanent material, and designed in a manner and color to be compatible with the adjacent structures whether the stand is opened or closed. Security doors shall be designed as an integral part of the structure.

2.     Shelving shall not exceed 8 feet in height nor 2 feet in depth.

D.    Maintenance. The news and flower stand shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair, at all times.

E.     Signs. Signs shall be designed as an integrated part of the stand, and shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     A stand shall not be used for advertising or publicity purposes. Signs shall be for identification only, with size and design in compliance with Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

2.     The owner or operator of an outdoor news or flower stand shall display, in a place readily visible to the public, a telephone number and address where the owners may be reached. Such display shall not count as signs for the purposes of this section.

F.     Additional Product Sales. In addition to the sale of newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals, for newsstands, and flowers and plants, for flower stands, the owners or operators may sell other related accessory products, not to exceed 10% of the total merchandise displayed.

G.    Hours of Operation. The allowable hours of operation of a news or flower stand shall be established by the minor use permit approval.

H.    Encroachment Permit. If a news or flower stand is proposed within a public right-of-way, the owners or operators shall apply for an encroachment permit from the city engineer before applying for approval of the stand by the director.

I.      Performance Bond. Submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, satisfactory to the director, is required to ensure that upon abandonment of the use and removal from the site that the property will be cleaned of debris, or other evidence of the structure, and the site restored to its former condition. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.090 Outdoor Dining, Display, and Sales Standards.
This section provides development and operational requirements for the establishment of outdoor uses, including temporary, accessory, and permanent outdoor displays and sales and similar uses where merchandise is displayed for sale (e.g., garden nurseries, lumber yards), and outdoor dining and seating areas, which shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

A.     Temporary Outdoor Displays and Sales. Temporary outdoor displays and sales may be allowed subject to the approval of a minor use permit, in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits and the following standards. In approving an application for a minor use permit, the planning commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the permit would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings. These conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use, and may include the following:

1.     Fixed Period of Time. Provision for a fixed period of time as specified by the permit, or where not specified, not to exceed 10 consecutive days;

2.     Landscaping. Landscaping may be required to ensure that the use has a pleasing appearance and that the screening requirements identified in paragraph C.6, of this section, are satisfied, subject to the approval of the director;

3.     Nuisance Factors. Regulation of nuisance factors including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjoining parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, waste, and vibration;

4.     Operating Hours. Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use, as stated above;

5.     Parking. Provision for adequate temporary parking facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including vehicular ingress and egress and public transportation, if applicable, in compliance with Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading;

6.     Performance Bond. Submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, satisfactory to the director, may be required to ensure that any temporary facilities would be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the activity, the property would be cleaned of debris, or other evidence of the activity, and the site restored to its former condition;

7.     Sanitary and Medical Facilities. Provision for sanitary and medical facilities, as appropriate;

8.     Security. Provision for security and safety measures, if applicable;

9.     Setbacks. Provision of appropriate setbacks to ensure separation from adjoining land uses and a safe environment for pedestrians and vehicles, subject to the approval of the director;

10.   Signs. Regulation of signs, in compliance with Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations;

11.   Temporary Structures. Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

12.   Waste Collection and Disposal. Provision for solid, hazardous, and toxic waste collection, recycling and/or disposal;

13.   Zoning Code Compliance. A requirement that the approval of the requested minor use permit is contingent upon a finding, by the planning commission that the activity would be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this section, the zoning code, and successful approval of all required permits from another department(s) or governing agency; and

14.   Other Conditions. Other conditions that would ensure the operation of the proposed temporary activity in an orderly and efficient manner.

B.     Accessory Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays incidental and complementary to an allowed use on commercially or publicly zoned parcels shall be subject to the approval of a minor use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, and all of the following standards.

1.     Outdoor displays shall be:

a.     Approved with a defined fixed location entirely on private property that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, or parking spaces. Displays shall not obstruct traffic safety sight areas or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic. They shall also be placed so that the clear space for the passage of pedestrians upon any private walkways is not reduced to less than 8 feet. Placements within the public right-of-way is prohibited;

b.     Directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the same site, and shall display only goods of the primary business on the same site;

c.     Limited to artwork and pottery, flowers and plants, handicrafts, furniture, or other items which are determined by the director to be similar in nature;

d.     Limited to the hours of operation of the business and portable and removed from public view at the close of each business day;

e.     Managed so that display structures and goods are maintained at all times in a clean and neat condition, and in good repair; and

f.      Placed to not block structure entrances and on-site driveways.

2.     Outdoor displays shall not be:

a.     Placed within 100 feet of any residential dwelling, except for mixed-use projects; or

b.     Placed so as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of the store front windows for display purposes.

C.    Permanent Outdoor Displays and Sales.

1.     Permit Requirement. The permanent outdoor display/sale of merchandise may be allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, and shall comply with the following standards and guidelines:

2.     Height of Displayed Materials. The outdoor display/sale of merchandise shall not exceed a height of 7 feet above finished grade.

3.     Location. Outdoor display/sale area(s) shall be located entirely on private property. They shall not encroach into required setbacks. In zoning districts where no setback is required, the outdoor area(s) shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from adjoining property line(s) unless otherwise allowed through the approval of the conditional use permit, in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

4.     Location of Merchandise. Displayed merchandise shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved, and defined location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, parking spaces, or pedestrian walkways. Displays shall not obstruct traffic safety sight areas or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

5.     Relationship to Main Use. The outdoor display/sales area(s) shall be directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the subject parcel.

6.     Screening Required. Outdoor display/sales area(s), other than vehicle sales lots, produce stands, and nursery product sales, shall be screened from adjoining public rights-of-way by decorative walls, fences, and/or landscaping in compliance with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards. Screening shall be provided to a height of 1 foot above the approved height of the merchandise and materials being displayed.

7.     Signs. Additional signs, beyond those normally allowed for the subject use pursuant to Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations, shall not be provided as a result of the outdoor display/sales area(s).

D.    Outdoor Dining and Seating Areas. Outdoor dining and seating area(s) shall be allowed in conjunction with legally established restaurants and other food service uses as an accessory and incidental use to a restaurant with indoor eating area on the same site subject to the approval of a minor use permit in compliance with an approved site plan which indicates the areas dedicated for outdoor dining and the maximum seating capacity for the outdoor dining area, in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits and the following standards.

Outdoor dining establishments shall also operate in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020: Performance Standards. In approving an application for a minor use permit, the planning commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the permit would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings and the minor use permit/conditional use permit shall contain the applicable standard conditions for alcohol related land uses, pursuant to the city council Policy 600-1. These conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the outdoor dining or seating area, and include the following standards:

1.     Limitation on Seating. The number of seats in the outdoor dining and seating area(s) shall not exceed 12 seats; otherwise, a conditional use permit shall be required.

2.     Hours of Operation. The hours and days of operation of the outdoor dining area shall be identified in the approved minor use permit or conditional use permit.

3.     Separation by Physical Barrier. The planning commission may require separation by a physical barrier. If required, such barriers must be a minimum of 25% open and may not exceed 4 feet in height, except as required by the California Building Code or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. Only barriers composed of planters, or a retaining wall may be solid. However, railings may have backings on the interior (restaurant) side of the railing that are made of fabric or other materials satisfactory to the planning commission. Pipe stanchions linked by chains are not permitted as a railing. Railing designs must be submitted to the director, the city engineer if adjacent to a public right-of-way, and the building official for review and approval.

4.     Alcoholic Beverage Sales. Areas in which alcoholic beverages would be served shall comply with the standards established by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and the following standards. The dining and seating area(s) shall be:

a.     Accessible from inside the restaurant only, unless the director waives or modifies this requirement in circumstances where this is not feasible or practical;

b.     Clearly and physically defined. The area shall be clearly a part of the restaurant it serves; and

c.     Supervised by a restaurant employee to ensure compliance with laws regarding on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages.

5.     Landscaping. All outdoor dining areas shall include some landscaping. A landscape plan for the outdoor dining area may include the use of planter boxes and permanent vegetation, which shall comply with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards. Planter boxes may be constructed of wood, ceramics, stone, or metal. Plastic planter boxes are prohibited.

6.     Sound and Music. Un-amplified sound and music that is limited to no more than 1 entertainer is permitted within an outdoor dining or seating area upon approval of a minor use permit or conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20, Development Permits. Amplified sound and music is prohibited within an outdoor dining or seating area unless approved by a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

7.     Parking Requirements. Required parking for outdoor dining and seating area(s) shall be calculated in compliance with Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading.

8.     Clean-up. Outdoor dining area(s), whether part of a restaurant or seating in common, shall be cleaned on a continual basis for removal of litter and food items that constitute a nuisance to public health and safety.

9.     Design Compatibility. To ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and a high standard of design quality, the following standards shall be implemented:

a.     Associated structural elements, awnings, covers, furniture, umbrellas, or other physical elements that are visible from the public rights-of-way, shall be compatible with the overall design of the main structure(s);

b.     Awnings, plants, umbrellas, and other human scale elements shall be provided as necessary to enhance the pedestrian experience;

c.     The relation of the outdoor seating area to religious institutions, hospitals, public schools, and residential uses shall be considered by the reviewing authority. Proper mitigation measures shall be applied to eliminate potential impacts related to glare, light, loitering, and noise;

d.     Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow shall not be obstructed, nor shall existing pedestrian or vehicular movement areas be removed;

e.     Outdoor dining areas shall maintain adequate vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow; and

f.      A minimum setback of 15 feet from adjoining residential district property lines and 5 feet from adjoining parking lots shall be provided.

10.   Outdoor Cooking. Cooking within an outdoor dining area may occur only with conditional use permit approval.

11.   Sound Buffering. A sound buffering, acoustic wall may be required along property lines adjacent to the outdoor dining area. The design and height of the wall shall be approved by the reviewing authority.

12.   Exterior Lighting.

a.     All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed to ensure that all light is directed away from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties.

b.     Lighting shall not:

i.      Be of a high intensity to cause a traffic hazard;

ii.     Be used as an advertising element; or

iii.     Adversely affect adjoining properties, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.095 Recycling Facilities.
Recycling facilities shall be subject to the following standards:

A.     Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machines are permitted as specified in Part II: Base District Regulations, and in addition, are subject to the following criteria:

1.     Machines shall be located adjacent to the entrance of the commercial host use and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

2.     Machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.

3.     Machines shall have a maximum sign area of 4 square feet exclusive of operating instructions.

4.     Machines shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation between dusk and dawn.

5.     Machines shall provide a 40-gallon garbage can for non-recyclable materials located adjacent to the reverse vending machine.

B.     Recycling Collection Point. Recycling collection points are conditionally permitted as specified in Part II: Base District Regulations, and in addition are subject to the following criteria:

1.     Facilities shall be set back at least 10 feet from any street line and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

2.     Facilities shall accept recyclable material as defined by the State Department of Conservation.

3.     Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of accepted material, the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

4.     Signs shall be a maximum of 20% per side of facility or container or 16 square feet, whichever is larger. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side is measured from the pavement to the top of the container.

5.     Facilities shall provide a 40-gallon garbage can for non-recyclable materials adjacent to any receptacle where recyclable materials are deposited.

6.     Visual screening is required around the recycling collection point, the exact type, location, and amount to be determined by the reviewing authority.

C.    Recycling Processing Facility. Recycling processing facilities are conditionally permitted as specified in Part II: Base District Regulations, and in addition are subject to the following criteria:

1.     Facilities shall not abut a property zoned for residential use unless specifically exempted by findings and conditions of the conditional use permit.

2.     Facilities shall be screened from the public right-of-way by operating within a fully enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a solid block wall at least 6 feet in height with landscaping.

3.     Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for in the base zone.

4.     No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible above the height of the fencing.

5.     Facilities shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and hours of operation. Signage shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

6.     Facilities shall provide a 40-gallon garbage can for non-recyclable materials on the property. (Ord. 1598)

11.4.05.100 Residential Accessory Uses, Structures, and Vehicle Parking.
This section provides standards for residential accessory uses, structures, and vehicle parking allowed in the zoning district applicable to a parcel (see Table 11.2.05.015: Development Standards for Residential Districts). Accessory uses include any use that is customarily related to a residence, including carports, garages, greenhouses, storage sheds, studios, above ground swimming pools/spas, and workshops.

A.     Relationship of Accessory Use to the Main Use. Accessory uses and structures shall be incidental to and not alter the residential character or scale of the parcel and may be established in compliance with this section only on a parcel with an existing single-unit dwelling, or simultaneously with the development of a new single-unit dwelling.

B.     Garage Sales. Garage sales shall be limited to 4 per calendar year per site, and a maximum of 2 days each following approval by the city.

C.    Attached Accessory Structures.

1.     Structurally Part of the Main Structure. An accessory structure that is attached to a main structure shall be compatible with, and made structurally a part of the main structure (e.g., share a common wall with the main structure, rely partially on the main structure for structural support, or be attached to the main structure at a minimum of 4 points within 20 feet).

2.     Compliance. An attached accessory structure shall comply with the requirements of this zoning code applicable to the main structure, including heights, setbacks, and site coverage.

3.     Exterior Design and Materials. An attached accessory residential structure shall be architecturally compatible with the primary structure, and have the same architectural style and materials.

D.    Detached Accessory Structures.

1.     Minimum Separation. Detached accessory structures shall be separated from the main structure by a yard, open to the sky, having a minimum width of 6 feet;

2.     Side and Rear Setbacks and Height.

a.     Required Setbacks and Height. Detached accessory structures shall not exceed 9 feet in height within 5 feet of any property line; 12 feet in height within 10 feet of any property line; and 15 feet at the highest point of the roof; and shall not be placed closer than 5 feet to a side or rear property line. See Figure 11.4.05.100.D.2: Detached Accessory Structure Setbacks and Height.

b.     Exceptions. The following structures are exempt from the detached accessory structure setback requirements provided by subparagraph 2.a of this subsection:

i.      Pre-fabricated, detached accessory structures with an area of up to 120 square feet, and an overall height not exceeding 8 feet, may be placed adjacent to a side or rear property line.

ii.     Planter boxes and masonry planters with a maximum height of 36 inches.

iii.     Children’s play equipment not exceeding 7 feet in height, movable dog houses and similar structures.

iv.    Trash enclosures not exceeding 4 feet in height.

 

Figure 11.4.05.100.D.2

Detached Accessory Structure Setbacks and Height

 



 

3.     Prohibited in Specified Setbacks. Detached accessory structures are prohibited in required front and street side setbacks.

4.     Maximum Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage for detached accessory structures are set forth in Table 11.4.05.100.D.4: Maximum Lot Coverage—Detached Accessory Structures.

Table 11.4.05.100.D.4

MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE—DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES

District

Maximum Height (ft.)

Maximum Lot Coverage (sq. ft.)

Location

Setbacks

RLD

15

225, up to 350 with a minor use permit

Rear one-half of lot

See paragraph 11.4.05.100.D.2

RMD

15

225, up to 350 with a minor use permit

Rear one-half of lot

See paragraph 11.4.05.100.D.2

RHD

15

225, up to 350 with a minor use permit

Rear one-half of lot

See paragraph 11.4.05.100.D.2

 

a.     This limitation shall not apply to a detached garage, or to a swimming pool, barbecue, sport court, or other outdoor private residential recreational facilities.

b.     This limitation also applies to the storage of recreational vehicles and boats. See paragraph 11.4.05.100.O.2: Recreational Vehicles and Boats.

5.     Height Limit. Detached accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.

6.     Compatibility. Construction and the use of materials and colors shall be compatible with the main structure whenever feasible.

7.     Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for all non-prefabricated accessory structures and for pre-fabricated accessory structures larger than 120 square feet in area.

E.     Driveways, Walkways, and Patios. Driveways, walkways, patio slabs, and other areas paved with concrete, asphalt or similar materials, and wooden decks, may be placed in up to 40% of the area within any required setback, provided that the structures do not exceed a height of 12 inches. This requirement does not exclude the use of steps providing access between areas of different elevation on the same site. At least 50% of all setback areas shall consist of permeable surface.

F.     Mechanical Equipment. Ground-mounted air conditioners, swimming pool pumps, and related and similar equipment may be placed within required rear setbacks, provided that the equipment is:

1.     Not closer than 3 feet to any property line;

2.     Not closer than 10 feet to a neighboring residence, or 8 feet with a sound attenuation structure approved by the director;

3.     Four feet or less in height; and

4.     In compliance with the provisions of Section 7.15.035 of Chapter 7.15: Noise of Title 7: Public Peace, Morals and Welfare of the Seal Beach Municipal Code.

G.    Antennas. Antennas are subject to the provisions of Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

H.    Garages. A detached accessory garage shall not occupy more than 600 square feet for each dwelling unit (including any workshop or storage space within the garage) unless a larger area is authorized by a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

I.      Guest Rooms and Pool Houses. Guest rooms and pool houses shall be allowed subject to the following limitations:

1.     No more than one guest room and one pool house shall be allowed on a single parcel unless a conditional use permit is obtained pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

2.     Kitchen facilities shall not be allowed within a guest room or pool house; a pool house may have a sink and/or shower.

3.     Detached guest rooms and pool houses shall be limited to ground-floor construction, unless a conditional use permit allowing a second floor is obtained pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

J.     Swimming Pools/Spas/Hot Tubs. Private swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs are allowed accessory to approved residential uses on the same parcel, subject to the following provisions:

1.     Limitation on Use. The pool is to be used solely by occupants of the dwelling(s) on the same parcel and their invited guests;

2.     Fencing. The swimming pool shall be secured by fencing and/or walls to prevent uncontrolled access by children, in compliance with the California Building Code.

See also Section 11.4.10.030: Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs, for additional regulations applicable to swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs located on residential properties.

K.     Minor Accessory Structures—Freestanding Barbecues/Fireplaces, Sculptures, and Fountains, etc. Minor accessory structures may be located in required side and rear yard setbacks provided that the structure is located in the rear two-thirds of the lot and a minimum 5-foot clearance is maintained between such structure and dwelling if it is located in the required side yard. Minor accessory structures that are decorative such as landscape garden walls, fire pits, freestanding barbecues/fireplaces, sculptures, and fountains may be located anywhere on the property provided:

1.     They do not exceed 6 feet in height when located within the required side and rear yard setback areas or exceed 42 inches in height when located within the front yard setback; and

2.     Minor accessory structures greater than 6 feet in height and located in a required side or rear yard require minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

3.     Rock formations shall be set back one foot from the side and/or rear property lines for each foot of rock formation height, maximum 5-foot setback required. See Figure 11.4.05.100.K.3: Rock Wall Setbacks Adjacent to Property Line.

Figure 11.4.05.100.K.3

Rock Wall Setbacks Adjacent to Property Line



L.     Tennis and Other Recreational Courts. Noncommercial outdoor tennis courts and courts for other sports (e.g., racquetball, etc.) accessory to a residential use are subject to the following provisions:

1.     Permit Requirement. Minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits shall be required to establish a tennis or other recreational court.

2.     Fencing. Court fencing shall be subject to the height limits of Chapter 11.4.15: Fences, Hedges and Walls.

3.     Lighting. Court lighting fixtures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet, measured from the court surface. The lighting shall be directed downward, shall only illuminate the court, and shall not illuminate adjoining property, in compliance with Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting.

M.    Workshops or Studios. Any accessory structure intended solely or primarily for engaging in artwork, crafts, light hand manufacturing, mechanical work, etc. is subject to the following provisions when located in a residential zoning district:

1.     Limitation on Use. An accessory structure may be constructed or used as a studio or workshop in any residential zoning district solely for the following noncommercial activities:

a.     Amusements or hobbies;

b.     Artistic endeavors (e.g., painting, photography, or sculpture);

c.     Maintenance of the main structure or yards;

d.     Maintenance or mechanical work on vehicles owned or operated by the occupants; or

e.     Other purposes deemed similar by the director.

2.     Floor Area. A workshop shall not occupy an area larger than 15% of the floor area of the main structure, except where a workshop is combined with a garage. In this case subsection H: Garages of this section shall apply.

N.    Tents and Portable Shelter Structures. The use of tents and other temporary and portable shelter structures shall be allowed only within a rear yard and subject to the provisions of paragraph D.4: Maximum Lot Coverage, of this section.

O.    Restrictions on Residential Parking within Residential Districts. The parking of automobiles and recreational vehicles in residential zoning districts shall comply with the following standards.

1.     Location. Automobiles shall not be parked between the street property line and the front of a residential unit except on a driveway leading to a garage or carport, or a semicircular driveway on a lot that has a minimum frontage width of 80 feet. Semicircular driveways may be approved only when the driveway interior is landscaped, and where 2 curb cuts are approved by the city engineer. See also subsection 11.2.05.015.L: Curb Cuts and Driveways—RLD-9 District.

2.     Recreational Vehicles and Boats. Recreational vehicles may be stored or parked within single-unit residential districts only as follows:

a.     Recreational vehicles and boats may be stored only within the side or rear yard behind the front line of the residential unit or, in the case of a corner parcel, behind the front or street side line;

b.     A solid, minimum 6-foot high wall and/or gate shall screen recreational vehicles and boats from view from public roadway and from adjoining properties;

c.     Subject to the provisions of paragraph D.4: Maximum Lot Coverage, of this section; and

d.     Recreational vehicles and boats may be temporarily parked on driveways in front of residences for not more than 72 continuous hours.

P.     Driveway Standards. Driveways providing site access shall be from an improved street, alley, or other right-of-way and shall be designed, constructed, and maintained as follows.

1.     Driveway Location. Driveways shall be located as far away from intersections and as directly across from any existing driveway on the opposite side of the street as is practical. Whenever a site has access to more than 1 street, a driveway access shall be generally located on the street with the lowest traffic volume, where the impact of a new access will be minimized, provided that this location will not increase traffic impacts on residential neighborhoods. All proposed driveways are subject to approval by the city engineer.

2.     Number and Extent of Residential Driveways.

a.     Number of Driveways—Mid-block Parcels. As practical, the number of driveways shall be limited to 1, provided that properties with more than 80 feet of street frontage may devote an additional 18 feet maximum to a second driveway if the additional driveway is separated as much as is feasible from the main driveway, as approved by the director, and if the city engineer determines that the second driveway will not cause the loss of an on-street parking space in an area where such a loss would cause significant harm to the general public welfare. See also subsection 11.2.05.015.L: Curb Cuts and Driveways—RLD-9 District.

b.     Number of Driveways—Corner or Double Frontage Parcels. For corner and double frontage parcels with residential uses other than single-unit dwellings and duplexes, 1 access on each frontage may be allowed if the city engineer determines that 2 driveways are needed to provide safe access.

c.     Driveway Width. Driveway pavement shall be limited to a maximum width of 20 feet, or 40% of the parcel width, whichever is less. Minimum driveway width shall be 10 feet.

3.     Visibility Considerations. Driveways and driveway landscaping shall be designed to maintain visibility and minimize interference with passing pedestrians. Landscaping adjacent to a driveway and the walls of the building shall be designed not to interfere with motorists’ views of the sidewalk and pedestrians’ views of vehicles exiting the project. See also subsection 11.4.20.030.C: Driveway Visibility. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.105 Residential Care Facilities.
Residential care facilities shall meet the following standards:

A.     Location. If located in a residential district, the minimum distance from other residential care facilities is 300 feet.

B.     Landscaping and Walls. A minimum 6-foot high perimeter wall, constructed of wood or masonry, is required to secure outdoor recreation areas and screen the site. Walls must be at least 75% opaque. Chain link fencing or barbed wire is prohibited. The project shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

C.    Traffic Impacts. The operation of buses and vans to transport residents to and from off-site activities shall not cause traffic operating conditions, including street operation, intersection operation, and operation of any turning movement in an intersection, to exceed Level of Service “D” on collectors or local streets.

D.    Passenger Loading. One passenger loading space is required, either curbside or on-site.

E.     Deliveries. If located in a residential district, delivery of goods shall occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., 7 days a week. Additional hours may be allowed with approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.110 Residential Uses—Multi-Unit Project Standards.
A.     Applicability. These provisions apply to new or remodeled multi-unit projects (50% or more of building area remodeled).

B.     Open Space Requirements. All multi-unit residential projects except duplexes shall provide permanently maintained outdoor open space for each dwelling unit (private space), and for all residents (common space).

1.     Area Required. Private open space shall be provided at a ratio of 200 square feet per dwelling unit. Common open space shall be provided based on the size of the project, as indicated in Table 11.4.05.110.B.1: Multi-Unit Open Space Requirements.

Table 11.4.05.110.B.1

MULTI-UNIT OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS

Project Size

Common Open Space Required

Private Open Space Required

3 to 4 units

200 sq. ft.

200 sq. ft. per unit

5 to 10 units

500 sq. ft.

11 to 30 units

1,000 sq. ft.

31 and more units

2,000 sq. ft. plus 500 sq. ft. for every 10 units above 40 units

 

2.     Configuration of Open Space.

a.     Location on Site. Required open space areas:

i.      Shall be located adjacent to the primary entrance;

ii.     Shall be designed to be easily accessible;

iii.     Shall be provided as continuous, usable site elements, which shall not include setback areas but may be contiguous to required setbacks; and

iv.    Private open space shall be at the same level as, and immediately accessible from, a kitchen, dining room, family room, master bedroom, or living room within the unit. Variations from these dimensional and locational standards may be allowed where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this section.

b.     Dimensions. All open space areas shall be of sufficient size to be usable by residents.

i.      Private open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of 8 feet on any side, and a configuration that would accommodate a rectangle of at least 100 square feet.

ii.     Common open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet on any side for projects of 5 or more dwelling units.

c.     Elevation. A minimum of 60% of the required common open space shall be located at grade or the level of the first habitable floor.

d.     Uncovered Areas Required. At least 33% of the perimeter of the private open space of each unit, or 100% of the roof of the open space of each unit, shall be open to the outdoors. Reference to this requirement shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions of any common interest development.

e.     Substitution of Private Open Space for Common Open Space. For every square foot of private open space provided over and above that required, the amount of common open space required may be reduced by one square foot.

3.     Allowed Uses. Required common open space:

a.     Shall be available for passive and active outdoor recreational purposes for the enjoyment of all residents of each multi-unit project; and

b.     Shall not include driveways, setbacks, public or private streets, or utility easements where the ground surface cannot be used appropriately for open space, parking spaces, or other areas primarily designed for other operational functions.

4.     Maintenance and Control of Common Open Space. Required common open space shall be controlled and permanently maintained by the owner of the property or by a homeowners’ association. Provisions for control and maintenance shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions of any common interest development.

5.     Surfacing. Open space areas shall be surfaced with any practical combination of lawn, landscaping, paving, decking, concrete, or other serviceable material.

6.     Landscaping. The applicant shall submit a landscape plan for approval. Landscape design, installation, and maintenance shall comply with Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

7.     Slope. Required open space areas shall not exceed a slope of 5%.

C.    Facility and Design Requirements.

1.     Accessory Structures. Accessory structures and uses (e.g., car washing areas, bicycle storage, garages, laundry rooms, recreation facilities, etc.) shall incorporate a design, including materials and colors, similar to the dwelling units, and shall be located in an efficient manner in compliance with this subsection.

2.     Front Façade. At least 50% of the front façade of all buildings fronting public streets shall be habitable space. A project shall have at least one private entry into the façade adjacent to the right-of-way, with the entry at or within 5 feet of the finished grade.

3.     Front Yard Paving. No more than 40% of the total area of the front yard setback shall be paved for walkways, driveways, and other hardcover pavement.

4.     Driveway Width. Driveway pavement shall be limited to a maximum width of 20 feet, or 40% of the parcel width, whichever is less. Minimum driveway width shall be 10 feet.

5.     Laundry Facilities. All residential developments with 5 or more dwelling units shall provide common laundry facilities, except developments with facilities provided within each unit.

a.     Keyed Access. Laundry facilities shall be provided with keyed access for “tenants only.”

b.     Location. The facilities shall be evenly dispersed throughout the multi-unit project and easily accessible to all tenants.

6.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be installed and maintained along all vehicular access ways and major walkways, in compliance with subsection 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting. The lighting shall be directed onto the driveways and walkways within the development and away from adjacent properties. Lighting of at least one foot candle shall also be installed and maintained within all covered and enclosed parking areas and shall be screened to minimize glare onto public sidewalks. All proposed lighting shall be shown on the required landscape plan.

7.     Storage Area. Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum of 100 cubic feet of lockable storage area with a minimum dimension of 30 inches, outside of the dwelling unit; provided that these storage areas shall not be visible from a public street.

8.     Television Antennas. Dwelling units shall not have exterior television antennas other than satellite dishes less than 39 inches in diameter. A single common, central antenna may be allowed, with underground cable service to all dwelling units. This restriction shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions of any common interest development.

9.     Solid Waste Recycling. Each project shall incorporate innovative designs, both interior and exterior, to make solid waste recycling more convenient and accessible to the occupants. See also Section 11.4.10.025: Recycling and Solid Waste Facilities. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.115 Residential Uses—Accessory Dwelling Units.
The following regulations are intended to comply with Government Code Sections 65582.1, 65583.1, 65589.4, 65852.150, 65852.2, and 66412.2 or any successor statutes, on accessory dwelling units and implement the general plan, by allowing accessory units in specified residential districts subject to the following requirements:

A.     Accessory Dwelling Units Subject to Administrative Review.

1.     Application. An application for an accessory dwelling unit that meets the standards contained in subsections B through U of this section shall be approved ministerially without discretionary review, notice or public hearing. An application for an accessory dwelling unit shall be submitted to the director of development services concurrently with submittal of an application for a building permit on a form provided by the city. The application form shall specify the information from the applicant. The city council may establish a fee for the application.

2.     Decision. The director shall consider the application without discretionary review, public notice or hearing in accordance with Chapter 11.5.25 Director Determinations. The director shall approve the application if he or she determines the application meets all requirements and standards in subsections B through U of this section and in the applicable zoning district. The director shall deny the application if he or she determines it does not meet all such requirements. The decision of the director may be appealed in accordance with Section 11.5.25.025.

B.     Locations Allowed. Accessory dwelling units may be established on any lot in the RLD-9 and RLD-15 Districts, and in the RMD and RHD Zones, excluding Old Town and Surfside except as provided in subsection T, where a primary single-unit dwelling has been previously established or is proposed to be established in conjunction with an application for construction of an accessory dwelling unit, subject to compliance with all requirements of this section and the requirements of the underlying zoning district. Only 1 accessory dwelling unit is permitted per primary single-unit dwelling on the same lot.

C.    Primary Dwelling Unit. A legal single-unit dwelling (the “primary dwelling unit”) must exist on the lot or must be constructed on the lot in conjunction with the construction of the accessory dwelling unit. Such primary dwelling unit is further defined as a building that provides complete, independent living facilities, as defined herein, for 1 or more persons as defined herein.

D.    Independent Living Facilities. An accessory dwelling unit shall provide independent living facilities for 1 or more persons and include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking (including a kitchen, as defined herein), and sanitation.

E.     Lot Size and Floor Area.

1.     Minimum Lot Size. The lot or parcel on which the accessory dwelling unit is proposed to be located must be at least 5,000 square feet in size.

2.     Maximum and Minimum Floor Area. The maximum and minimum floor areas of an accessory dwelling unit are set forth in Table 11.4.05.115.E: Accessory Dwelling Unit—Maximum and Minimum Floor Area.

 

Table 11.4.05.115.E

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT—MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM FLOOR AREA

Type of Accessory Dwelling Unit

Area (Square Feet)

Maximum Floor Area

 

Detached

1,200

Attached

50% of existing living area of primary residential unit, maximum increase of floor area of 1,200*

Minimum Floor Area

 

Efficiency

150

1-Bedroom

400

2-Bedroom

600

*      Living area: See definition of “living area” in Table 11.2.05.015, Note (L-4).

 

F.     Zoning Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this section, ministerial approval for an accessory dwelling unit shall not be issued unless the proposed accessory dwelling unit complies with the same height, setback, lot size, lot coverage, and other applicable zoning requirements as apply to the primary dwelling unit.

G.    Access—Entrance Location and Visibility. The accessory dwelling unit shall provide an exterior access separate from the primary dwelling unit. The exterior access shall be a standard exterior door and shall be located in a manner that will preserve, to the greatest extent feasible, the privacy of the primary residence, other accessory structures and any adjoining residences. In order to maintain the single-unit residential character of the street, the entrance to the accessory dwelling unit shall be located so that it is not visible from the public right-of-way. The accessory dwelling unit shall not have interior access from or to the primary dwelling unit.

H.    Emergency Access. An accessory dwelling unit may be permitted only on a lot with access to a public street that meets the fire apparatus access road requirements of the California Fire Code Section 902.2.2.1 et seq., or any successor regulations.

I.      Parking.

1.     Number Required. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, 1 space per accessory dwelling unit or per bedroom, whichever is less, The required off-street parking space for the accessory dwelling unit may be provided in a rear yard setback or side yard setback area or through as tandem parking on a driveway, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this section. The off-street parking space for an accessory dwelling unit shall not be located within the front yard setback area. No accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed unless the existing or proposed primary dwelling is also in compliance with all applicable parking requirements of this code. An accessory dwelling unit is not required to provide parking in any of the following instances:

a.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile (as measured by public pedestrian or vehicle access) of public transit.

b.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

c.     The accessory dwelling unit is part of the proposed or existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

d.     When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.

e.     When there is a car share vehicle located within 1 block of the accessory dwelling unit.

2.     Obstructions. The location of the required parking space(s) for an accessory dwelling unit shall not obstruct the parking of the primary unit or ingress and egress from the public street. At least 1 of the required parking space(s) for the accessory dwelling unit and at least 1 of the required parking space(s) for the primary dwelling unit shall each be independently accessible at all times so that clear access is provided for each subject motor vehicle to access the public street, and the configuration of the parking shall not obstruct fire and other public safety access to and from the primary dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit. Parking for the accessory dwelling unit may be permitted in rear yard setback or side yard setback areas in locations determined by the city or through tandem parking, unless specific findings are made that parking in rear yard setback or side yard setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions.

3.     Replacement on Demolition or Conversion. When an existing garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, or an existing garage, carport or covered parking structure is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, any required off-street parking for the primary dwelling unit shall be replaced elsewhere on the subject property in a ratio of 1:1 in accordance with the requirements of this code as set forth in Table 11.4.20.015.A.1. The replacement spaces for the primary dwelling unit may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts, and in accordance with the requirements of this code as set forth in Table 11.4.20.015.A.1, except that no replacement parking for the primary dwelling unit shall be located within the front yard setback area. No accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted which shall cause the parking spaces for the primary dwelling unit to fall below the minimum required number of parking spaces for the primary unit. The requirement for replacement parking shall not apply to an accessory dwelling unit described in subsection I.1.a through e of this section.

4.     Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, parking for any attached or detached accessory dwelling unit shall not obstruct any public sidewalk, public street or any other public right-of-way for pedestrian travel, including, but expressly not limited to, passage by a person in a wheelchair, and shall not obstruct any fire road, fire lane or other emergency access.

J.     Separation Requirements. Detached accessory dwelling units, which do not share any walls with the primary dwelling unit, shall be separated by at least 10 feet from the primary dwelling unit.

K.     Common Walls. Any common wall separating the attached accessory dwelling unit from the primary dwelling unit shall be soundproofed. Details of the proposed means of soundproofing shall be submitted with plans for construction.

L.     Ownership and Occupancy Requirements.

 

1.     Owner Occupancy Required. The property shall be the primary residence of the property owner. The owner must occupy either the primary dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit as his or her primary principal residence as long as the accessory dwelling unit exists.

2.     Rental Occupancy. The residential unit on the property that is not occupied by the owner of the property in conformance with this subsection may be rented for no less than 30 consecutive days at any time.

3.     Sale of Accessory Dwelling Units. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold, transferred or assigned separately from the primary dwelling unit. The lot upon which the accessory dwelling unit and primary unit are located shall not be subdivided in any manner that would authorize such sale, transfer assignment or ownership.

4.     Annual Verification. The property owner shall annually submit written verification under penalty of perjury on an annual basis, no later than January 1st of each year, to demonstrate that the owner continues to occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit as his or her primary principal residence. Annual verification may consist of proof of homeowner property tax exemption or other written documentation sufficient to establish that the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit is the property owner’s primary residence to the satisfaction of the director.

M.    Deed Restrictions. Before obtaining a building permit for the accessory dwelling unit, the owner of the lot or parcel shall execute and record with the county recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions, which has been approved by the city attorney as to its form and content, containing all restrictions set out in subsection L and the following provisions:

1.     The accessory dwelling unit shall be considered a legal unit, and may be used as habitable space, only so long as either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of record of the property.

2.     The restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property and lack of compliance shall result in legal action against the property owner.

3.     The deed restriction shall further provide that violation of the code will be subject to administrative fines and penalties as contained in Chapter 1.15 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code and may be enforced in accordance with the code and applicable law.

N.    Impact on Historic Resources. No accessory dwelling unit may be approved if located on, or adjacent to, real property that is listed on the California Register of Historic Places.

O.    Setbacks.

1.     Conversion of Existing Structure. No setback shall be required for an existing garage or existing accessory/detached building or portion of an existing garage (or other accessory/detached building) that is converted to an attached accessory dwelling unit, provided it meets fire and building code requirements. An accessory dwelling unit constructed above an existing garage shall have a minimum setback of 5 feet.

2.     Construction of New Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit. If an existing primary dwelling unit is nonconforming as to side yard or rear yard setbacks, a new detached accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted.

P.     Design Criteria.

1.     Architectural style and building form of accessory dwelling units shall match the color, style and form of the primary residence. Architectural details, including, but not limited to, windows, roof pitch, and trim shall match the main building on the property.

2.     Lighting shall be shielded or directed so that it does not glare off-site or illuminate the primary residence or adjacent property.

3.     Windows shall be located to avoid line of sight to windows of adjacent properties. Obscured glass and other techniques may be used to avoid line of sight.

Q.    Health and Safety.

1.     Accessory dwelling units must, at a minimum, adhere to the fire safety standards in the building and fire code for residential structures and use measures such as fire preventative site design, landscaping and building materials, and other required fire suppression techniques as determined by the fire marshal. Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence.

2.     Accessory dwelling units proposed to be developed in areas of geologic hazard must not be endangered by, nor contribute to, hazardous conditions on the site or on adjoining properties.

3.     If the accessory dwelling unit proposed to be developed is in a special flood hazard area identified on the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or in an area known for flooding, the finished floor level of the improvements shall be above the base flood elevation.

R.    Building Permits and Codes. In addition to the provisions herein, accessory dwelling unit construction shall be subject to all applicable provisions and requirements of Title 9 of this code.

S.     Illegal Units. Any illegal building additions or accessory structures on the parcel or lot shall be brought into compliance with the code prior to approval of the accessory dwelling unit.

T.     Conversion of Existing Spaces to an Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit. Notwithstanding any other applicable requirements of this section, the director of development services, or designee, shall ministerially approve an application for an accessory dwelling unit in conjunction with a building permit to create an attached accessory dwelling unit only if all of the following requirements are met:

1.     The proposed attached accessory dwelling unit will be located within a zone allowing for single-family uses;

2.     The proposed attached accessory dwelling unit is contained entirely within the existing space of the existing single-family residence or existing accessory structure on the lot;

3.     The proposed attached accessory dwelling unit has independent exterior access from the existing primary residence that complies with subsection G of this section;

4.     The side and rear setbacks of the proposed attached accessory dwelling unit are sufficient for fire safety;

5.     Only 1 accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per single-family lot; and the lot on which the attached accessory dwelling unit is proposed to be established shall not contain any existing attached or detached accessory living quarters, accessory dwelling units, second units, granny flats, guest houses, servant’s quarters, or similar facilities, unless the proposal includes demolition or modification of such facilities so as to comply with the provisions of this subsection;

6.     The attached accessory dwelling unit shall contain no more than 1 bedroom; and

7.     The proposed attached accessory dwelling unit approved pursuant to this subsection shall comply with subsections L and M relating to owner-occupancy and deed restrictions for either the primary dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit created through this process.

U.    Coastal Zone. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, accessory dwelling units proposed in the Coastal Zone shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city’s Local Coastal Plan and the California Coastal Act (Public Resources Code Section 30000 et seq.), as amended from time to time, including, but expressly not limited to, a coastal development permit. See Chapter 11.4.35. (Ord. 1673; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.120 Restaurant—Alcohol Sales.
A.     Permit Requirement. The establishment of a new restaurant that serves alcoholic beverages, or the reconstruction, enlargement or alteration of an established restaurant currently approved for the sale of alcoholic beverages, may be approved only through the granting of a conditional use permit. The commission shall make the following findings in addition to the findings required by Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits:

1.     The proposed use will not result in an undue concentration of establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages.

2.     The distance of the proposed use from the following uses is sufficient to eliminate adverse impacts due to operational characteristics of the restaurant:

a.     Residential uses;

b.     Religious facilities, schools, libraries, public parks and playgrounds, and other similar uses; and

c.     Other establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages.

3.     Noise levels generated by the operation of the establishment would not exceed the level of background noise normally found in the area or would otherwise not be intrusive.

4.     Signs and other advertising on the exterior of the premises would be compatible with the character of the area.

B.     Compliance with City Council Policy. The conditional use permit shall include all appropriate conditions of City Council Policy 600-1: Standard Conditions for Alcohol Related Land Uses.

C.    Display of Permit Required. The conditional use permit issued for the alcoholic beverage establishment and a copy of the conditions of approval for the permit shall be displayed on the premises of the establishment in a place where it may readily be viewed by any member of the general public. (Ord. 1598)

11.4.05.125 Senior Citizen Apartments and Independent Living Facilities.
Where allowed by Part II: Base District Regulations, age-restricted senior citizen apartments shall comply with the same regulations that are applicable to other non-age-restricted residential developments of the same type in the same zone. (Ord. 1627; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.127 Single Room Occupancy.
Single room occupancy units (SROs) shall conform to the following requirements:

A.     Occupancy shall be limited to maximum 2 persons per unit. Minimum unit sizes (not including toilet compartment) shall be:

1.     One person: 150 square feet.

2.     Two persons: 175 square feet.

B.     Each SRO unit shall be provided with the following minimum amenities:

1.     Kitchen sinks with garbage disposal.

2.     A toilet and sink located in a separate room within the unit that is a minimum 20 square feet.

3.     One closet per person.

4.     Telephone and cable TV hookups.

C.    If full bathrooms are not provided in each unit, shared showers shall be provided on each floor at a ratio of 1 per 7 occupants or fraction thereof on the same floor, with doors lockable from the inside.

D.    If full kitchens are not provided in each unit, shared kitchen facilities shall be provided on each floor consisting of a range, sink with garbage disposal, and refrigerator.

E.     If laundry facilities are not provided in each unit, common laundry facilities shall be provided, with one washer and one dryer on the premises for every 25 units for the first 100 units and one washer and one dryer for every 50 units over 100.

F.     Elevators shall be required for SROs of 2 or more stories. (Ord. 1627)

 

11.4.05.130 Temporary Structures, Trailers, and Modular Units.
A.     Purpose. This section sets forth requirements for the establishment and operation of temporary structures, trailers, and modular units.

B.     Permit and Operational Requirements. The use of temporary structures, trailers, and modular units shall be subject to the following requirements:

 

1.     Minor Use Permit Required. The establishment and operation of a temporary structure, trailer, or modular unit shall require the approval of a minor use permit in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

2.     Only When Permanent Facilities Are Being Constructed or Remodeled. The planning commission may approve a minor use permit only when permanent facilities are being constructed or remodeled in accordance with applicable codes.

3.     Time Limit on Minor Use Permit. Approval shall be limited to a maximum of one year. However, upon request by the applicant, an extension may be granted by the planning commission, only if evidence is provided that extraordinary circumstances exist which prevent the completion of the permanent facilities within the original one-year time period, or if permanent facilities are near completion. A decision by the planning commission to deny a request of an extension may be appealed pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.

4.     Statement of Surety. When required by the director, security in the form of cash, performance bond, letter of credit, or instrument of credit, in an amount equal to 150% of the total cost of removal of such temporary structure or structures, as determined based on an actual bid of a licensed contractor, shall be posted with the city for a 2-year period. See Section 11.5.10.065: Performance Guarantees. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.135 Short-Term Rental of Residentially Zoned Property.
A.     Prohibited. No residentially zoned property, or any portion thereof, shall be leased or rented for a term of 29 days or less for any purpose, including but not limited to any residential or commercial purpose such as vacation rentals, weddings, or other event rentals.

B.     Legal Nonconforming Vacation Rentals. Any vacation rental granted a conditional use permit pursuant to Ordinance No. 1619-U shall be a legal nonconforming use permitted to continue subject to its conditions of approval and Chapter 11.4.40 of the zoning code. (Ord. 1624; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.05.140 Emergency Shelters.
This section sets forth requirements for the establishment and operation of emergency shelter facilities.

A.     Permit and Operational Requirements. The approval and operation of an emergency shelter shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.     Zoning Conformance Required. Emergency shelters may be established and operated in the Boeing Integrated Defense Systems (BIDS) Specific Plan District subject to non-discretionary approval of a zoning conformance in compliance with Chapter 11.5.250: Director Determinations;

2.     Management and Operations Plan. An application for a permit to establish and operate an emergency shelter shall be accompanied by a management plan, which shall establish hours of operation, staffing levels, maximum length of stay, size and location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and intake areas, and security procedures.

B.     Development Standards. In addition to other standards set forth in the BIDS Specific Plan, emergency shelters shall conform to the following standards.

1.     Maximum of 25 beds.

2.     Minimum separation of 300 feet between emergency shelters. (Ord. 1627)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.10 GENERAL SITE STANDARDS
11.4.10.005 Applicability.
This chapter establishes standards for specific uses that are permitted or conditionally permitted in several or all districts, and specific site standards that apply to several or all districts. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.010 Development on Lots Divided by District Boundaries.
A.     Generally. The regulations applicable to each district shall be applied to the area within that district and no use shall be located in a district in which it  is not a permitted or conditionally permitted use.

B.     Determination of District Boundary. See subsection 11.1.10.015.B: Zoning Map, for determination of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district or zone shown upon a zoning map as applied to lots divided by district boundaries, or any part or unit thereof, the following rules shall apply:

1.     In the case of un-subdivided property and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map.

2.     Any remaining uncertainty shall be determined by the director pursuant to Section 11.1.10.015: Rules of Interpretation.

3.     Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated street or alley shall acquire the classification of the adjoining property. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.015 Mechanical Equipment Screening.
All mechanical and electrical equipment, except solar collectors, and antennas shall be screened or incorporated into the building design so as not to be visible. These include, but are not limited to, all roof-mounted equipment, utility meters, cable equipment, telephone entry boxes, backflow preventions, irrigation control valves, electrical transformers and pull boxes. Screening materials shall be consistent with the materials of the building.

A.     Design Requirements. The screen shall exceed the height of the equipment, shall not interfere with the operation of the equipment, and shall utilize materials, colors, and architectural style of screening materials that are architecturally consistent with other on-site development and without giving the appearance of being added on.

B.     Exceptions. Minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits is required for exceptions to the screening of mechanical equipment where the screening enclosure may substantially increase the visual mass of the roof line of a structure and alternative treatment may be preferable. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.020 Performance Standards.
The following performance standards shall apply to development within the city:

A.     Lighting. Lighting shall be provided subject to the following requirements:

1.     Purpose. Parking lots, driveways, circulation areas, passageways, recesses, and grounds contiguous to buildings shall be provided with sufficient illumination levels to make clearly visible the presence of any persons on or about the premises during the hours of business non-operation and shall provide a safe, secure environment for all persons, property, and vehicles on site.

2.     Exterior Fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with the character of the surrounding structure(s) and shall be energy efficient. Fixtures shall be appropriate in height, intensity, and scale to the use they are serving.

3.     Outdoor Illumination Levels. This requirement shall not apply to single-unit residential uses, traffic safety lighting, or public street lighting. A minimum of 0.5 foot candle of illumination shall be maintained at the land surface throughout the area to be illuminated. In addition, related business use parking areas shall conform to the standards set forth in Table 11.4.10.020.A: Outdoor Parking Area Illumination Levels by Use (Average Foot Candles).

Table 11.4.10.020.A

OUTDOOR PARKING AREA ILLUMINATION LEVELS BY USE

(AVERAGE FOOT CANDLES)

Land Use

Illumination Level

(Average Foot Candles)

Financial Institution/Bank

2 to 3 foot candles

Bar/Restaurant

2 to 3 foot candles

Condominium, Apartment, Mixed Use Residential

1 foot candle

Meeting Center

2 foot candles

Convenience Stores

2 to 3 foot candles

Car Wash

2 foot candles

Drive-In/Drive-Through Facilities

2 to 3 foot candles

Automobile Service Station

2 to 3 foot candles

Hotel/Motel

2 foot candles

Office

1 foot candle

Warehouse

1 foot candle

Retail/Commercial

2 to 3 foot candles

Fast Food Facilities

2 to 3 foot candles

Mixed Use Commercial/Residential

2 to 3 foot candles

Pedestrian Courts/Plazas/Walkways

1 to 2 foot candles

 

The electrical or lighting plan shall demonstrate the dispersal of light on the ground surface and compliance with the requirements of this section. Building mounted decorative lights shall not exceed 5 foot-candles measured 5 feet from the light source.

4.     Security Lighting. Security lighting shall be provided in all nonresidential zoning districts at building entrances/exits. Security lighting shall provide a minimum of one foot-candle and a maximum of 2 foot-candles at the ground level of the entrance.

5.     Shielding. This requirement shall not apply to traffic safety lighting, public street lighting, or light trespass into an alley or other public right-of-way. Where the light source is visible from outside the property boundary, shielding shall be required to reduce glare to the greatest degree practicable to prevent light trespass onto an adjacent private property, per subsection 11.6.05.010.L.

6.     Height. Light standards shall be limited to maximum height of 20 feet or the height of the nearest building, whichever is less. The planning commission may allow taller standards in large parking lots that are not adjacent to residential uses or in other special settings upon approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

7.     Recreational Court Lighting. The following standards shall apply to the lighting of outdoor recreational courts:

a.     Type. Fixtures shall be of a type that is rectangular on a horizontal plane. The outside of the fixture, arm, and supporting pole shall be coated with a dark, low reflectance material;

b.     Location. Light fixtures shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the nearest residential property line;

c.     Height. The maximum height of the light fixtures shall be 15 feet measured from the court surface;

d.     Number. Not more than one light fixture for each 900 square feet of court surface is allowed, with a maximum of 8 poles and fixtures for each recreational court;

e.     Supports. Light fixtures shall be supported by an arm extending at least 4 feet from a support pole;

f.      Design. Light fixtures shall be designed, constructed, mounted, and maintained so that, with appropriate shielding, the light source is completely cut off when viewed from any point 5 feet or more beyond the property lines of the subject parcel. The incident light level at a property line shall not exceed one foot-candle measured from finished grade to a height of 12 feet. The incident light level upon any habitable structure on an adjoining property shall not exceed 0.05 foot-candles;

g.     Hours of Operation. Recreational court lighting shall not be operated between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays;

h.     Coating of Surface. In the event that an illuminated court surface is visible from another parcel, the court surface shall be treated with a low reflectance, dark-colored coating; and

i.      Modification of Provisions. Provisions of this subsection may be modified by the planning commission through the approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

8.     Director Authority. The director may require:

a.     Photometric diagram and catalog cuts for conformity review of these standards.

b.     Fixture replacement if it is found that glare continues to be an issue following installation of lighting fixtures.

c.     Illumination levels for uses not set forth in this subsection A.

d.     Minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, when security, energy conservation, aesthetics, or design requirements require modifications of the standards in this subsection A.

B.     Noise. The following noise standards are guidelines and performance-based standards only. If an area currently is below the desired maximum noise levels, an increase in noise up to the maximum should not necessarily be allowed. The impact of a proposed project on an existing land use should be evaluated in terms of the increase in existing noise levels and potential for adverse community impact.

1.     Definitions. The following definitions apply to the provisions of this section only.

a.     Normally Acceptable: the specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.

b.     Conditionally Acceptable: the specified land use may be permitted with the preparation of a noise study and only after detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements and needed noise insulation features are included in the design.

c.     Unacceptable: new construction or development should generally not be undertaken because mitigation is usually not feasible to comply with noise element policies.

2.     Outdoor Noise Levels. All new development shall comply with the outdoor noise standards established in Table 11.4.10.020.B.2: Outdoor Noise Levels.

 

Table 11.4.10.020.B.2

OUTDOOR NOISE LEVELS

 

Exterior Noise Exposure (Ldn or CNEL, dB)

Land Use Type

Normally Acceptable

Conditionally Acceptable

Unacceptable

Residential, Hotel and Motels

60

75

>75

Outdoor Sports and Recreation, Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds

65

80

>80

Schools, Libraries, Museums, Hospitals, Personal Care, Meeting Halls, Religious Institutions

60

75

>75

Office Buildings, Business Commercial, and Professional

60

80

>80

Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheatres

—

70

>70

Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities and Agriculture

70

85

—

 

a.     Outdoor Noise Levels for Residential Areas. The goal for maximum outdoor noise levels in residential areas is an Ldn of 60 dB. This level is a requirement to guide the design and location of future development and is a goal for the reduction of noise in existing development. This goal will be applied where outdoor use is a major consideration (e.g., backyards in single-unit housing developments and open space areas in multi-unit housing projects). The outdoor standard will not normally be applied to the small decks associated with apartments and condominiums but these will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Where the director determines that providing an Ldn of 60 dB or lower outdoors is not feasible, the outdoor goal may be increased to an Ldn of 65 dB upon approval of a minor use permit, pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

b.     Transportation Noise Sources. For other non-transportation related noise sources, noise levels outdoors should not exceed the limits in Table 11.4.10.020.B.2: Outdoor Noise Levels, above.

c.     HVAC Equipment. For noise levels associated with HVAC equipment, please refer to Title 7, Chapter 7, Noise, Section 7.15.035: HVAC Equipment.

3.     Indoor Noise Levels. All new development shall comply with the indoor noise standards established in Table 11.4.10.020.B.3: Indoor Noise Levels.

Table 11.4.10.020.B.3

INDOOR NOISE LEVELS

Land Use Type

Indoor Noise Levels

Residential

45 dB1

Commercial, Industrial and Office

Evaluated on a case-by-case basis; generally 45 Leq (hourly average or less)

1      As required by the State of California Noise Insulation Standards

 

a.     Indoor Instantaneous Noise Levels. Interior noise levels in new residential units exposed to an Ldn of 60 dB or greater should be limited to a maximum instantaneous noise level of 50 dBA in the bedrooms. Maximum instantaneous noise levels in other rooms should not exceed 55 dBA. The typical repetitive maximum instantaneous noise level at each site would be determined by monitoring.

4.     Evaluation of Noise Impacts in Existing Residential Areas. The noise environment in existing residential areas shall be protected. The director shall require the evaluation of mitigation measures for projects under the following circumstances:

a.     The project would cause the Ldn to increase 3 dBA or more.

b.     Any increase would result in an Ldn greater than 60 dBA.

c.     The Ldn already exceeds 60 dBA.

5.     Noise Study Required. The director may require a noise study to be prepared for all new uses with outdoor noise levels within the conditionally acceptable range in Table 11.4.10.020.B.2: Outdoor Noise Levels above, or uses that, in the director’ opinion, may not meet the standards of the noise element. The noise study shall, at a minimum, conform to the following standards:

a.     The analysis shall be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.

b.     Noise levels shall be documented with sufficient sampling periods and locations to adequately describe local noise conditions and noise sources.

c.     Existing and projected noise levels shall be estimated in terms of Leq and Ldn or CNEL. Levels shall be compared to the existing ambient noise levels.

d.     Mitigation shall be recommended, giving preference to site planning and design rather than noise barriers, where feasible.

e.     Noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been implemented shall be estimated.

6.     Noise Mitigation Measures. The approval body may require a project to incorporate any noise mitigation measures deemed necessary to ensure that noise standards are not exceeded.

C.    Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving the use of, or storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be operated with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate fire fighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices, as approved by the Orange County Fire Authority. Incineration is prohibited.

D.    Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. No use, activity or process, other than wireless communications which are regulated specifically in Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in residential districts, or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site on which they are situated.

E.     Vibration. No use, activity or process shall produce vibrations that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at or beyond the property line of the site on which they are situated.

F.     Smoke, Particulate Matter, Odor and Other Air Contaminants. All uses, activities or processes shall be conducted to prevent the emission of particulate matter or air contaminants that are readily detectable without instruments by a reasonable person beyond the property line of the site on which they are situated. All required permits from the South Coast Air Quality Management District shall be obtained.

G.    Humidity, Heat and Cold. All uses shall be operated so as not to produce humidity, heat or cold which is perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at or beyond the property line of the site on which such uses are situated.

H.    Storm Drainage and Storm Water Runoff.

1.     Prevention of Runoff.

a.     Site grading shall be designed to prevent runoff onto adjacent properties and to eliminate the impacts of runoff on all structures on the site.

b.     On-site drainage systems, (i.e., roof drains, downspouts, french drains, swales, etc.) shall be designed and maintained to prevent runoff onto adjacent properties.

2.     Connection to Public Drainage System Required. On-site drainage systems shall be connected directly to the existing public storm drainage system whenever an underground storm drain exists adjacent to a development site. Connection to a storm drainage system shall be in compliance with any required connection permits of the jurisdictional agency.

3.     Runoff Water Quality. Storm water and urban runoff discharges to the public storm drainage system shall be prohibited for all discharges not wholly comprised of storm water, or allowed by a valid National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board. Discharges shall comply with Chapter 9.20: Storm Water Management Program, Chapter 9.25: Fats, Oil and Grease Management and Discharge Control, Chapter 9.30: Sewerage, Chapter 9.35: Water, and Chapter 9.50: Grading of the Municipal Code.

Proposed projects shall be designed to comply with the following requirements, and shall integrate best management practices as required by the city’s NPDES permit and to the satisfaction of the city engineer:

a.     Minimize parking lot pollution through retention, infiltration, and good housekeeping.

b.     Vegetation clearance in preparation for construction shall commence no earlier than one month before the start of construction in the dry season and no more than one week before the start of construction in the wet season.

c.     Runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas shall not be allowed to enter the storm drain.

4.     Non-permeable Surfaces. No more than 50% of required ground-level common open space areas, and of all required setbacks and yards, shall have non-permeable surfaces. Porous paving and landscaping shall be considered permeable surfaces. Where subterranean parking garages extend to property lines, an alternate area of size equal to at least 50% of the required yard shall have a permeable surface.

5.     National Flood Insurance Program. The provisions of Chapter 9.45: Floodplain Management, of the municipal code and the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Parts 59-77, shall be complied with, in all respects, for compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.025 Recycling and Solid Waste Facilities.
A.     Definitions. The following definitions apply to the provisions of this section only.

1.     Existing Development Project: any commercial, industrial, or institutional building, or cluster of buildings, constructed prior to January 1, 2010.

2.     Existing Project: any existing development project, existing public facility, or existing residential project, as those terms are defined by this section.

3.     Existing Public Facility: any existing public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste which was constructed before January 1, 2010.

4.     Existing Residential Project: a residential project which was constructed before January 1, 2010, and which consists of either of the following:

a.     A single building having 5 or more dwelling units; or

b.     A residential project consisting of 5 or more dwelling units where solid waste is not collected and loaded from each individual unit’s curbside, but is instead collected and loaded in a location intended to serve 5 or more dwelling units.

5.     New Development Project: any newly constructed commercial, industrial, or institutional building or cluster of buildings, for which an application for a building permit or other discretionary approval is submitted on or after January 1, 2010.

6.     New Project: any new development project, new public facility, and new residential project, as those terms are defined by this section.

7.     New Public Facility: any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste which is constructed on or after January 1, 2010.

8.     New Residential Project: a newly constructed residential project for which an application for a building permit or other discretionary approval is submitted on or after January 1, 2010, and which consists of either of the following:

a.     A single building having 3 or more dwelling units; or

b.     A residential project consisting of more than one dwelling unit where solid waste is not collected and loaded from each individual unit’s curbside but is instead collected and loaded in a location intended to serve more than one dwelling unit.

9.     Recycling Area (areas for recycling): the interior or exterior space allocated for collecting, storing and loading recyclable material.

B.     New Projects. Any new development project, new residential project, or new public facility for which a building permit is required shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting, storing and loading recyclable materials, subject to the following requirements:

1.     No building permit shall be issued for any new project until the recycling area is approved as being in compliance with the provisions of this section by the director.

2.     In reviewing the recycling area, the director shall consider the standards listed in subsection C: Recycling Area Standards, below.

C.    Recycling Area Standards. The following criteria shall apply to the review of the plans for a recycling area:

1.     Residential Development Minimum Individual and Common Storage Area Requirements.

a.     Multi-Unit Projects. Multi-unit residential projects with 5 or more dwelling units shall provide solid waste and recyclable material storage areas in the following manner:

i.      Individual Unit Storage Requirements. Each dwelling unit shall be designed to include a space with a minimum of 3 cubic feet for the storage of solid waste and 3 cubic feet for the storage of recyclable material; and

ii.     Common Storage Requirements. Table 11.4.10.025.C.1: Residential Development Storage Requirements sets forth the minimum requirements for common solid waste and recyclable material storage areas for multi-unit projects, which may be located indoors or outdoors as long as they are readily accessible to all residents. These requirements apply to each individual structure.

Table 11.4.10.025.C.1

RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STORAGE REQUIREMENTS

 

Minimum Common Storage Area Required (Sq. Ft.)

Number of Dwellings

Solid Waste

Recycling

Total Area

Up to 6

12

12

24

7-15

24

24

48

16-25

48

48

96

26-50

96

96

192

51-75

144

144

288

76-100

192

192

384

101-125

240

240

480

126-150

288

288

576

151-175

316

316

672

176-200

384

384

768

201+

Every additional 25 dwellings shall require an additional 48 sq. ft. for solid waste and 48 sq. ft. for recyclables.

 

2.     Nonresidential Development Minimum Common Storage Area Requirements. Nonresidential structures and uses within all zoning districts shall provide solid waste and recyclable material storage areas. Table 11.4.10.025.C.2: Nonresidential Development Storage Requirements sets forth the minimum storage area requirements. These requirements apply to each primary structure.

Table 11.4.10.025.C.2

NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STORAGE REQUIREMENTS

 

Minimum Storage Area Required (Sq. Ft.)

Building Floor Area (sq. ft.)

Solid Waste

Recycling

Total Area

Up to 5,000

12

12

24

5,001-10,000

24

24

48

10,001-25,000

48

48

96

25,001-50,000

96

96

192

50,001-75,000

144

144

288

75,001-100,000

192

192

384

100,001+

Every additional 25,000 sq. ft. shall require an additional 48 sq. ft. for solid waste and 48 sq. ft. for recyclables.

 

D.    Change in Recycling Area Location. An owner or operator may not modify the design, location or configuration of a recycling area approved by the director or the planning commission, without first consulting the director to determine if any other city approvals are required.

E.     Solid Waste and Recycling Enclosures.

1.     Location and Orientation. All enclosures shall comply with the California Fire Code and shall meet the following requirements unless it is demonstrated that they are infeasible. A building permit shall not be issued for a project until documentation of approval of the location is provided by the director.

a.     Location. No enclosures shall be located within any required front yard or street side yard setback areas unless it is satisfactorily demonstrated to the director that due to originality of design, architectural treatments, and lack of visibility of loading areas, the location meets the intent of this section.

b.     Compatibility with Equipment. Solid waste and recycling enclosures shall be located so that the current equipment used by the city’s franchised solid waste collector and recycling collector has sufficient maneuvering areas and, if feasible, so that the collection equipment can avoid backing. The enclosure pad shall have an apron with a minimum width of 10 feet and length of 30 feet. Projects and applicants are responsible for procuring current equipment size and turning radius from the city’s franchised solid waste/recycling collector.

c.     Consolidation of Enclosure Areas. All enclosure types shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites and located so as to reasonably equalize the distance from the building spaces they serve. For multi-unit residential projects, there should be a minimum of 1 trash enclosure per 50 units and the enclosure should be located within 100 feet of the residential units. Exceptions may be approved by the director to take into account specifics of the site plan and unit location.

d.     Clear of Obstructions. The area in front of and surrounding all enclosure types shall be kept clear of obstructions, shall not be utilized for parking, and shall be painted, striped, and marked “No Parking.”

2.     Materials, Construction, and Design. The materials, construction and design of solid waste and recycling enclosures for single-unit projects shall be subject to director approval. For commercial and multi-unit projects, the various components of solid waste and recycling-container enclosures shall be constructed and thereafter maintained as follows:

a.     Enclosure Material. Enclosure material shall be solid masonry or concrete tilt-up with decorated exterior-surface finish compatible to the main structure(s).

b.     Gate Material. Gate material shall be decorative, solid, heavy-gauge metal or a heavy-gauge metal frame with a covering of a view-obscuring material.

c.     Enclosure Pad. Four-inch-thick-minimum concrete pad.

d.     Bumpers. Two inches by 6 inches thick and made of concrete, steel, or other suitable material and shall be anchored to the concrete pad.

e.     Protection for Enclosures. Concrete curbs or equivalent shall protect enclosures from adjacent vehicle parking and travel ways.

f.      Travelways and Area in Front of Enclosure. An adequate base to support a truck weight of 62,000 pounds. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.030 Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs.
The following standards apply to swimming pools and hot tubs in all districts:

A.     Lot Coverage.

1.     Residential Districts. The maximum pool or hot tub area, measured at the high water line, shall be no more than 20% of the lot area.

2.     All Other Districts. The maximum pool or hot tub area shall be as approved by the decision-making body for any discretionary project, or by the director if no discretionary approval is required.

3.     Rear Yard. No pool or hot tub shall occupy over 60% of the required rear yard. Coverage by a swimming pool or hot tub shall not be considered in measuring maximum lot coverage unless it is enclosed in a roofed structure.

B.     Location. The minimum distance from a lot line to the nearest point of a pool or hot tub shall be as follows:

District

Front and Street Side Lot Line

Rear and Side Lot Line (not along street)

Residential

50 ft. – Front

10 ft. - Street Side

4 ft.

All Other Districts

As approved by the planning commission pursuant to a minor use permit

 

C.    Enclosures for Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs.

1.     Swimming Pools. All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a protective fence in compliance with the provisions of the California Building Code.

2.     Hot Tubs. Hot tubs shall be either enclosed or screened to prevent noise and other disturbance to adjacent properties. When a hot tub is located in a required rear or side yard in a residential district, landscaping between 6 and 8 feet in height shall be provided between the hot tub and fence separating adjacent properties to provide a privacy buffer. This requirement may be waived by the director if there is a large setback from the property line, fencing taller than 6 feet, a structure enclosing the hot tub, or other feature that acts as a privacy buffer.

D.    Filter and Heating Systems. All swimming pool and hot tub filtration and heating systems shall be set back a minimum of 1 foot from any property line and a minimum of 10 feet from any adjacent dwelling unit, or 8 feet with sound attenuation approved by city staff. All filtration and heating systems shall comply with SBMC Title 7: Noise, Section 7.15.035: HVAC Equipment.

E.     Public Pool and Semipublic Pool. A conditional use permit shall be obtained pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits before the construction of any public pool. All public and semipublic pools shall meet all of the requirements of the state and local health departments, building codes, and the provisions of this zoning code.

F.     Permanent Wading Pools. Permanent wading pools are not permitted in any required setback area and shall not be located or maintained in a manner contrary to the public health and safety of the people residing in the area.

G.    Engineer’s Statement. A written statement from a civil engineer registered in the State of California that certifies that construction of the pool will not have a detrimental effect on any neighboring structures, shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit.

H.    Elevated Swimming Pools. All elevated swimming pools, constructed on the ground, may not be higher than 4 feet. (Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.035 Underground Utilities.
All electrical, telephone, cable television, and similar distribution lines providing direct service to a development site shall comply with all undergrounding requirements specified in Title 9, Public Property, Public Works and Building Regulations, Section 9.55: Underground Utilities and Title 10: Subdivisions, of the municipal code. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.040 Street and Highway Dedications and Improvements.
A.     Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for development or redevelopment of any use or building on any property abutting streets and highways shown in the “Circulation Element of the General Plan” until the streets and highways are dedicated to the city to their ultimate right-of-way width and length abutting the subject property. Full improvements shall be constructed by the developer to the specifications contained in Title 10: Subdivisions, and Chapter 9.55: Underground Utilities, of the municipal code and to the requirements of the city engineer.

Exception. If at the time of development it is impractical, in the opinion of the city engineer, for the required improvement to be provided, the owner of the subject property shall deposit a faithful performance bond with the city in an amount as determined by the city engineer, sufficient to insure the construction of the improvements.

B.     Establishment of Centerlines. The centerline of any street or highway shown on the circulation element may be established by resolution of the planning commission and becomes effective upon affirmation by city council.

C.    Minor Additions or Expansions. Minor additions or expansion to existing buildings, not exceeding 150 square feet or 5% of the existing building area, may be excluded by issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

D.    Deviation of Provisions. Any deviation from the provisions of this section may be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.10.045 Solar Energy Systems.
The following installation standards shall apply to solar energy systems.

A.     Solar Collectors.

1.     Roof-mounted collectors shall be placed in the location least visible from public streets without reducing the operating efficiency of the collectors, unless they are integrated into the design of the structure as an architectural element.

2.     Wall-mounted and ground-mounted collectors shall be screened from public view.

3.     Collectors shall be mounted at the same angle or as close as possible to the pitch of the roof.

B.     Appurtenant Equipment. Appurtenant equipment, plumbing, and related fixtures, shall be installed in the attic, where feasible, or shall be screened from public view. See also Section 11.4.10.015: Mechanical Equipment Screening.

C.    Accessory Fixtures. Large accessory fixtures which generally require exposure (e.g., storage tanks) shall be screened through architectural features that harmonize with other elements of the structure, shall not be located in any required front or side yards, nor be visible from any public right-of-way.

D.    Exterior Finishes. Exterior surfaces shall have a matte finish and shall be color coordinated to harmonize with roof materials or other dominant colors of the structure. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.15 FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS
11.4.15.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all fences, hedges, and walls unless otherwise stated. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to fences required by state law to surround and enclose public utility installations or to fences located on federal or school district properties. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.15.010 General Height Limitations.
A.     Maximum Heights. Fences, hedges, and walls (except retaining walls) may be constructed to the heights shown in Table 11.4.15.010.A.1: Allowable Heights. Additional standards for specific areas are set forth in Table 11.4.15.010.A.2: Allowable Heights—Specific Locations. See also Section 11.4.15.015: Height Limitations for Retaining Walls.

Table 11.4.15.010.A.1

ALLOWABLE HEIGHTS

Location

Maximum Height

Front setbacks

3.5 feet

Rear and interior side setbacks

7 feet1

Street-side setbacks

7 feet1

At intersections of streets, alleys, and driveways within traffic safety sight areas

30 inches if solid; otherwise the maximum height normally allowed, if the fence material is 75% open (e.g., lattice)

Alleys

6 feet if not within 5.5 feet of the rear property line

1      An additional 1 foot of height is allowed (to a maximum of 8 feet tall), but all fencing material above 7 feet in height shall be open grill or latticework, or a similar open design allowing light and air to pass through at least 50% of the fencing material.

 

 

Table 11.4.15.010.A.2

ALLOWABLE HEIGHTS—SPECIFIC LOCATIONS

Maximum Allowable Height

Specific Locations

10 feet

Between residential and commercial/industrial zone districts

10 feet

Along the rear yards of lots that are located along the following roadways:

 

  Almond Avenue

 

  Balboa Drive from Pacific Coast Highway to Bolsa Avenue

 

  Bolsa Avenue

 

  First Street

 

  Lampson Avenue

 

  Marina Drive

 

  Pacific Coast Highway

 

  San Diego Freeway

 

  Seal Beach Boulevard

 

  Westminster Avenue

 

  I-605/7th Street Connector

 

  Beverly Manor Road

10 feet

Along the rear yards of lots that are adjacent to the following areas/facilities:

 

  Hellman Ranch

 

  Gum Grove Park

 

  East flood control channel, College Park East

 

  Edison Park

 

  West property line, Leisure World

8 feet

RLD-15 District, where 7-foot fences are permitted pursuant to Table 11.4.15.010.A.1

 

B.     Visibility.

1.     On reverse corner lots and corner lots abutting an alley, no fence, wall or hedge greater than 42 inches in height may be located within the triangular area formed by measuring 10 feet from the intersection of the rear and street side property lines.

2.     On corner lots, no fence, wall, landscaping, berming, sign, or other visual obstruction between 42 inches and 7 feet in height as measured from the adjacent curb elevation may be located within the triangular area formed by measuring 25 feet from the intersection of the front and street side property lines or their prolongation. Trees trimmed free of branches and foliage so as to maintain visual clearance below 7 feet shall be permitted. See Figure 11.4.15.010.B: Intersection and Driveway Visibility Standards.

3.     Visibility of a driveway crossing a street or alley property line or of intersecting driveways shall not be blocked between a height of 42 inches and 7 feet within a triangular area formed by measuring 10 feet from intersecting driveways or street/alley and driveway. See Figure 11.4.15.010.B: Intersection and Driveway Visibility Standards.

 

Figure 11.4.15.010.B

Intersection and Driveway Visibility Standards



 

C.    Modifications to Fence Height Standards. The planning commission may modify the fence height standards referenced in subsection A of this section, subject to the approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Findings and Decision. The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director, that the following findings are met in addition to those required for use permits pursuant to Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings:

1.     That the fence will be compatible with the design, appearance, and physical characteristics of the site and other existing structures in the surrounding neighborhood;

2.     That the height, orientation, and location of the fence is in proper relation to the physical characteristics of the site and surrounding properties;

3.     That the fence will be a planned architectural feature and would not dominate the site or overwhelm surrounding properties, structures, or passersby; and

4.     That the fence will be of sound construction and located so as not to cause a safety hazard. (Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.15.015 Height Limitations for Retaining Walls.
A.     City-Wide Standards.

1.     A retaining wall less than or equal to 30 inches in height is automatically permitted.

2.     A retaining wall greater than 30 inches and up to 48 inches in height is permitted subject to minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. If such a wall faces a public street or place, such wall shall be screened by a landscape buffer at least 18 inches wide.

3.     A retaining wall greater than 48 inches in height is permitted subject to conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

4.     A guard rail shall be placed, when necessary, on a retaining wall in accordance with the California Building Code.

5.     A fence, wall, hedge or screen planting may be placed on a retaining wall provided the combined height of the retaining wall and fence, wall, hedge or screen planting does not exceed 10 feet.

6.     If the combined height of a retaining wall and fence exceeds 6 feet, then the fence shall be separated from the retaining wall by a landscape terrace at least 3 feet wide.

7.     If a set back area contains multiple retaining walls, such walls shall be separated by landscaped terraces at least 3 feet wide. All landscaped terraces shall be landscaped with automatic sprinkler systems in compliance with Section 11.4.30.010: Landscape and Irrigation Plans. See Figure 11.4.15.015: Multiple Retaining Wall Separations.

Figure 11.4.15.015

Multiple Retaining Wall Separations



 

B.     RLD-9 Zone—Ocean Avenue Standards.

1.     Scope. The standards of this paragraph B.1 apply to side yard retaining walls abutting a public street within the RLD-9 Zone on Ocean Avenue between First Street and Eighth Street. To the extent not in conflict with these standards, the city-wide standards of subsection A apply to such retaining walls as well.

2.     A retaining wall greater than 30 inches in height is permitted subject to minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. There is no maximum height for retaining walls in this area.

3.     The base of the public side of a retaining wall greater than 30 inches in height shall be screened by a landscape buffer at least 3 feet wide if required in connection with the minor use permit approval.

4.     A retaining wall shall not be erected along the rear 96 feet of a lot.

5.     A retaining wall shall not be erected on public property unless an encroachment permit has been obtained.

C.    RLD-9 Zone—Gum Grove Park Standards.

1.     Scope. The standards of this subsection C apply to rear yard retaining walls abutting Gum Grove Park or the wetlands area within the RLD-9 Zone along the following streets: Avalon, Catalina, Crestview and Surf Place. To the extent not in conflict with these standards, the city-wide standards of subsection A apply to such retaining walls as well.

2.     A retaining wall may not exceed a height of 6 feet.

3.     If a set back area contains multiple retaining walls, such walls shall be separated by a landscape terrace at least 3 feet wide.

D.    Nonconforming Retaining Walls. Lawfully erected retaining walls existing prior to January 1, 2010 shall be deemed nonconforming and may remain as is indefinitely unless damaged to the extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost. In the event of such damage, the wall shall be restored in conformance with this section. If a nonconforming wall is removed from a lot, each future retaining wall on the lot shall be in conformance with this section.

E.     Miscellaneous. All landscape buffers and landscape terraces shall be equipped with automatic sprinklers and continuously maintained in good condition. Height limits shall be based on measurements made on both sides of the retaining wall. All landscaped terraces shall be landscaped with automatic sprinkler systems in compliance with Section 11.4.30.010: Landscape and Irrigation Plans. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.15.020 Measurement of Fence or Wall Height.
A.     Determination of Height. Refer to Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement, subsection 11.1.15.025.C: Measurement of Fence or Wall Height to determine wall and fence heights.

B.     Averaging.

1.     Variations. To allow for minor variations in topography, the height of a fence or wall may vary up to 6 inches.

2.     Average Finished Grade. The variation shall be dependent on the average finished grade which shall be determined by adding to the lowest grade adjacent to the fence or wall, one-half of the difference in elevation of the grade on each side of the fence.

3.     Maximum Height. The average height of a fence or wall shall not exceed the maximum height allowed. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.15.025 Special Wall and Fencing Requirements.
A.     Swimming Pools, Spas, and Similar Features. Swimming pools, spas, and other similar features shall be fenced in compliance with requirements of the California Building Code. See also Section 11.4.10.030: Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs.

B.     Walkway and Driveway Architectural Features. A maximum of 1 walkway and 1 driveway architectural feature such as an arbor, archway, or gate structure shall be permitted for each full 100 feet of street or private easement frontage; provided that a maximum of 1 such feature is allowed for properties with less than 100 feet of street or private easement frontage. Such architectural features require minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, and shall conform to the maximum dimensions and criteria set forth in Figure 11.4.15.025.B: Architectural Features Around Walkways and Driveways.

Figure 11.4.15.025.B

Architectural Features Around Walkways and Driveways



 



 

C.    Outdoor Equipment, Storage, and Work Areas. Screening of outdoor uses and equipment and activities shall be provided in compliance with Section 11.4.30.040: Buffer Yards, and Section 11.4.05.090: Outdoor Dining, Display, and Sales Standards.

D.    Sport Facility and Golf Course Fencing. Fencing height greater than that allowed by Section 11.4.15.010: General Height Limitations, may be permitted by minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

E.     Temporary Fencing. Temporary fencing used during site preparation and construction shall be subject to the approval of the director.

F.     Fence and Wall Design. In new development the director shall utilize the following guidelines in reviewing and approving fences and walls:

1.     Uniformity Required. Fence or wall designs should be consistent throughout a multi-unit or nonresidential development, or single-unit subdivision, although multiple designs may be employed in large projects.

2.     Mix of Materials Required. The design should include a mix of materials and finishes that are compatible with the overall design of the project.

3.     Articulation Required. Perimeter fences and walls adjoining public rights-of-way should be articulated as determined by the director. See also Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards; subsection 11.4.30.015.B: Street Side and Street Rear Property Line Walls. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.15.030 Restrictions on Fence Materials.
A.     Security Fences. Barbed wire, electrified, or razor wire fences, and other similar types of security fences are prohibited in all residential zoning districts and on commercial properties adjoining a residential zoning district. The use of such fence materials on commercial, mixed-use, light manufacturing, and oil extraction properties that do not adjoin a residential zoning district shall be subject to minor use permit review, in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     Chain-link. Except for temporary fencing associated with construction, the use of chain-link fencing shall not be allowed on a residentially zoned or developed property. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.15.035 Authority to Waive or Modify Requirements—Restrictions on Fence Materials.
The planning commission may waive or modify the requirements of Section 11.4.15.030: Restrictions on Fence Materials through approval of a minor use permit in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, for nonresidential projects where evidence is presented that a higher degree of security is required and that the security may only be achieved through the use of barbed wire or similar security-type fencing materials. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.20 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11.4.20.005 Applicability.
The regulations of this chapter apply to:

A.     New development, and

B.     Any alterations or additions to an existing building or change in use that increases the number of parking spaces required by this chapter over the total number of spaces required before the alteration, enlargement, or change in use. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.010 Review Procedure.
The design, location, and surfacing of required parking shall be subject to review and approval by the director. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.015 Required Off-Street Parking Spaces.
Off street motor vehicle parking shall be provided in all residential, commercial and other districts in accordance with the following provisions:

A.     Number of Spaces Required. Each land use shall be provided at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces stated in Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking, except where a parking reduction has been granted in compliance with Section 11.4.20.020: Parking Reductions. Parking requirements for the Main Street Specific Plan District are stated in Table 11.4.20.015.A.2: Required Parking—Main Street Specific Plan District, except where a parking reduction has been granted in compliance with Section 11.4.20.020: Parking Reductions. For land uses located within the Main Street Specific Plan District that are not specified in Table 11.4.20.015.A.2: Required Parking—Main Street Specific Plan District, the standards of Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking shall apply.

B.     When Constructed. Off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities required by this chapter shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the use they serve.

 

C.    Calculation of Required Spaces.

1.     Fractions. If a calculation of the number of required off-street parking spaces results in a fraction that is 0.50 or higher, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If such calculation results in a fraction that is less than 0.50, the fraction shall be rounded down to the preceding whole number. For example, if computed requirements equal 9.5 spaces, 10 spaces will be required. If computed requirements equal 9.4 spaces, 9.0 spaces will be required.

2.     Floor Area. Where an off-street parking or loading requirement is stated in Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking, or in Table 11.4.20.015.A.2: Required Parking—Main Street Specific Plan District as a ratio of parking spaces to floor area, floor area is assumed to be gross floor area, unless otherwise stated.

3.     Employees. Where an off-street parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to employees, the number of employees shall be based on the largest shift that occurs in a typical week.

D.    Multiple Land Uses. When 2 or more primary uses are located in the same lot or within the same building, the number of off-street parking spaces required shall be the sum total of the requirements of the various individual uses.

E.     Uses Not Specified. In the case of a land use for which off-street parking requirements are not specified in this section, the director shall establish a requirement considering the parking requirements for the most nearly similar use for which off-street parking requirements are specified, and any other relevant studies and data regarding parking demand. Such director determination shall be made in accordance with subsection 11.1.10.015.C: Interpretations.

F.     Substitution of Compact for Standard Parking Stalls. Twenty-five percent of required spaces may be compact spaces. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all parking spaces serving building materials stores and home improvement sales and service stores must be standard size. Required dimensions for standard-size and compact spaces are stated in Tables 11.4.20.025.C: Parking Area Space Dimensions for Automobiles—Standard Spaces, and 11.4.20.025.D: Parking Area Space Dimensions for Automobiles—Compact Spaces.

 

Table 11.4.20.015.A.1

REQUIRED PARKING

Use Classification

Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Types

 

 

Single-Unit Dwelling

2 spaces per studio unit.

 

 

2 spaces per dwelling unit for each unit of 1 to 5 bedrooms.

 

 

3 spaces per dwelling for each unit of 6 bedrooms or more plus 1 additional space for each bedroom above 6 total bedrooms in the dwelling unit.

See also Section 11.2.05.015.N: Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage. All required spaces must be located in a garage. See also Section 11.2.05.015.N.4: Required Garage Exception—RLD-9 District. See also Section 11.2.05.015.N.5: Required Garage Exception—Surfside. See also Section 11.2.05.015.N.6: Required Garage Exception—RHD-20 District. See also Section 11.4.40.010.B: Maintenance, Nonstructural Repairs and Interior Alterations. Note: Additions to existing single-unit dwellings may have a reduced parking requirement approved by minor use permit subject to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

Accessory Dwelling Unit

1 space per accessory dwelling unit or per bedroom, whichever is less.

Section 11.4.05.115.I: Residential Uses - Accessory Dwelling Units. Required spaces may be provided in tandem configuration on a driveway or in rear yard or side yard setback areas, subject to topographical or public safety requirements per Section 11.4.05.115.I.2. For replacement spaces. see Section 11.4.05.115.I.3.

Two-Unit Dwelling; Multiple-Unit Residential

2 spaces per dwelling unit for each unit. 1 guest space for every 7 units. 1 space per dwelling unit, inclusive of guest parking, for each studio or one-bedroom unit in a development meeting the minimum requirements of Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus.

See also Section 11.2.05.015.N: Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage. All spaces except guest spaces must be located in a garage or carport.

Small Family Day Care

No additional spaces required (besides the required spaces for the residential dwelling).

 

Large Family Day Care

1 space per employee, with a minimum of 3 provided.

Section 11.4.05.045.B: Large Family Day Care Homes

Group Housing

0.5 space per unit.

See also Section 11.2.05.015.N: Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage

Senior Citizen Housing

0.5 space per unit.

See also Section 11.2.05.015.N: Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage

Transitional Housing

0.5 space per unit.

See also Section 11.2.05.015.N: Limitations on Parking and Garage Frontage

Public, Semi-Public, and Service Use Types

 

Cemetery

To be determined by Director, who may require a parking demand analysis.

 

Clubs and Lodges

1 space per 5 fixed seats or per 75 square feet of main assembly area, whichever is greater. Each 24″ of bench type seating is considered 1 seat.

 

Community Center

1 space per 5 fixed seats or per 75 square feet of main assembly area, whichever is greater. Each 24″ of bench type seating is considered 1 seat.

 

Social Service Organization

To be determined by director, who may require parking demand analysis.

 

Cultural Institutions

1 space per 5 fixed seats or per 75 square feet of main assembly area, whichever is greater. Each 24″ of bench type seating is considered 1 seat.

 

Day Care Center

1 space per employee, with a minimum of 3 spaces provided.

Section 11.4.05.045.C: Child Day Care Center

Golf Course

Minimum of 5 spaces per hole.

 

Government Offices

1 space per 400 square feet.

 

Hospitals and Clinics

 

 

Hospitals

1 space per bed.

 

Clinics

1 space per 250 square feet.

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

To be determined by director, who may require parking demand analysis.

 

Parking Facilities, Public

1 space per attendant station.

 

Public Maintenance and Service Facilities

To be determined by director, who may require parking demand analysis.

 

Public Safety Facilities

To be determined by director, who may require parking demand analysis.

 

Religious Facilities

1 space per 5 fixed seats or per 75 square feet of main assembly area, whichever is greater. Each 24″ of bench type seating is considered 1 seat.

 

Residential Care Facilities

 

Residential Care, General

1 space per 2 employees, plus 1 space per facility vehicle.

 

Residential Care, Limited

None required above the requirement for the residential dwelling type.

 

Residential Care, Senior

1 space per 5 beds.

 

Schools, Private

Junior high/elementary school: 1 space per classroom, plus 1 space per 300 square feet of office area.

 

High school: 1 space per classroom, plus 1 space per 300 square feet of office area, plus 1 space per 10 students.

 

Commercial Use Types

 

Adult Business Establishments

Retail establishments: 1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Bars

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

Animal Sales and Services

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Kennel

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area.

 

Artists’ Studios

1 space per studio.

 

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

 

Automobile Rentals

1 per 300 square feet of office area in addition to storage/display spaces for all vehicles for rent.

 

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing

1 per 300 square feet of office area in addition to storage/display spaces for all vehicles for sale or lease.

 

Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Major

1 space per service bay (not including areas for auto service or auto storage), plus parking for any towing vehicles used in the operation.

 

Automobile Service Station/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor

1 space per 300 square feet of any convenience store plus 1 space per service bay if repair occurs on-site (in addition to spaces at pumps, queuing areas for pumps, and areas for self-service water and air areas).

 

Automobile Washing

1 per 300 square feet of any indoor sales, office, or lounge areas.

 

Large Vehicle Sales, Services and Rental

1 space per 300 square feet of office area in addition to storage/ display spaces for all vehicles for rent.

 

Banks and Other Financial Institutions

1 space per 250 square feet.

 

With Drive-Through Facilities

1 space per 250 square feet of floor area. No additional spaces required for drive-through facility.

 

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)

2 spaces per ATM.

 

Bed and Breakfasts

1 space per guest room, in addition to 1 space required for resident owner.

Section 11.3.05.015: General Provisions

Building Materials and Services

1 space per 500 square feet of building area plus 1 space per 600 sq. ft. of outdoor sales/ display area.

Section 11.4.20.015.F: Substitution of Compact for Standard Parking Stalls

Business Services

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Commercial Recreation

 

Large-Scale (greater than 20,000 sq. ft.)

Gyms and fitness studios: 1 space per 300 square feet. Other specific uses: to be determined by director, who may require a parking demand analysis.

 

Small-Scale (20,000 sq. ft. or less)

Gyms and fitness studios: 1 space per 300 square feet. Other specific uses: to be determined by director, who may require a parking demand analysis.

 

Day Spa/Spa

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

Bars

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

Restaurants, Fast Food

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

Restaurants, Full Service

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

Restaurants, Limited Service

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

Restaurants, Take Out Only

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

With Drive-Through Facilities

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

With Outdoor Eating Areas

1 space per 100 square feet, including outdoor dining areas.

 

Food and Beverage Sales

 

Catering Services

1 space per 1000 square feet, plus parking for any vehicles used in the business.

 

Convenience Market

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

General Market

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Liquor Stores

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries

To be determined by the director, who may require a parking demand analysis.

 

Home Improvement Sales and Services

1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area or outdoor sales display.

Subsection 11.4.20.015.F: Substitution of Compact for Standard Parking Stalls

Hotels and Motels

1 space per unit; plus 2 spaces adjacent to registration office; 1 space per 20 person capacity of any conference or banquet rooms.

 

Laboratories

1 space per 400 square feet.

 

Live/Work Unit

1 space per unit for each unit smaller than 1000 square feet; 1.5 spaces per unit for each unit containing 1000 square feet or greater floor area or 2 or more bedrooms.

 

Maintenance and Repair Services

1 space per 500 square feet.

 

Massage Establishment

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Offices, Business and Professional

1 space per 400 square feet.

 

Walk-in Clientele

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Offices, Medical and Dental

1 space per 200 square feet.

 

Parking Facilities, Commercial

1 space per attendant station (in addition to parking spaces for customers).

 

Personal Improvement Services

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Massage, Accessory

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Personal Services

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Massage, Accessory

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Beauty/Barber Shops

2 spaces for each operator station.

 

Retail Sales

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Shopping Centers greater than 75,000 square feet of GFA

5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA.

Subsection 11.4.20.015.F: Substitution of Compact for Standard Parking Stalls

Tattoo Parlors

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Theaters

1 space per 4 seats.

 

Light Manufacturing Use Types

 

Contractors’ Yards

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area (if building exists).

 

Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing

1 space per 750 square feet.

 

Industry, General

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area.

 

Industry, Limited

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area.

 

Warehousing and Storage

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area.

 

Indoor Commercial Storage

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area.

 

Outdoor Storage

1 space per 1000 square feet of building area.

 

Personal Storage

1 space per 20 storage units.

 

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Use Types

 

Communication Facilities

 

Antennae and Transmission Towers

No spaces required unless maintenance occurs on a daily or more frequent basis, in which case 1 space per facility required.

 

Facilities Within Buildings

None

 

Recycling Facilities

 

 

Reverse Vending Machine

When accessory to another use, no additional spaces required. Otherwise, subject to determination by director.

 

Recycling Collection Point

A minimum of 6 spaces for customers, plus 1 space for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility.

 

Recycling Processing Facility

1 space per 1000 square feet.

 

Utilities, Major

To be determined by the director, who may require a parking demand analysis.

 

Utilities, Minor

No spaces required unless maintenance occurs on a daily or more frequent basis, in which case 1 space per facility required.

 

Agricultural Use Types

 

 

Crop and Animal Raising

None for the crop or animal raising operation area. 1 space per 300 square feet of any accessory retail outlet.

 

Nurseries

1 space per 350 square feet of indoor or outdoor sales/display area.

 

 

Table 11.4.20.015.A.2

REQUIRED PARKING—MAIN STREET

SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT

Use Classification

Required Off-Street

Parking Spaces

Additional Regulations

Commercial Use Types

 

 

Beauty Salon/Nail Shop

2 spaces per operator station.

 

Business Offices

1 space per 300 square feet.

 

Coffee Houses/Desert Shops

1 space per 500 square feet.

 

Financial Institution

1 space per 250 square feet.

 

Professional Offices

1 space per 250 square feet.

 

Furniture Stores

1 space per 1,000 square feet.

 

Grocery Stores

1 space per 1,000 square feet.

 

Hardware Stores

1 space per 1,000 square feet.

 

Horticultural Nursery

1 space per 2,500 square feet.

 

Medical Offices

1 space per 200 square feet.

 

Movie Theater

1 space per 6 seats.

 

Office, no customer services

1 space per 4 employees or 500 square feet, whichever is greater.

 

Drug Store/Pharmacy

1 space per 1,000 square feet.

 

Restaurant

1 space per 100 square feet.

 

Retail Stores

1 space per 500 square feet.

 

(Ord. 1673; Ord. 1627; Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.020 Parking Reductions.
The required number of parking spaces may be reduced in accordance with the following provisions:

A.     Shared Parking.

1.     Permit Requirement. A conditional use permit may be approved for shared parking facilities serving more than one use on a site or serving more than one property. The use permit may allow for a reduction of the total number of spaces required by this chapter if the following findings are made, in addition to the required findings pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings:

a.     The peak hours of parking demand from all uses do not coincide so that peak demand will not be greater than the parking provided; and

b.     The adequacy of the quantity and efficiency of parking provided will equal or exceed the level that can be expected if parking for each use were provided separately.

2.     Shared Parking Agreement. A written agreement between the landowner(s) and the city shall be filed, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, and including:

a.     A guarantee that there will be no substantial alteration in the uses that will create a greater demand for parking without application for an approval of a use permit;

b.     A guarantee among the landowner(s) for access to and use of the shared parking facilities; and

c.     Evidence that the agreement has been recorded in the county recorder’s office.

B.     Other Parking Reductions. Required parking for any use except a single-unit dwelling, second unit, or two-unit dwelling may be reduced through approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings.

1.     Criteria for Approval. The commission may only grant a conditional use permit for reduced parking if it finds that the project meets all of the conditional use permit criteria in Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings, and that at least 2 of the following findings can be made:

a.     The use will be adequately served by the proposed parking due to the nature of the proposed operation; proximity to frequent transit service; transportation characteristics of persons residing, working or visiting the site; or because the applicant has undertaken a transportation demand management program that will reduce parking demand at the site.

b.     Parking demand generated by the project will not exceed the capacity of or have a detrimental impact on the supply of on-street parking in the surrounding area.

c.     The site plan is consistent with the objectives of the zoning district, and incorporates features such as unobtrusive off-street parking placed below the ground level of the project with commercial uses above, or enclosed parking on the ground floor.

C.    Application Submittal Requirements. In order to evaluate a proposed project’s compliance with the above criteria, the director may require submittal of a parking demand study that substantiates the basis for granting a reduced number of spaces and includes the following information:

1.     Total square footage of all uses within existing and proposed development and the square footage devoted to each type of use;

2.     Existing parking surveys of the surrounding area;

3.     Trip generation rates expected for existing and proposed development;

4.     A description of any transportation demand management program that would result in reduced parking demand through measures such as preferential carpool spaces, telecommuting or staggered works shifts, provision of transit passes or other transit incentives for residents or employees, incorporation of spaces for car share vehicles, bicycle trip-end facilities, provision of shuttles to transit stations, or other measures; and

5.     The lot or business owner’s plan to reasonably provide alternative solutions to off-street parking on the lot.

D.    Main Street Specific Plan District In-Lieu Parking Program.

1.     Participation in Program Required. In the event a use cannot provide the off-street parking spaces required by Table 11.4.20.015.A.1: Required Parking or Table 11.4.20.015.A.2: Required Parking—Main Street Specific Plan District, such use shall not be established unless there is full compliance with all the requirements of the Main Street in-lieu parking program as established in this section. All or part of off-street parking space requirements may be satisfied by compliance with this section.

2.     In-Lieu Parking Fee. The in-lieu parking fee and the formula for calculating such fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.

3.     Existing Uses—Parking Deficiencies. Any use which existed prior to September 12, 1996 and which is presently operating under the authority of a discretionary land use entitlement and/or development agreement shall remain subject to the terms and conditions of such approval and agreement. As a condition to those entitlements, the applicants agreed to participate in any in-lieu program established by the city council. This chapter constitutes the in-lieu parking program referenced in the resolutions conferring those entitlements and in those certain development agreements.

4.     Processing In-Lieu Parking Program Applications.

a.     Application Submission. Eligible persons or businesses desiring to participate in the in-lieu parking program established herein shall submit a written application for participation to the director on a form prescribed by the city. If the director determines that such application meets the requirements set forth in this subsection D: Main Street Specific Plan District In-Lieu Parking Program, the director shall, within 30 days of the completion of such application, calculate the applicable in-lieu fee and grant permission to participate in the program, if the director makes the following findings:

i.      Participation in the in-lieu parking program will not create any significant adverse traffic safety impacts, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or parking impacts.

ii.     Participation in the in-lieu parking program will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.

b.     The director may deny the request to participate in the program, if the director is unable to make the findings set forth in subsections i and ii, above.

c.     The director may restrict the applicant’s participation in the program, if the director determines that such restriction is necessary to make the findings set forth in subsection i.

d.     The director’s decision shall be in writing, and shall be served upon the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested.

5.     Appeals. The decision of the director may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.

6.     Payments and Deposits.

a.     Payments of in-lieu parking program fees shall be made pursuant to the fee established by the master fee schedule. In no event shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for any participating use in the Main Street Specific Plan District prior to the receipt by the city of the first installment or, if applicable, full payment of the in-lieu parking fee.

b.     Funds collected from the in-lieu parking program shall be deposited in a segregated city in-lieu parking program fund. Such fund shall be used exclusively for the purpose of promoting, managing, operating, increasing and maintaining the availability of parking spaces in the immediate vicinity of Main Street.

7.     Transferability. In-lieu parking space payments paid for pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be credited only to the use for which participation was granted, and shall not be assigned or otherwise transferred for use on any other property.

8.     Expansion, Intensification or Change in Use to a Use which Requires Additional Off-Street Parking Spaces. Should the use of any property within the Main Street Specific Plan District be proposed for expansion, enlargement, structural alterations, intensification or conversion to a new use which requires additional off-street parking spaces, the owner, lessee or sub-lessee of the property shall provide the required additional off-street parking, either on-site, within 300 feet of the property on which the building is located, or through payment of in-lieu parking program fees, or additional in-lieu parking program fees, as required by this section.

9.     Acceptance of Terms and Provisions. An applicant’s participation in the program shall not become effective, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued, unless and until the participant first executes and submits for recording on the title to the property a covenant accepting the terms of the approval, in a form to be provided by the city attorney. Such covenant shall be recorded in the office of the Orange County recorder and shall also be maintained in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.025 General Parking Design Standards.
A.     Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all required parking spaces as well as spaces provided in excess of the minimum requirements.

B.     Property on Which Parking and Loading Must Be Provided. Required off-street parking spaces and loading spaces must be located on the same lot as the use they serve, except:

1.     When shared parking consistent with Section 11.4.20.020.A: Shared Parking has been approved; or

2.     Upon the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, parking may be provided on another lot located within 300 feet of the use served. The planning commission shall only approve a use permit for parking located on a different lot than the use served if it finds that the parking will be convenient and accessible to residents, employees, or patrons of the use. The owners of both lots shall prepare and execute to the satisfaction of the city attorney, and file with the Orange County recorder, an agreement guaranteeing that parking facilities will be maintained and reserved for the use served, for the duration of such use.

C.    Minimum Parking Space Dimensions: Standard. Off-street parking spaces shall have the minimum dimensions stated in Table 11.4.20.025.C: Parking Area Space Dimensions for Automobiles—Standard Spaces, according to the angle of spaces in relation to adjacent aisles. The minimum basic dimension of a standard-size parking stall shall be 9 feet by 18 feet. In addition, any parking space located adjacent and parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall be at least 11 feet wide. See Figure 11.4.20.025.C.1: Parking Space Typical Layouts, and Figure 11.4.20.025.C.2: Standard Size Parking Space Dimensions.

Table 11.4.20.025.C

PARKING AREA SPACE DIMENSIONS FOR AUTOMOBILES—STANDARD SPACES

Angle of Parking (degrees)

Space Width

Curb Length Per Car

Space Depth

Aisle Width

Double-Loaded Parking Area Width

1-Way

2-Way

Parallel

9′-0″

22′-0″

9′-0″

12′-0″

24′-0″

30′-0″

30

9′-0″

18′-0″

17′-10″

12′-0″

22′-0″

47′-8″

40

9′-0″

14′-1″

19′-8″

12′-0″

22′-0″

51′-4″

*45

9′-0″

12′-9″

19′-0″

13′-0″

22′-0″

51′-0″

50

9′-0″

11′-8″

21′-1″

16′-0″

22′-0″

58′-2″

*60

9′-0″

10′-5″

20′-0″

18′-0″

23′-0″

58′-0″

70

9′-0″

9′-7″

21′-11″

21′-0″

23′-0″

64′-10″

*90

9′-0″

9′-0″

18′-0″

24′-0″

24′-0″

60′-0″

*Most frequently used angles

Figure 11.4.20.025.C.1

Parking Space Typical Layouts



 

Figure 11.4.20.025.C.2

Standard Size Parking Space Dimensions



 

 

D.    Minimum Parking Space Dimensions: Compact. Compact parking spaces, where permitted by this zoning code, shall have the minimum dimensions stated in Table 11.4.20.025.D: Parking Area Space Dimensions for Automobiles—Compact Spaces, according to the angle of spaces in relation to adjacent aisles. The minimum basic dimension of a compact-size parking stall shall be 8 feet by 16 feet. In addition, any compact parking space located adjacent and parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall be at least 10 feet wide. The maneuvering aisle width listed in the table applies only where compact spaces are designated on both sides of a one-way aisle. All other aisle widths must meet corresponding standard aisle width requirements set forth in Table 11.4.20.025.C: Parking Area Space Dimensions for Automobiles—Standard Spaces. Each compact space shall be clearly and distinctively marked as a compact space.

Table 11.4.20.025.D

PARKING AREA SPACE DIMENSIONS FOR AUTOMOBILES—COMPACT SPACES

Angle of Parking (degrees)

Space Width

Curb Length Per Car

Space Depth

Aisle Width1

Double-Loaded Parking Area Width

Parallel

8′-0″

20′-0″

8′-0″

12′-0″

28′-0″

*30

8′-0″

16′-0″

14′-11″

11′-0″

40′-10″

40

8′-0″

12′-5″

16′-5″

11′-0″

43′-10″

*45

8′-0″

11′-4″

17′-0″

11′-0″

45′-0″

50

8′-0″

10′-5″

17′-5″

13′-0″

47′-10″

*60

8′-0″

9′-3″

17′-10″

16′-0″

51′-8″

70

8′-0″

8′-6″

17′-9″

16′-0″

51′-6″

*90

8′-0″

8′-0″

16′-0″

21′-0″

53′-0″

*      Most frequently used angles.

1      Aisle width applies only to double-loaded compact spaces where compact spaces are double-loaded on both sides of a one-way aisle. All other aisle widths must meet corresponding standard aisle width requirements of Table 11.4.20.025.C: Parking Area Space Dimensions for Automobiles—Standard Spaces.

 

E.     Standards for Disabled Parking Spaces. All parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled. The spaces required by this section shall count toward compliance with the total number of spaces required by this chapter.

1.     Number of Spaces, Design Standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with the provisions of the California Building Code.

2.     Upgrading of Marking Required. If amendments to the California Building Code change standards for the marking and signing of disabled parking spaces, the disabled parking spaces shall be upgraded to comply with the new standards. In the event that the required changes to space markings cause a reduction in the overall number of parking spaces and nonconformance with this zoning code, a parking reduction may be requested pursuant to Section 11.4.20.020: Parking Reductions. Upgrading shall be completed by affected property owners within 60 days of receipt of notification in writing from the city of the new state standards.

F.     Access to Spaces. Except where otherwise specified by this zoning code, each parking space shall have unobstructed access from a street or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street without requiring moving another vehicle. However, required parking spaces for any dwelling unit may be arranged in tandem, so long as parking required for any dwelling unit is arranged independently from parking serving any other dwelling unit, with unobstructed access from a street for at least 1 of the spaces required for each dwelling unit.

G.    Vertical Clearance. A minimum height of 14 feet shall be maintained clear of obstructions from the parking surface to any structure or landscape feature above that may interfere with the safe passage of vehicles, except within garages, carports, or parking structures, where the minimum clearance shall be 8 feet 6 inches.

H.    Direction of Vehicle Ingress/Egress. Off-street parking areas shall allow vehicles to enter and exit from or onto a public street by a forward motion only. Off-street parking areas for single-unit dwellings, second units, and two-unit dwellings are exempted.

1.     Exception. Subject to minor use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, parking areas may be designed to allow vehicles to back onto a street provided:

a.     The lot contains no more than 3 spaces.

b.     The director determines that the adjacent street is a non-major street with light traffic intensity.

c.     The siting of the parking stalls allows for safe vehicular line of sight.

d.     The parking area complies with all other pertinent parking requirements and guidelines.

e.     The parking area is not located near an intersection.

2.     Main Entrance for Commercial Centers Having More than 200 Parking Spaces. Commercial centers which have more than 200 parking spaces shall have at least one main entrance designed as shown in Figure 11.4.20.025.H.2: Main Entrance for Commercial Center Parking Lots Having More than 200 Parking Spaces.

 

Figure 11.4.20.025.H.2

Main Entrance for Commercial Center Parking Lots Having More than 200 Parking Spaces



 

I.      Pedestrian Walkways.

1.     Materials. Where a pedestrian walkway crosses parking areas, it must be clearly identifiable through the use of elevation changes, calming measures such as speed bumps, a different paving material, or other similar method. Striping does not meet this requirement. Elevation changes and speed bumps designed to meet this requirement must be at least 4 inches high.

2.     Separation. Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it must be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb, bollards, landscaping or other physical barrier. If a raised path is used, it must be at least 4 inches high and the ends of the raised portions must be equipped with curb ramps. Bollard spacing must be no further apart than 5 feet on center.

J.     Surfacing. All parking areas shall be improved with surfacing such as asphalt, concrete, or a comparable permanent nonabsorbent surface. Other surfacing may be permitted subject to approval by the director and the city engineer.

1.     Landscaping In-Lieu of Paving. A maximum of 3 feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hardy materials in-lieu of paving, allowing a bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. However, the overhang area shall not be counted as part of the minimum required perimeter or interior landscaping. See Figure 11.4.20.025.J.1: Landscaped Area at Front of Parking Space.

 

Figure 11.4.20.025.J.1

Landscaped Area at Front of Parking Space



 

K.     Drainage. Parking and loading areas shall be designed and constructed:

1.     So that surface water will not drain over sidewalks or adjacent parcels; and

2.     In compliance with the storm water quality and quantity standards of the city’s best management practices. See also Section 11.4.10.020.H: Storm Drainage and Storm Water Runoff.

L.     Landscaping. All parking areas shall be landscaped according to the provisions of Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

M.    Screening. Where a parking lot is adjacent to a public right-of-way, it shall be screened according to the standards in subsection 11.4.30.025.F: Landscaped Buffer for Open Parking Abutting Public Right-of-Way.

N.    Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for the illumination and protection of the premises. See subsection 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting. Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent streets and properties. All light standards and luminaries shall be clearly identified on all site plans. Lights shall not blink, flash, change intensity, or cause glare. String lights are prohibited. The type of lighting (e.g., mercury vapor, sodium vapor, fluorescent, etc.) shall be approved by the director.

O.    Wheel Stops and Curbing. Concrete curbing at least 6 inches high and 6 inches wide, with breaks to allow on-site drainage, shall be provided for parking spaces located adjacent to fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas, and structures. Individual wheel stops may be provided in-lieu of continuous curbing when the parking is adjacent to a landscaped area and the drainage is directed to the landscaped area. Alternative barriers designed to protect landscaped areas from vehicle damage may be approved by the director or the city engineer. Wheel stops shall be placed to allow for 3 feet of vehicle overhang area within the dimension of the parking space.

P.     Markings. Each parking space and parking facility shall be identified by surface markings and shall be maintained in a manner so as to be readily visible and accessible at all times. Such markings shall be arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. Marking required to be maintained in a highly visible condition includes striping, directional arrows, lettering and field color on signs in handicapped-designated areas. Marking requirements are depicted in Figure 11.4.20.025.P: Parking Space Marking Requirements.

Figure 11.4.20.025.P

Parking Space Marking Requirements



 

Q.    Utilization of Required Parking Spaces. Storage of merchandise, cartons, trash, equipment or other materials shall not be permitted in required parking areas, driveways, or landscaped areas. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.030 Driveways.
A.     Driveway Width. Minimum and maximum driveway widths are prescribed in the base zoning district regulations.

B.     Driveway Separation. Driveways serving the same parking facility shall be located at least 35 feet apart.

C.    Driveway Visibility. Visibility of a driveway crossing a street property line shall not be blocked between a height of 2.5 feet and 7 feet for a depth of 5 feet from the street property line as viewed from the edge of the right-of-way on either side of the driveway at a distance of 5 feet or at the nearest property line intersecting the street property line, whichever is less. See Figure 11.4.20.030.A: Parking Lot Design Standards and Figure 11.4.20.030.B: Driveway Visibility.

Figure 11.4.20.030.A

Parking Lot Design Standards



 

 

Figure 11.4.20.030.B

Driveway Visibility



 

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.035 Required Off-Street Loading.
A.     Required Loading Spaces for Delivery and Distribution. A building, or part thereof, having a floor area of 10,000 square feet or more that is to be occupied by any use requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles or trucks of material or merchandise must provide at least one off-street loading space, plus one additional such loading space for each 40,000 square feet of floor area. The off-street loading space(s) must be maintained during the existence of the building or use it is required to serve. Truck-maneuvering areas must not encroach into required parking areas, travelways, or street rights-of-way.

B.     Required Loading Spaces for Customers. Customer loading spaces allow bulky merchandise to be loaded into customers’ vehicles. Each building materials store and home improvement sales and service store use shall provide at least 2 customer loading spaces per business establishment or one customer loading space per 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater. Customer loading spaces shall be located adjacent to the building or to an outdoor sales area where bulky merchandise is stored and shall be clearly visible from the main building entry or through directional signage visible from the main entry. Customer loading spaces shall not be located in such a way that they impede on-site or off-site traffic circulation, as determined by the director and the city engineer.

C.    Standards for Off-Street Loading Spaces.

1.     Minimum Size. Each off-street loading space required by this section must be not less than 12 feet wide, 30 feet long, and 15 feet high, exclusive of driveways for ingress and egress and maneuvering areas. Loading spaces for customers may be 12 feet wide, 26 feet long, and 12 feet high.

2.     Driveways for Ingress and Egress and Maneuvering Areas. Each off-street loading space required by this section must be provided with driveways for ingress and egress and maneuvering space adequate for trucks, per city standards.

3.     Location of Loading Areas. Truck docks, loading and service areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any residential district boundary or within 40 feet of a street-facing property line. These facilities shall be located at the interior side of buildings or on the rear of the site and be screened so as not to be visible from public streets. Facilities within 150 feet of a residential district shall provide screen walls and sound attenuation to comply with a noise level of 55 CNEL at the residential district boundary. Exceptions may be granted with approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, if an alternative location for the truck dock, loading and/or service area better protects the pedestrian environment of the commercial district and/or better shields adjoining residential neighborhoods from noise and visual impacts. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.040 Parking Structures.
A.     Permit Requirement. Parking structures above or below grade shall be subject to conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     Required Design Standards. All parking structures shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     Transition Ramps. Transition ramps which are also used as back-up spaces for parking stalls shall have a maximum slope of 5%. The maximum slope for transition ramps with no adjacent parking spaces shall be 10%. A ramp used for ingress and egress to a public street shall have a transition section at least 16 feet long and a maximum slope of 5%.

2.     Structures Having More than 300 Spaces. Parking structures with over 300 spaces shall provide secondary circulation ramps and additional ingress and egress if deemed necessary by a traffic study prepared by a state-registered traffic engineer.

3.     Perimeter Landscaping. Parking structures shall be provided with a minimum 10-foot-wide perimeter landscape planter at ground level. Parked cars shall be screened on each level through landscape planters or trellises and/or decorative screening wall or railings. The landscaping plan shall be approved by the director.

4.     Architectural Compatibility. All parking structures shall be architecturally compatible with existing or proposed structures and shall be subject to review and approval as part of the conditional use permit. The commission shall consider the following factors in reviewing a proposal: bulk, scale, proportion, building materials, colors, signage, architectural features, and landscaping.

C.    Conversion to Fee Parking. All parking structures proposed for conversion to a fee parking arrangement shall be subject to conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. Public parking structures within the coastal zone proposed for conversion to a fee parking arrangement shall also be subject to approval of a coastal development permit. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.20.045 Required Bicycle Parking.
A.     Applicability. Bicycle parking shall be provided for all new construction, additions of 10% or more floor area to existing buildings, and changes in land use classification as set forth in subsections B and C, of this section.

B.     Nonresidential Developments. Nonresidential developments shall provide one bicycle stall for every 20 parking spaces. Racks shall be made available to both customers and employees.

C.    Residential Multiple-Unit Developments. Residential multiple-unit developments shall provide at a minimum one bicycle stall per 4 units in a secured, enclosed and covered area.

D.    Design Standards. Bicycle parking facilities shall include provision for locking of bicycles, either in lockers or in secure racks in which the bicycle frame and wheels may be locked by the user. Bicycle spaces shall be conveniently located near the primary entrance of structures or at a central location and shall be protected from automobile damage. The director shall verify compliance with these criteria. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.25 SIGN REGULATIONS
11.4.25.005 Applicability.
The provisions set forth in this chapter shall apply in all zoning districts of the city, except where expressly stated otherwise. No sign shall be erected or maintained anywhere in the city except in conformity with this chapter. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.010 Exempt Signs.
The sign area of the following signs shall not be included in the maximum area of signs permitted for any site or use:

A.     Address Signs. Required address identification signs that are in conformance with the building code.

B.     Change of Business Signs. A temporary attachment or covering of wood, plastic, or canvas over a permanent sign indicating a change of ownership or activity may be displayed for no longer than 30 days following the change of ownership or activity for which the sign is intended. The sign shall be no larger than the previously permitted permanent sign.

C.    Construction Signs. A temporary construction sign may be erected on a construction site for the duration of construction activities provided that it is immediately removed after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion for the project, or abandonment of work. A temporary construction sign may not exceed 32 square feet in area or 8 feet in height within commercial, mixed-use, or other nonresidential zones or 6 square feet in area or 5 feet in height within residential zones.

D.    Interior Signs. Signs that are located in interior areas of a building or site, more than 3 feet from a storefront window, and are not visible from public streets or adjacent properties. For the purpose of this regulation, “visible” means legible to a person of ordinary eyesight (with vision adequate to pass a state driver’s license exam) standing at ground level at a location on the public right-of-way or other private property.

E.     Official Government Signs. Official notices issued by a court, public body or office; official notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agency; signs erected by a governmental body to direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or other signs required or authorized by law.

F.     Commemorative Signs. Commemorative plaques, memorial signs or tablets, or signs indicating names of buildings and dates of building erection, either attached to or cut into the surfaces of buildings, provided that no such sign exceeds 3 square feet in area.

G.    Parking and Directional Signs. On-site parking and directional signs not exceeding 5 square feet in area and limited to directional messages such as entrance/exit locations or instructions to direct on-site traffic circulation.

H.    Informational Signs. Noncommercial informational signs located wholly on private property not exceeding 2 square feet in area erected for the immediate convenience of the public, such as signs identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, and similar features or facilities.

I.      Time and Temperature Devices. Time and temperature devices, not exceeding 6 square feet and not higher than permitted signs, located wholly on private property and bearing no commercial message.

J.     On-Site Real Estate Signs. On-premises signs conveying information about the sale, rental, or lease of the appurtenant lot, premises, dwelling, or structure, provided that they comply with the following standards:

1.     No more than one real estate sign per public street frontage per lot is displayed at any one time;

2.     The sign or signs do not exceed the following size restrictions:

a.     Residential districts: 6 square feet;

b.     Commercial, mixed-use, or other nonresidential districts:

i.      Lots less than 10,000 square feet: 6 square feet;

ii.     Lots between 10,000 square feet and one acre: 25 square feet; and

iii.     Lots over one acre: 50 square feet.

3.     The sign or signs are not illuminated; and

4.     The sign or signs are removed within 7 days after the sale, lease, or rental of the property has been completed.

K.     Vehicle Signs. Signs painted, stenciled or similarly affixed to the surface of vehicles.

L.     Window Signs. Window signs, subject to the following provisions:

1.     In residential zones and on residential properties, window signs not exceeding 20% of the area of window and transparent door frontage on any building façade, and subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.25.030: Signs—Residential Districts.

2.     In commercial and mixed-use zones, window signs not exceeding 20% of the area of window and transparent door frontage on any building façade. Any sign either hung within 3 feet of a window or attached to a display located within 3 feet of a window is considered a window sign. See paragraph 11.4.25.025.D.10: Main Street Specific Plan District—Additional Requirements, for additional requirements. See also subsection 11.4.25.010.D: Interior Signs.

M.    Barber Poles. Barber poles not exceeding 6 feet in height, located wholly on commercial private property and bearing no lettering.

N.    Newspaper Stands. Signs that are part of newspaper stands, provided the sign area does not exceed 6 square feet.

O.    Decorative Holiday Displays. Noncommercial decorative holiday displays, provided that such displays are removed within 45 days of their installation.

P.     Bus Shelter and Bus Bench Signs. Signs on a public bus bench, public bus shelter, or any waste bin attached to a public bus bench or public bus shelter, which convey a commercial message as their primary purpose and that are authorized by a contract or franchise agreement with the applicable transit agency. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.015 Prohibited Signs.
The following types of signs, materials, designs, messages, and locations are prohibited:

A.     Banners, Streamers, or Pennants. Banners, streamers, pennants, and other signs made of lightweight fabric or similar material, or designed to rotate or move with the wind, except where expressly provided for in this chapter. See also Section 11.4.25.020: Temporary Banners. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, banners may be posted or otherwise affixed upon fences located at public schools. A permit shall not be required for such banners affixed upon fences located at public schools.

B.     Emissions. Signs that produce noise or sounds that can be heard at the property line, excluding voice units at menu boards, and signs that emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor.

C.    Animated and Moving Signs. Signs which incorporate any manner of animation, flashing, moving, or intermittent lighting. Moreover, sign illumination shall not blink, flutter, or change light intensity, brightness, or color. Revolving, or other similar signs or signs with visibly moving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, either adjacent to or as an integral part of the display are also prohibited.

D.    Signs Creating Traffic Hazards.

1.     Signs located in such a manner as to constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign or signal device, or signs that may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or which makes use of the words “stop,” “look,” “danger,” or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character that interferes with, misleads, or confuses vehicular drivers in their use of roads.

2.     Signs within 5 feet of a fire hydrant, street sign, or traffic signal if such placement could create a safety hazard.

3.     Signs placed or fixed so as to create obstruction, interference, or injury to passerby, residents, or occupants.

E.     Off-Premises Signs. Off premises signs, as defined in Chapter 11.6.05: Terms and Definitions, except signs on a public bus bench, public bus shelter, or any waste bin attached to a public bus bench or public bus shelter which convey a commercial message as their primary purpose and are authorized by a contract or franchise agreement with the applicable transit agency.

F.     Roof Signs.

1.     Attached signs that extend above the roof line or parapet (whichever is higher) of a building with a flat roof.

2.     Attached signs that extend above the eave line of a building with a sloped, gambrel, gable or hip roof.

3.     Attached signs that extend above the deck line of a mansard roof, whether real or simulated.

4.     Signs on rooftop structures, such as penthouse walls or mechanical enclosures.

5.     However, signs that do not extend above the eave line of a sloped, gambrel, gable, or hip roof, that do not extend above the deck line of a mansard roof, that do not extend above the parapet (or the roofline if no parapet is present) of a flat roof are permitted subject to the standards of Section 11.4.25.025: Signs—Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts. See Figure 11.4.25.015.F: Roof Signs.

Figure 11.4.25.015.F

Roof Signs



 

G.    Signs in Right-of-Way. No sign, or supporting sign structure, may be erected in the public right-of-way, with the exception of:

1.     Legal notices which are required by law to be placed upon public property to provide notice to the public;

2.     Signs erected by a governmental body to promote public safety or direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

3.     Public holiday lights and displays;

4.     Signs and banners posted by the city above streets or attached to lamp posts or utility poles, which promote city-sponsored events;

5.     Commercial signs on public bus benches and public bus shelters, which convey a commercial message as their primary purpose, as specifically authorized by a contract or franchise agreement with the applicable transit agency;

6.     Noncommercial bus stop signs erected by a public transit agency; and

7.     Projecting signs that are attached to a building and project over the public sidewalk but provide at least 8 feet of clearance above the sidewalk. See also subparagraph 11.4.25.025.D.10.b: Projecting Signs.

Any sign located in a public right-of-way or projecting over a public sidewalk shall be placed only in a manner consistent with standards promulgated by the city engineer. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.020 Temporary Banners.
In addition to any other signs permitted by this chapter, temporary banners are permitted on private property in the Limited Commercial/Residential Medium Density zone (LC/RMD), Professional Office (PO), Service Commercial (SC), Main Street Specific Plan (MSSP), and General Commercial (GC) districts as follows:

A.     Permit Requirement. A “Temporary Banner Permit” shall be obtained from the director each time a banner(s) is to be displayed. A permit for a banner will allow one banner for each face of a building that fronts a street or parking area. The application fee for a permit to display a banner shall be set forth in the master fee schedule.

B.     Banner Display Periods. Banners shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days per calendar year. Banners shall not be displayed longer than 30 days in succession; with a period of not less than 14 days between the times a banner is displayed by the same property.

C.    Banner Size. The size of a banner shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage, or 30 square feet maximum. A banner for a business or organization fronting, or adjacent to, a street with a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or more shall be permitted an additional 0.5 square foot per lineal foot of frontage, not to exceed 45 square feet total for the banner.

D.    Day Glow Colors Prohibited. No banner utilizing luminescent/day glow colors may be installed.

E.     Not Substitute for a Permanent Sign. The posting of a temporary banner shall not substitute for a permanent sign.

F.     Obstruction Prohibited. A banner(s) shall be permitted only if its display does not obstruct the view of any adjoining buildings, or any signs, permanent or temporary, connected with adjoining buildings.

G.    Allowable Locations. Banners shall be permitted to be mounted on the fascia or wall only. Banners shall not be permitted on the roofs of buildings or over a public right-of-way, excepting on legally permitted overhangs of the public right-of-way when the banner provides a minimum head clearance of 8 feet.

H.    Banner Maintenance. Banners shall be tightly secured. Torn or damaged banners shall either be immediately replaced or removed entirely.

I.      Banner Removal. The applicant shall bring the banner to the city for review in conjunction with the application form. The removal date shall be affixed/marked to the banner by the director. If the removal date of a banner is removed or otherwise tampered with, the banner permit shall be deemed expired and the banner shall be immediately removed.

J.     Fee Exemptions. Fees for temporary banner use shall apply to commercial signs only. A noncommercial banner, on private property (i.e., a Red Cross blood drive, etc.) shall be exempt from the application and deposit fees set forth above.

K.     City-Sponsored Banners. This section shall not apply to city-sponsored banners hung over public rights-of-way. See paragraph 11.4.25.025.D.7: City Sponsored Banners for regulations. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.025 Signs—Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts.
The regulations of this section apply to signs located in commercial, mixed-use, public/semipublic, open space, and any other nonresidential districts.

A.     Allowable Signs Per Commercial Activity and Per Shopping Center Location—LC/RMD, PO, MSSP, SC, GC, LM and OE Districts. The aggregate area of all signs on a single building activity and at a shopping center, excluding exempt signs pursuant to Section 11.4.25.010: Exempt Signs, shall not exceed the following standards.

1.     Temporary Noncommercial Signs. Temporary non-commercial signs that do not exceed an aggregate surface area of 25 square feet per lot, up to 4 per lot. Signs posted on a building face or in a window shall not exceed 36 inches by 48 inches in size. Temporary noncommercial signs shall be removed or replaced within 60 days of placement.

2.     Shopping Center Identification Signs. For each shopping center, identification signs are permitted as follows:

a.     One freestanding or pole identification sign containing the name and logo of the center. Sign not to exceed 15 feet in overall height and not to exceed 60 square feet on one face of a double-faced sign.

b.     One monument sign not to exceed 10 square feet in area and not to exceed 4 feet in height at each traffic entrance to the center, in no case shall more than 4 monument signs be placed in any shopping center.

3.     Commercial Business Activity Signs. Each commercial activity may have signing identifying the activity on the premises as follows:

a.     One sign per building face which is visible from streets or parking lot area. Such sign to be fascia or wall sign.

b.     Size of fascia or wall sign shall be one square foot per lineal foot of building face, not to exceed 100 square feet per sign.

c.     In lieu of one or more fascia or wall signs, one freestanding or pole sign not to exceed 15 feet in overall height may be erected on the parcel or building site on which the building is located. Maximum size of sign shall not exceed 60 square feet per face of a double faced sign.

d.     In case of buildings having less than 25 linear feet of frontage on a street, 25 square feet of signing is permitted.

e.     In cases where a business is located on a street with a speed limit of 35 mph or more, a freestanding sign or larger fascia or wall sign will be permitted. The larger sign may be an additional 0.5 square foot per lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed 80 additional square feet. (See subparagraphs a, b, c, above.) The maximum sign area per sign of 100 square feet does not apply in this case.

f.      No more than 2 items of information will be permitted per sign. An example of one item of information would be the name of the business, specialty item, unique service, etc.

4.     Provisions Not Applicable with Adopted Planned Sign Program. When property falls under an adopted planned sign program the above provisions do not apply.

B.     Special Situations—Sign Area Calculations. In the special situations listed below, sign area is calculated as follows.

1.     Sites with Multiple Frontages. On sites with more than one frontage on a public street, maximum permitted sign area shall be calculated as follows:

a.     Where an interior lot fronts on 2 streets (a “through lot”), both the front and rear lot lines may be used for calculating the allowable sign area.

b.     Where a lot has 3 or more frontages on a public street, the length of only 2 contiguous sides, one of which shall be the principal street frontage, shall be added together to determine allowable sign area.

2.     Multiple-Occupancy Commercial Sites with Limited Frontage. Where a commercial site for which a master sign program is required pursuant to Section 11.4.25.045: Procedures for Sign Approval, has a land area in excess of 2 acres and public street frontage equal to 20% or less of the perimeter measurement of the site, the maximum allowable sign area for the site may be calculated as one square foot of sign area per one lineal foot of public street frontage, plus one lineal foot of exterior building walls fronting on driveways and parking lots that are generally used for public access and are located on the same site. Pedestrian-only passageways that are lined on both sides by building walls shall be considered interior spaces, and the area of signs on such walls shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum allowable sign area for the site.

C.    Permitted Sign Types. Permitted sign types are listed in Table 11.4.25.025.A: Standards for Signs in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts and defined in Chapter 6.05: Terms and Definitions, under “Sign Types.” The signs erected on a site may be any combination of permitted sign types, subject to the limitations for individual sign types listed in this section and any other provisions of this chapter.

D.    Standards for Specific Sign Types. Signs shall conform to the standards listed in Table 11.4.25.025.A: Standards for Signs in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts, as well as any additional standards.

 

Table 11.4.25.025.A

STANDARDS FOR SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL, MIXED-USE,

AND OTHER NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

Sign Type

Maximum Number Permitted

Maximum Area per Individual Sign

Maximum Height

Maximum Horizontal Projection from Wall or Supporting Structure

Additional Regulations (Subsection)

Wall Sign

1 per building wall. Maximum of 2 per site

See Section 11.4.25.025.A and Section 11.4.25.025.B.

Roof line

12 in.

(8)(10)

Projecting Sign

1 per street frontage

See below

See below

See below

(1)(8)(10)

Located below canopy or awning

 

6 sq. ft.

Roof line

5 ft.

(1)(8)(10)

Not located below canopy or awning

 

10 sq. ft.

20 ft.

5 ft.

(1)(8)(10)

Freestanding Sign

See below

 

 

 

 

Pole Sign

1 for each site with over 100 feet of lot width

60 sq. ft.

15 ft.

NA

(2)(8)(10)

Monument Sign

Maximum 4 per site with over 100 feet of lot width

60 sq. ft.

5 ft.

(2)(8)

(10)

Roof Sign

 

 

 

 

 

On Flat Roof

1 per building

See Section 11.4.25.025.A and Section 11.4.25.025.B.

Roof line or parapet (whichever is higher)

 

(8)

On Sloped, Gambrel, Gable, or Hip Roof

1 per building

See Section 11.4.25.025.A and Section 11.4.25.025.B.

Eave line

 

(8)

On Mansard Roof (real or simulated)

1 per building

See Section 11.4.25.025.A and Section 11.4.25.025.B.

Deck line

 

(8)

Awning or Canopy Sign

1 per awning; Maximum 3 awning signs per tenant/use

See Section 11.4.25.025.A and Section 11.4.25.025.B

Top of awning or canopy

6 in.

(3)(8)

Permanent Window

N/A

10% - 20% of window area

Limited to first and second floor windows

N/A

(4)(10)

Marquee Sign

1 per building

See Section 11.4.25.025.A and Section 11.4.25.025.B.

Roof line, or up to 6 feet above roof line with minor use permit approval.

6 in.

(5)

Portable A-Frame Sign

1 per tenant/use

8 sq. ft.

 

 

(6) (10)

City Sponsored Banners

Subject to Director approval.

 

 

 

(7)

Flags

1 per lot frontage

12 sq. ft.

If on flag poles, 40 ft. maximum and not less than 12 ft.

N/A

(9)

Note: With limited exceptions, the maximum permitted aggregate area of all signage on a site is one square foot of sign per lineal foot of building frontage, per subsection 11.4.25.025.A.

 

1.     Projecting Signs.

a.     Minimum Clearance. Projecting signs shall be located a minimum of 8 feet above grade.

b.     Encroachment Permit. No sign shall project into any public right-of-way unless the director of public works shall have first issued an encroachment permit therefor.

2.     Freestanding Signs.

a.     Minimum Setback from Property Line. Freestanding signs must be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line.

b.     Limitations in Driveway Median. Freestanding signs erected in a median within a driveway shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the face of the curb surrounding the median, or from the edge of adjacent pavement where no curb exists, and shall not interfere with driver visibility.

3.     Awning or Canopy Signs.

a.     Location. Awning and canopy signs are permitted only on the first and second floor of buildings. Awnings and canopies shall not cover transom windows or historic building elements. Awnings and canopies shall be aligned with windows and entries.

b.     Minimum Clearance. Awnings and canopies shall be located a minimum of 8 feet above grade, measured from the lowest structural element of the awning or canopy.

c.     Non-Functional Awnings or Canopies. Awnings and canopies that project less than 2 feet from the building façade to which they are attached, or do not overhang a sidewalk or pedestrian walkway, are considered non-functional awnings or canopies. When signage is attached to or incorporated into non-functional awnings or canopies, the entire surface area of the face of the awning shall be considered the sign area.

4.     Permanent Window Signs. Permanent window signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

a.     Permanent window signs shall not exceed 10% of the area of each window.

b.     No window sign shall be displayed above the second story.

c.     Permanent window signs shall be limited to individual letters placed on the interior surface of the window and intended to be viewed from the outside. White, black or gold leaf paint are recommended colors. Glass-mounted graphic logos may be applied by silk screening or pre-spaced vinyl die-cut forms.

d.     Interior permanent signs within 3 feet of a storefront window shall be counted as a permanent window sign.

e.     Permanent window signs shall be allowed in addition to the aggregate sign area allowed for wall and projecting signs.

f.      Permanent window signs shall not be illuminated.

5.     Marquee Signs.

a.     Uses Allowed On. Marquee signs are allowed for theaters, cinemas, stadiums, auditoriums, or other public assembly facilities.

b.     Height. Subject to review and approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, a vertically-oriented marquee sign may project up to 6 feet above the roof line. The planning commission shall only approve a marquee sign extending above the roofline if the commission finds that the marquee sign is architecturally integrated with the building.

c.     Lighting. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a marquee sign may include changing lights, subject to review and approval of a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

6.     Portable A-Frame Signs.

a.     A portable A-frame sign shall be located so as to allow at least 6 feet clear for pedestrian passage along a pedestrian walkway and shall not be located on public property.

b.     Compliance with all provisions of the “City of Seal Beach Standards for Portable A-Frame Signs.”

7.     City Sponsored Banners.

a.     City-issued banners that identify the city or specific commercial districts or promote city-sponsored events may be posted by the city above streets or attached to lamp posts or utility poles.

b.     Banners shall be anchored on at least 2 opposite sides and shall be attached to light poles or similar permanent structures.

c.     Banners located in the right-of-way shall be placed only in a manner consistent with standards promulgated by the city engineer.

8.     Signs—Automobile Service and Repair Stations.

a.     Total signing for subparagraphs b, c, e and f of this paragraph 8 shall not exceed 150 square feet of area.

b.     A freestanding identification signs not to exceed 20 feet in overall height and not to exceed 80 square feet in area or a monument sign not to exceed 5 feet in overall height and not to exceed 60 square feet in area.

c.     Fuel price signs not to exceed 3 feet by 4 feet in size and not to exceed 15 feet in overall height; minimum height 8 feet. Fuel price signs shall comply with the requirements of the State Business and Professions Code.

d.     Information signs (self-service, full-service, etc.) not to exceed 24 inches by 24 inches in size and 2 per pump island. Signs required for safety and required by other governmental agencies shall be reviewed by the director for consistency with the intent of this section.

e.     Two promotional banners, each not to exceed 20 square feet per face, may be located on the building structure on the premises.

f.      Advertising signs not related to motor vehicles shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall be attached to the building or permanently mounted sign structure.

g.     In addition to any other applicable design criteria, signs for service stations shall only be approved if the review authority finds that the proposed signs are in architectural harmony with the total service station design theme.

9.     Flags.

a.     Each use may display a total of one flag per lot frontage.

b.     No flag displayed pursuant to this subsection shall exceed 12 square feet in area unless approved through a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

c.     Flags shall be suspended from flagpoles at a height of not less than 12 feet or more than 40 feet.

d.     Flags poles and related structures designed to display a flag require a building permit, and must comply with other regulations of the applicable zoning districts.

10.   Main Street Specific Plan District—Additional Requirements. Within the Main Street Specific Plan district the following additional sign requirements apply.

a.     Courtyard Signs. Courtyard signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

i.      Where businesses face a courtyard, and do not directly face Main Street, one single-faced or double-faced freestanding courtyard sign is permitted for tenant identification only, in addition to those on the building.

ii.     No part of the sign shall extend over public property or have a height exceeding 7 feet measured from the base at ground level to the apex of the sign.

iii.     The total area of the courtyard sign shall not exceed 0.5 square feet per foot of site street frontage or 20 square feet, whichever is smaller.

iv.    Placement shall conform with a minimum setback of 3 feet from a street property line, 2 feet from an interior property line, and a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of a driveway.

v.     Each courtyard sign shall contain an address plate identifying the subject property. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the public right-of-way. Address plates shall not be calculated against the allowable sign area.

b.     Projecting Signs. Projecting signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

i.      Shall not exceed 4 square feet in area per side;

ii.     Shall project no more than 4 feet from the wall to which attached;

iii.     Shall be located at least 8 feet but not more than 12 feet above grade;

iv.    Shall reflect the business by incorporating symbols or logos of the business;

v.     Shall have supports and brackets that are compatible with the design and scale of the sign; and

vi.    Shall not be internally or externally illuminated.

vii.    Each ground-level occupancy frontage may have one such projecting sign if such sign is located near its primary entryway. Such sign shall be in addition to other signs allowed in Table 11.4.25.025.A: Standards for Signs in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts, above.

viii.   No sign shall project into any public right-of-way unless the director of public works shall have first issued an encroachment permit therefor.

c.     Monument Signs. One single-faced or double-faced freestanding monument sign is permitted subject to the following standards where the face of the building is set back from the property line more than 15 feet:

i.      No part of the sign shall extend over public property or have a height exceeding 5 feet measured from the base at ground level to the apex of the sign.

ii.     The total area of the sign shall not exceed 0.5 square feet per foot of street frontage or 40 square feet, whichever is smaller.

iii.     Signs shall be located in a landscape planter a minimum of 2 feet wider than the sign itself, with a minimum 2-foot wide base for the monument sign itself.

iv.    Placement shall conform with a minimum setback of 3 feet from a street property line, 3 feet from an interior property line, and a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of a driveway.

v.     Landscaping with automatic sprinklers shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure equal to twice the area of one face of the sign, or 75 square feet, whichever is greater.

vi.    If the sign is to be lit, all lighting shall be from internal illumination.

vii.    Each monument sign shall contain an address plate identifying the subject property. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the public right-of-way. Address plates shall not be calculated against the allowable sign area.

d.     Restaurant Menu Signs. Restaurant menu signs and similar display box signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

i.      Shall be located in a permanently mounted display box on the surface of the building adjacent to the entry.

ii.     The allowable area shall be a maximum of 6 square feet and shall be limited to the size of 2 pages.

iii.     Such sign shall be compatible with the scale, colors, and materials of the storefront.

iv.    Such sign shall not be used for additional business identification or additional signage.

v.     Such sign shall not be included in the sign area calculation for the business.

e.     Permanent Window Signs. Permanent window signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

i.      Permanent window signs shall not exceed 20% of the area of each window.

ii.     No window sign shall be displayed above the second story.

iii.     Permanent window signs shall be limited to individual letters placed on the interior surface of the window and intended to be viewed from the outside. White, black or gold leaf paint are recommended colors. Glass-mounted graphic logos may be applied by silk screening or pre-spaced vinyl die-cut forms.

iv.    Interior permanent signs within 3 feet of a storefront window shall be counted as a permanent window sign.

v.     Permanent window signs shall be allowed in addition to the aggregate sign area allowed for wall and projecting signs.

vi.    Permanent window signs shall not be illuminated, except for neon signs illuminated in compliance with subparagraph 11.4.25.025.D.10.f.vi, below.

 

f.      Neon Signs. Neon signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

i.      Neon signs and linear tubing shall be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) listed with a maximum 30 milliamps per circuit and shall be designed to accommodate a dimmer in order to reduce the brightness of the neon.

ii.     The neon manufacturer shall be registered with Underwriters Laboratories.

iii.     Neon tubing shall not exceed 0.5 inches in diameter.

iv.    Neon lighting adjacent to residential uses shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the property line.

v.     Neon tubing shall not be combined with any reflective materials (e.g., highly-glazed tiles, mirrors, polished metal), or other similar material.

vi.    Interior neon signs placed within 5 feet of a storefront window shall have a transparent background and shall be counted as a permanent window sign.

g.     Temporary Window Signs. Temporary window signs are permitted subject to the following standards:

i.      Combinations of permanent and temporary window signs shall not cover more than 30% of any window (50% during December).

ii.     No more than 1 temporary window sign is allowed per window.

iii.     Commercial temporary window signs shall not be posted more than 3 times per calendar year.

iv.    Commercial temporary window signs shall not be posted more than 30 days for each period.

v.     A temporary sign permit approval is required to post commercial temporary window signs.

h.     Portable A-Frame Signs. Portable A-frame signs shall comply with the following standards:

i.      A portable A-frame sign is only permitted where building frontage is located within 10 feet of a public sidewalk.

ii.     A portable A-frame sign shall be located so as to allow at least 6 feet clear for pedestrian passage along a pedestrian walkway and shall not be located on public property.

iii.     Compliance with all provisions of the “City of Seal Beach Standards for Portable A-Frame Signs.”

i.      Sign Illumination. Sign illumination is subject to the following standards:

i.      Internal illumination is permitted on monument signs, channel letters and channel logos only.

ii.     Signs without channel letters and channel logos shall only be externally illuminated.

iii.     The permitted range of sign illumination shall be between 5 and 20 candelas per square foot of sign area, except for business properties that have property frontage on Pacific Coast Highway where a maximum of 70 candelas/square foot is permitted.

iv.    Lighting shall be energy efficient, and shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are confined to the maximum extent feasible within the boundaries of the site, and shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of way. No lighting on private property shall produce an illumination level greater than one footcandle on any property within a residential zoning district except on the site of the light source.

v.     A luminance report shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and submitted to the director within 90 days of the installation of any internal or external illuminated sign indicating compliance with subparagraphs (iii) and (iv), above. Such report shall include the method of measurement, results of such measurement, and, if the measurement exceeded the provisions of subparagraph (iii) above, the actions taken and resulting measurement information to achieve compliance with such subparagraph (iii).

j.      Outlining of Buildings or Components. Outlining of buildings or components of buildings (i.e., doorways, windows, rooflines, architectural features, etc.) by string lighting shall not be considered sign illumination, but shall be approved through the minor use permit process pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. See also Section 11.4.25.010: Exempt Signs; Subsection O: Decorative Holiday Displays.

k.     Additional Review. Additional review is required as set forth below:

i.      A conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, shall be required for the signage for a new structure, or a conversion of an existing structure into separate tenant spaces, that will establish or create 2 or 3 separate tenant spaces. In making its determination, the commission shall consider such factors as the size, location and design of the proposed signs; the type of businesses to which the signs will pertain; the architectural character of the site and surrounding buildings; and the type of other permitted signage in the vicinity of the site.

ii.     A planned sign program shall be required for the signage of a new structure, or a conversion of an existing structure into separate tenant spaces, that will establish or create 4 or more separate tenant spaces, pursuant to Section 11.4.25.045: Procedures for Sign Approval, and Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

iii.     When property falls under an adopted planned sign program, the above subparagraphs 10.a through 10.i, and the provisions of Table 11.4.25.025.A: Standards for Signs in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts, do not apply.

E.     LM and OE Districts. The following signs are permitted in the LM and OE districts:

1.     All signing permitted in Table 11.4.25.025.A: Standards for Signs in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Other Nonresidential Districts, with the same restrictions for wall, freestanding, and awning or canopy signs.

2.     For each industrial complex or industrial park, one monument sign not to exceed 10 feet in height and not to exceed 100 square feet per face shall be permitted at the entrance of a dedicated street. Such sign shall identify the industrial complex or industrial park.

3.     In the OE district one monument identification sign on each dedicated street shall be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 8 feet in height and shall not exceed 40 square feet per face and the sign shall identify the facility and company operating the site.

F.     RG District. The following signs shall be permitted in the RG district: Monument or ground signs containing the name of the facility. Such sign not to exceed 60 square feet per face or exceed 6 feet in height. One sign shall be permitted at each entrance to the facility from a dedicated street.

G.    Substitution of Sign Message. Any of the permitted sign types authorized by this section, with the exception of signs placed at public bus benches and bus shelters and city banners, may contain non-commercial copy in lieu of any other copy. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.030 Signs—Residential Districts.
The regulations of this section shall apply to all residential districts, as well as residential uses located in nonresidential zones.

A.     Permitted Signs. In addition to the exempt signs listed in Section 11.4.25.010: Exempt Signs, the following signs are permitted in residential zones:

1.     Subdivision Identification Signs. A subdivision in a residential district shall be permitted to display a subdivision identification sign or signs not exceeding 25 square feet in aggregate area. Such sign(s) must be attached to a wall, fence, or gateway structure, and integrated with the design of the structure. Larger signs may be approved by minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

2.     Flags. Each site may display a total of one flag per frontage. No flag shall exceed 12 square feet in area or contain commercial copy.

3.     Commercial Signs. One sign indicating the presence on the property of an approved use subject to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. Such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, unless a greater area is specifically approved by the decision-making authority as part of the use permit approval.

B.     Illumination. No sign governed by this section shall be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.035 Temporary Signs.
A.     Temporary Noncommercial Signs—Residential Districts and Uses. Up to 4 temporary noncommercial signs, each no larger than 6 square feet in area, are permitted per dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than 4 such signs are permitted to be located in the front yard or street-facing side yard of any residential property, whether single-unit, two-unit, or multi-unit. Temporary noncommercial signs may be attached to freestanding sign structures no more than 5 feet in height, building walls, or fences. Temporary noncommercial signs must be removed or replaced within 60 days of placement.

B.     Large Distributions. Any person wishing to distribute more than 50 temporary noncommercial signs to property owners in the city must first apply for and receive a permit from the director. The permit application shall contain an actual-sized prototype of the sign and the name, address, and telephone number where the applicant may be reached by the director or police chief or the respective deputies responsible for the enforcement of these provisions. The permit application shall be approved unless the sign does not meet the requirements set forth in this chapter. The decision to grant or deny a permit shall be made within one business day after submission of the application. One permit shall govern all signs of each type distributed to property owners in the city.

C.    Temporary Non-Commercial Signs—Commercial, Mixed-Use and Other Nonresidential Districts and Uses. Temporary noncommercial signs meeting the requirements of this chapter are permitted in commercial, mixed-use, and other nonresidential districts. Temporary noncommercial signs must be removed or replaced within 60 days of placement, and each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. For properties not subject to a master sign program, the maximum number of temporary noncommercial signs per property at a time shall be 4 signs.

D.    Temporary Commercial Signs—Permit Required. Temporary commercial signs meeting the requirements of this chapter may be displayed with a permit from the director on nonresidential properties in commercial and industrial zones. Temporary commercial signs shall be displayed for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, or a shorter period determined by the director based on the length of time of the use or activity, or as specified by this section. The provisions contained in Section 11.4.25.045: Procedures for Sign Approval, shall apply to temporary commercial signs. No more than one commercial temporary sign shall be permitted and no such sign shall be more than 32 square feet in sign area. A maximum of 3 such signs may be permitted on any site per year.

E.     Owner/Occupant Consent Required. No temporary commercial sign shall be placed, erected or maintained without the authorization of the property owner or occupant.

F.     Off-Premises Signs Prohibited. All temporary commercial signs shall be on-premises signs. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.040 General Provisions for All Sign Types.
A.     Calculation of Sign Area. The area of an individual sign shall be calculated as follows.

1.     Single-Faced Signs. Sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles that enclose the extreme limits of all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not included in sign area provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for addresses or required tags. The calculation of sign area for various types of single-faced signs is illustrated in Figure 11.4.25.040.A.1: Calculation of Sign Area.

 

Figure 11.4.25.040.A.1

Calculation of Sign Area



 

2.     Double-Faced Signs. Where 2 faces of a double-faced sign are located 2 feet or less from one another at all points, or located at an interior angle of 45 degrees or less from one another, the sign area shall be computed as the area of one face. Where the 2 faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face shall be used. Where 2 faces of a double-faced sign are located more than 2 feet or 45 degrees from each other, both sign faces shall be counted toward sign area. See Figure 11.4.25.040.A.2: Measurement of Double-Faced Signs.

Figure 11.4.25.040.A.2

Measurement of Double-Faced Signs



 

3.     Multi-Faced Signs. On a 3-faced sign, where at least one interior angle is 45 degrees or less, the area of 2 faces (the largest and smallest face) shall be summed to determine sign area. In all other situations involving a sign with 3 or more sides, sign area shall be calculated as the sum of all faces.

4.     Three-Dimensional Signs. Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), shall have a sign area of the sum of all areas using the 4 vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign. See Figure 11.4.25.040.A.4: Measurement of Three-Dimensional Signs.

Figure 11.4.25.040.A.4

Measurement of Three-Dimensional Signs



 

B.     Materials. Paper, cardboard, or other material subject to rapid deterioration shall be limited to signs displayed for no more than 60 days. Fabric signs shall be restricted to city banners, awning signs, and temporary banners permitted pursuant to Section 11.4.25.020: Temporary Banners, above.

C.    Illumination. The illumination of signs, from either an internal or external source, shall be designed to avoid negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way and properties. See also Section 11.4.10.020.A: Lighting. The following standards shall apply to all illuminated signs:

1.     External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign;

2.     Sign lighting shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will create a nuisance for residential properties in a direct line of sight to the sign.

D.    Illumination, Main Street Specific Plan District. The illumination of signs within the Main Street Specific Plan District shall comply with the following standards.

1.     Internal illumination is permitted on monument signs, channel letters and channel logos only.

2.     Signs without channel letters and channel logos shall only be externally illuminated.

3.     The permitted range of sign illumination shall be between 5 and 20 candelas per square foot of sign area, except for business properties that have property frontage on Pacific Coast Highway where a maximum of 70 candelas/square foot is permitted.

4.     Lighting shall be energy efficient, and shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are confined to the maximum extent feasible within the boundaries of the site, and shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of way. No lighting on private property shall produce an illumination level greater than one footcandle on any property within a residential zoning district except on the site of the light source.

5.     A luminance report shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and submitted to the director of development services within 90 days of the installation of any internal or external illuminated sign indicating compliance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of this subsection. Such report shall include the method of measurement, results of such measurement, and, if the measurement exceeded the provisions of paragraph 3 above, the actions taken and resulting measurement information to achieve compliance with such paragraph 3.

E.     Changeable Copy. Changeable copy shall cover no more than 20% of the total sign area, except for the following uses which are allowed up to 75% of sign area to be changeable copy: all public and civic uses, indoor theaters, other public assembly uses, and fuel price signs.

F.     Code Compliance. Signs erected, installed, located or maintained in the city must comply with all applicable structural provisions of the most recently adopted versions of the Uniform Sign Code, California Building Code, and California Electrical Code adopted by the city. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.045 Procedures for Sign Approval.
A.     Director Review Required. The erection, installation, alteration, enlargement, or relocation of all signs shall be approved by the director unless otherwise stated in this chapter. Specifically, planned sign programs shall be reviewed and approved through the conditional use process pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     Minor Alterations Excepted. The changing of changeable copy, or the replacement of sign copy or sign face where the materials, copy and background color, and copy size are the same as the existing sign they replace, is not deemed an alteration and is only subject to director approval.

C.    Findings. The approval authority will not approve an application for a sign unless it finds that the proposed sign or signs are aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area, considering such factors as the proposed size, location and design of the sign(s), the type of business to which the sign(s) pertain, the architectural character of the building(s) on site, the architectural character of surrounding buildings, and the type of other permitted signage in the vicinity of the proposed sign.

D.    Application—Individual Signs on Sites with Less than 4 Nonresidential Tenant Spaces. An application for a sign shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall include detailed drawings to show the locations, dimensions, structure, colors, materials, fonts, and symbols of all proposed signs. The application shall indicate the area of each individual sign and the aggregate area of all existing and proposed signs on the lot, and demonstrate through drawings and/or calculations that all standards are met. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount specified in the master fee schedule.

E.     Planned Sign Programs. All commercial projects with more than 4 nonresidential tenant occupancies, all separately identifiable commercial building groups, and all construction and renovation projects involving more than 20,000 square feet must obtain approval for a planned sign program prior to the installation of any signs.

1.     Permit Requirement. Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits shall be required to approve a planned sign program.

2.     Required Submittals. Applications for a planned sign program shall include the following information: a computation of allowable area for all signs, the total number of proposed signs, the area of each individual sign as well as aggregate area of all signs on the site, the proposed height and dimensions of all signs, the location of each sign indicated on both a site plan and on typical building elevations, and drawings of generic sign types, including general information on materials and color schemes. An application shall also include a written program of standards for all sign types to be distributed to future tenants, including color, size, illumination, construction details, and placement of signs.

3.     Findings. The commission will only approve a planned sign program if it finds that the program is aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area. In making this determination, the commission shall consider such factors as the size, location and design of the proposed signs; the type of businesses to which the signs will pertain; the architectural character of the site and surrounding buildings; and the type of other permitted signage in the vicinity of the site.

4.     Consistency. After approval of a planned sign program, no sign shall be contracted or installed except in conformance with the planned sign program, and such program may be enforced in the same way as any other provision of this chapter.

5.     Amendments. A planned sign program may be amended through submission to and approval of a new conditional use permit by the commission.

F.     Conditional Use Permit for Exceptions to Standards. An exception to any standard of this chapter regarding the size, dimensions, or height of individual signs, or the number of signs of a particular type, may be reviewed and approved through the conditional use permit process of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. No conditional use permit for an exception to a standard shall be granted unless the planning commission finds that in addition to conformity with the required use permit findings in Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings, the proposal meets the following:

1.     The project is consistent with the applicability of the sign regulations. See Section 11.4.25.005: Applicability;

2.     The proposed signage is not excessive in relation to the size of the site or the size of signs in the surrounding area; and

3.     The proposed departure from a standard is necessary in order to adequately identify businesses, or will result in a superior design solution given the characteristics of the site or buildings. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.050 Maintenance and Administrative Removal of Signs.
A.     Maintenance of Signs. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be properly maintained with respect to appearance, structural and electrical features. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. All signs shall be subject to maintenance provisions as follows:

1.     Any location where business goods are no longer sold or produced or where services are no longer provided shall have 90 days to remove any remaining or derelict signs following notification by the city and at the expense of such property. Where the written notification has been given by the city and compliance has not been met within the required 90-day period, the city may cause the removal of such signs with the cost for such removal to be attached to the property.

2.     All signs shall be refinished to remove rust or other corrosion due to the elements and any cracked or broken faces and malfunctioning lamps shall be replaced within 90 days following notification by the city.

3.     Signs erected, installed, located or maintained in the city must comply with all applicable structural provisions of the most recently adopted versions of the Uniform Sign Code, California Building Code, and California Electrical Code adopted by the city.

4.     When a sign is replaced or removed, all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that supported the sign shall also be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the structure within 30 days of such replacement or removal.

B.     Administrative Removal. Signs may be removed by the city in accordance with the following procedures:

1.     Illegal or Dilapidated Signs. If the director finds that a permanent sign is in violation of this chapter, or is in disrepair, deteriorated, including peeling paint, prohibited, abandoned, illegal, or is in violation of the California Building Code or any other laws and ordinances, he or she shall seek correction of the violations as provided for in the municipal code. The director shall inform the sign owner by a written notice that the sign is to be removed.

2.     Safety Hazard or on Public Right-Of-Way. The city engineer, or his/her designee, without giving notice, shall have the authority to authorize removal of any sign which:

a.     Poses an immediate threat to public safety; or

b.     Is displayed in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other City ordinances on or over any public right-of-way. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.055 Legibility of Signs.
Lettering on signs should be legible. Preferred character sizes for signs are:

Minimum Character Size (inches)

Intended Reading Distance (feet)

3.5

60

4.0

70

4.5

80

5.0

90

5.5

100 or more

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.060 Materials.
Paper, cardboard, or other material subject to rapid deterioration shall be limited to signs displayed for no more than 60 days. Fabric signs shall be restricted to city banners, awning signs, and temporary banners permitted pursuant to Section 11.4.25.020: Temporary Banners. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.065 Changeable Copy.
Changeable copy shall cover no more than 20% of the total sign area, except for the following uses which are allowed up to 75% of sign area to be changeable copy.

A.     All public and civic uses.

B.     Indoor theaters.

C.    Other public assembly uses.

D.    Fuel price signs. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.070 Historic Signs.
A.     Planning Commission to Designate. The planning commission shall designate existing signs as historically and/or architecturally significant and therefore exempt from the size and/or height provisions of this chapter. Any sign so designated shall be maintained in its original condition and inspected annually for structural or other defects which would render the sign unsafe. Any such sign found by the city to be unsafe shall be restored or removed within the time specified by the city.

B.     Permit Requirement.

1.     Requests for such historic designation shall be approved by conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

2.     In considering an application for historic sign designation, the planning commission shall make the following findings, in addition to those required by Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings:

a.     The sign is of local, state or regional historic significance.

b.     The sign contributes to the architectural integrity of the building or use.

c.     The sign does not adversely impact the public health, safety, and welfare.

d.     The sign is a minimum of 25 years old.

3.     Any replacement sign for an historic sign shall require a current sign permit and all new signs shall comply with the current height and size requirements. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.25.075 Illegal Signs.
Any sign, banner, or sign structure not erected, constructed or located in conformance with this chapter is an illegal sign and is subject to abatement in accordance with the public nuisance abatement procedures set forth in Title 7: Public Peace, Morals, and Welfare, Chapter 7.40: Nuisance Abatement. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.30 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER YARDS
11.4.30.005 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all land uses as follows:

A.     New Projects.

1.     New landscape installations or landscape rehabilitation projects by developers or property managers of single-family and multifamily residential projects or complexes, private nonresidential developers, or public agencies with a landscaped area, including pools or other water features but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, shall provide landscaping in compliance with this chapter. All development projects, regardless of size, shall provide street trees in compliance with Section 11.4.30.030: Required Street Trees.

2.     New landscape installation projects by individual homeowners on single-family and multifamily residential lots with a total project landscaped area, including pools or other water features but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet, shall provide landscaping in compliance with this chapter. All development projects, regardless of size, shall provide street trees in compliance with Section 11.4.30.030: Required Street Trees.

B.     Existing Development. The approval of a minor use permit, conditional use permit, variance, or other discretionary permit approval for physical alterations and/or a change in use within an existing development may include conditions of approval requiring compliance with specific landscaping and irrigation requirements of this chapter.

C.    Projects Not Required to Comply. This chapter does not apply to:

1.     Registered local, state, or federal historical sites.

2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system.

3.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.

D.    Timing of Installation. Required landscape and irrigation improvements shall be installed before final building inspection. The installation of landscaping for a residential project may be deferred for a maximum of 90 days in compliance with Section 11.5.10.065: Performance Guarantees.

E.     Alternatives to Requirements. The review authority may modify the standards of this chapter to accommodate alternatives to required landscape materials or methods, where the review authority first determines that the proposed alternative will be equally or more effective in achieving the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.010 Landscape and Irrigation Plans.
A.     Preparation by Qualified Professional. Each landscape and irrigation plan submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, certified nurseryman, or other professional determined by the director to be qualified, based on the requirements of state law.

B.     Information Required. For all projects for which landscaping is required, a landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application. A landscape and irrigation plan shall be drawn to scale and shall at a minimum indicate: proposed plant locations, species, and sizes; any additional landscape features; proposed irrigation systems; and any measures to facilitate plant growth or control erosion.

1.     Preliminary Landscape and Irrigation Plan. A preliminary landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted as part of each application for new development, or the significant expansion (e.g., 25% or more of floor area), or redevelopment of an existing use, as determined by the director. The preliminary landscape and irrigation plan may take the form of the information required by this subsection B being shown on the site plan for the project.

2.     Final Landscape and Irrigation Plan. After planning permit approval, a final landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a building permit. A final landscape and irrigation plan shall be approved by the director before the start of grading or other construction, and before the issuance of a building permit.

3.     Content and Preparation.

a.     Required Information. Preliminary landscape and irrigation plans and final landscape and irrigation plans shall contain the information required for landscape plans by the department. However, at a minimum, these plans shall include the following information:

i.      Preliminary Landscape and Irrigation Plans. Location of proposed materials, including the identification of ground covers, shrubs, and trees as well as the location of the irrigation system and its individual components.

ii.     Final Landscape and Irrigation Plans. Detailed drawings and specifications clearly identifying the name, size, and precise location of all materials, as well as the precise location and technical description of the irrigation system and its individual components.

C.    Alternative Landscape Plan. An applicant who can demonstrate that the overall provisions and desired outcomes of this chapter can be exceeded, in whole or in part, through a modification of the standards of this chapter, may submit an alternative landscape plan (ALP) prepared in accordance with the following principles and design criteria. The ALP shall include a narrative that clearly details the modifications being requested and explains how they are superior to standard requirements and how they meet the landscape design principles listed below.

1.     Design Principles. To qualify for consideration, an alternative landscape plan shall demonstrate the following principles:

a.     Innovative use of plant materials and design techniques in response to unique characteristics of the site or the proposed use achieving a better overall design solution than would be created under the landscaping standards of this chapter.

b.     Preservation or incorporation of existing native vegetation.

c.     Incorporation of naturalistic design principles, such as variations in topography, meandering or curvilinear plantings, and grouping of dominant plant materials (trees, large shrubs) in a manner consistent with existing native vegetation.

d.     Integration of landscaping and pedestrian facilities in a manner that improves access or incorporates pedestrian-friendly design, this may include reduced ground-level planting along the front setback if canopy shade trees along sidewalks are provided.

e.     Use of additional shade trees to create a greater canopy effect.

f.      A greater degree of compatibility with surrounding uses than a standard landscape plan would offer.

D.    Review and Approval. After initial application, the director shall review each preliminary landscape plan and final landscape plan to verify its compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The director may approve the submittal in compliance with this chapter, or may deny or require changes to a submittal if it is not in compliance.

E.     Statement of Surety. When required by the director, security in the form of cash, performance bond, letter of credit, or instrument of credit, in an amount equal to 150% of the total value of all plant materials, irrigation, installation, and maintenance shall be posted with the city for a 2-year period. The director may require statements of surety for phased development projects, a legitimate delay in landscape installation due to seasonal requirements (including adverse weather conditions) and similar circumstances where it may not be advisable or desirable to install all approved landscaping before occupancy of the site. See Section 11.5.10.065: Performance Guarantees.

F.     Changes to Approved Landscape Plans. The director may authorize minor changes from the requirements of this chapter.

1.     For purposes of this section, minor changes shall be defined as changes to the final landscape plans that are not visible and do not affect the theme or character established for the subject development project.

2.     If the director determines that a requested change does not comply with the definition of minor as identified in subparagraph 1, above, the applicant must file the requested change with the applicable review authority, if a discretionary project review included review of landscape plans. (Ord. 1598)

11.4.30.015 Areas to be Landscaped.
The following areas shall be landscaped, and may count toward the total area of site landscaping required by the zoning district regulations.

A.     Required Setbacks. All required front and street-facing side setbacks, except for areas used for approved driveways and walkways, shall be landscaped. This requirement does not apply to the Main Street Specific Plan Zone District. See Table 11.4.30.015.A: Amount of Landscaping Required.

Table 11.4.30.015.A

AMOUNT OF LANDSCAPING REQUIRED

Land Use

Minimum Amount of Landscaping Required

Single-unit residential

Front setback and all common areas, except for approved driveways and walkways

Other residential

All usable open space areas not used for decks, patios, walkways, or parking

Commercial or industrial

Required setbacks, parking areas in compliance with Section 11.4.30.025: Parking Lot Landscaping Standards

All others

At the discretion of the review authority

 

B.     Street Side and Street Rear Property Line Walls. When a street side or street rear property line wall over 6 feet high is constructed there shall be landscape pockets with a minimum dimension of one-foot depth by 5-foot length provided every 25 feet of said wall. Permanent irrigation shall be provided to the landscape pockets.

C.    Parking Lots. Parking lots must be landscaped as provided in Section 11.4.30.025: Parking Lot Landscaping Standards.

D.    Buffer Yards. Required buffer yards must be landscaped as provided in Section 11.4.30.040: Buffer Yards.

E.     Unused Areas. All areas of a project site not intended for a specific use, including areas planned for future phases of a phased development, shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.020 General Landscaping Standards.
A.     Landscape Design. The required landscape and irrigation plan shall be designed to integrate all elements of the project (e.g., buildings, parking lots, and streets) to achieve their aesthetic objectives, desirable microclimates, and minimize water and energy demand.

1.     Plant Selection and Grouping. Plant materials shall be selected for: low water demand and drought tolerance; use of appropriate native species; adaptability and relationship to the Seal Beach environment, and the geological and topographical conditions of the site; color, form, and pattern; ability to provide shade; and soil retention capability, in compliance with Section 11.4.30.045: Water Efficient Landscaping, below.

a.     Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydro-zones.

b.     The protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged, and may be required by conditions of approval.

2.     Minimum Dimensions. No landscaping area smaller than 3 feet in any horizontal dimension shall count toward required landscaping. Wherever this zoning code requires a landscaped area of a specified width, the width shall be measured exclusive of any curb or wall.

3.     Height Limits. Landscape materials shall be selected, placed on a site, and maintained to not:

a.     Exceed a maximum height of 30 inches within a required traffic safety visibility area (see Section 11.4.20.030.C: Driveway Visibility), except for trees with the lowest portion of their canopy maintained at a minimum height of 7 feet above grade; or

b.     Interfere with the proper operation of solar energy equipment or passive solar design on adjacent parcels.

4.     Protective Curbing. Required landscaping shall be protected with a minimum 6-inch high concrete curb, except adjacent to walls or bicycle paths, or where otherwise deemed unnecessary by the director.

5.     Safety Requirements. Landscape materials shall be located so that at maturity they do not:

a.     Interfere with safe sight distances for vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic. See Section 11.4.20.030.C: Driveway Visibility;

b.     Conflict with overhead utility lines, overhead lights, or walkway lights; or

c.     Block pedestrian or bicycle ways.

6.     Water Features. Decorative water features (e.g., fountains, ponds, pools) shall have re-circulating water systems and shall be maintained in good operating order.

B.     Plant Material. Required landscape plans shall include ground covers, shrubs, and trees, which shall be selected and installed in compliance with Section 11.4.30.045: Water Efficient Landscaping, below, and as follows.

1.     Size at Time of Planting. Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect and shall not be less than a 5-gallon container for specimen shrubs, a 15-gallon container for trees, and a 1-gallon container for mass planting, unless otherwise approved by the director on the basis that the alternate size will achieve the desired immediate effect equally well.

2.     Trees. Tree planting shall comply with the following standards. Existing trees shall be retained and preserved wherever and whenever possible.

a.     Trees shall not be planted under any structure that may interfere with normal growth (e.g., an eave, overhang, balcony, light standard, or other similar structure).

b.     Trees in landscape planters less than 10 feet in width or located 5 feet or closer to a permanent structure shall be provided with root barriers/root barrier panels.

c.     Trees shall be staked in compliance with standards provided by the department.

d.     Number of trees:

i.      Parking areas: refer to Section 11.4.30.025: Parking Lot Landscaping Standards.

ii.     Street trees: one per 25-foot length of right-of-way. The director may modify this requirement depending on the chosen tree species and its typical spread at maturity, and as supported by concurrence of the city engineer.

3.     Groundcover and Shrubs. Generally the landscaped areas shall include groundcover, shrubs, turf, or other types of plants that are predominantly drought tolerant.

a.     A minimum of 2, 5-gallon size shrubs shall be provided for every 6 feet of distance along street frontages, or as approved by the director.

b.     Groundcover shall be provided throughout the landscaped area and shall be spaced to achieve full coverage within one year.

c.     Artificial groundcover or shrubs shall not be allowed.

d.     Crushed rock, redwood chips, pebbles, stone, and similar materials shall be allowed up to 15% of the total required landscape area. Artificial or synthetic ground covers are not allowed.

e.     Non-turf areas (e.g., shrub beds) shall be top dressed with a mulch or approved alternative.

4.     Turf. Turf shall be limited to 25% of the total landscaped area on the site for a drought tolerant turf variety. An infill lot, corner lot, or other parcel with more than one street frontage may be approved with turf up to 35% of the landscaped area on the site for a drought tolerant turf variety, where necessary to provide consistent streetscapes. No turf shall be allowed:

a.     In any area of 8 feet or less in width; or

b.     On any slope exceeding 10%. A level buffer zone of 18 inches shall be provided between bermed turf areas and any hardscape (e.g., any street, walkway, or similar feature).

5.     Soil Testing and Preparation.

a.     A soil test for horticultural suitability shall be required at time of landscape installation in each landscaped area.

b.     The soil shall be prepared and/or amended to be suitable for the landscape to be installed, in compliance with Section 11.4.30.045.C: Soil Conditioning and Mulching.

C.    Irrigation System Requirements. All landscaped areas shall include an automatic irrigation system, designed and installed in compliance with Section 11.4.30.045: Water Efficient Landscaping.

1.     Water-efficient systems (e.g., drip, mini-spray, bubbler-type, or similar system) shall be used unless determined to be infeasible by the review authority. Any alternative system shall be subject to the approval of the review authority. Low-flow sprinkler heads with matched precipitation rates shall be used when spray or rotor-type heads are specified for watering shrubs and ground cover areas. Turf areas shall be sized and shaped so they can be efficiently irrigated.

2.     Dual or multi-program controllers with separated valves and circuits shall be used when the project contains more than one type of landscape treatment (e.g., turf, ground cover, shrub, tree areas), or a variety of sun exposures. Soil moisture-sensing devices and rain sensors shall be used on larger projects (e.g., 5,000 plus square feet of landscaped area) to minimize or eliminate over-watering.

3.     Watering shall be scheduled at times of minimal wind conflict and evaporation loss.

4.     Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates within each valve zone.

5.     Check valves are required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.025 Parking Lot Landscaping Standards.
Parking lot landscaping shall conform to all of the general standards of Section 11.4.30.020: General Landscaping Standards above, as well as the following: (See Figure 11.4.30.025.A: Minimum Dimensions of Required Parking Lot Landscaping).

A.     Landscape Area Required. A minimum of 15% of the parking lot area shall be landscaped. For the purpose of calculating required parking lot landscaping, parking lot area shall include parking and loading spaces and adjacent paved areas, aisles, and auto entry and exit areas. Internal pedestrian access ways may be excluded from the parking lot area used to calculate required landscaping. On-site landscaped setbacks or buffer areas located between a parking lot and adjacent public right-of-way, public sidewalk, or interior lot line, as required by subsections E and F of this section, may be counted toward the required parking lot landscaping. Planting strips located within the right-of-way may not be counted toward required parking lot landscaping.

B.     Required Trees. A minimum of one 24-inch box tree shall be provided within the parking lot area for every 4 parking spaces. Trees that are required as part of a buffer yard per Section 11.4.30.040.C.2: Landscaping of Required Buffer Yards shall not count toward fulfilling this requirement.

C.    Parking Lot Tree Shading. Trees shall be planted and maintained throughout any surface parking lot to ensure that, within 15 years after establishment of the parking lot, at least 50% of the parking area will be shaded.

D.    Layout. Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the parking lot area. Parking lot landscaping may be provided in any combination of landscaped strips at least 6 feet wide between rows of parking stalls, landscaped strips between parking areas and adjacent buildings or internal pedestrian walkways, landscaped islands located between parking stalls or at the ends of rows of parking stalls, and on-site landscaping at the parking lot perimeter, as long as the following minimum requirements are met:

1.     Landscaped Islands. A landscaped island at least 6 feet wide and 18 feet deep or equivalent area shall be provided at each end of each interior row of parking stalls and between every 6 consecutive parking stalls in any residential development or any mixed-use development in which residential units overlook on-site parking areas, and between every 10 stalls in any nonresidential development. One tree of at least 24-inch box size shall be located in the rear one-third of each such landscaped island. For the purpose of this regulation, “rear” constitutes the portion of the landscaped island corresponding to the rear of adjacent parking stalls and proximal to the aisle.

2.     Landscaped Separation between Parking Areas and Buildings. No parking space shall directly abut an exterior building wall. A landscaped area at least 4 feet wide shall be provided between any parking stall and adjacent on-site building.

E.     Size of Tree Planting Spaces. Anywhere that an individual tree is planted in a space surrounded by pavement, the planting area must have a minimum interior dimension of 5 feet.

F.     Landscaped Buffer for Open Parking Abutting Public Right-of-Way. A landscaped area at least 10 feet wide shall be provided between any surface parking lot and any adjacent public sidewalk or street. Alternatively, a landscaped area at least 5 feet wide may be provided in conjunction with a solid screening wall at least 2.5 to 3.5 feet tall. The wall must be at least 80% opaque. Such screening wall shall be composed of brick, stone, stucco, or other quality durable material approved by the director, and shall include a decorative cap or top finish as well as edge detail at all wall ends. Plain concrete blocks are not allowed as a screening wall material unless capped and finished with stucco or other material approved by the director.

G.    Landscaped Buffer for Open Parking Abutting Interior Lot Line. A landscaped area at least 4 feet wide shall be provided between any surface parking area and any adjacent lot or lots for the length of the parking area. Such landscaped area may overlap or be continuous with any buffer yard required by Section 11.4.30.040: Buffer Yards.

 

Figure 11.4.30.025.A

Minimum Dimensions of Required Parking Lot Landscaping

 



 

H.    Protection of Vegetation.

1.     Design. All required parking lot landscaped areas shall be designed so that plant materials, at maturity, are protected from vehicle damage by providing a minimum 2-foot clearance of low growing plants where a vehicle overhang is permitted, or by wheel stops set a minimum of 2 feet from the back of the curb.

2.     Planters. All required parking lot landscaping shall be within planters bounded by a concrete curb at least 6 inches wide and 6 inches high. No planter, except building perimeter planters, shall be smaller than 25 square feet in area, or 3 feet in any horizontal dimension, excluding curbing.

3.     Clearance. Landscaping in planters at the end of parking aisles shall not obstruct drivers’ vision of vehicular and pedestrian cross traffic. Mature trees shall have a foliage clearance of 7 feet from the grade of the parking area, with other plant materials not to exceed 26 inches in height. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.030 Required Street Trees.
Street trees shall be provided at a ratio of at least one tree for each 25 feet of public street frontage unless a greater number of trees are specified in the zoning district regulations. Street tree locations shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.035 Landscape Installation and Maintenance.
A.     Consistency with Approved Plans. All landscaping shall be installed consistent with approved plans and specifications.

B.     Timing of Installation. Required landscaping shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a project. All required fences and walls shall be permanently maintained in good condition and repaired or replaced when necessary to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this section.

C.    Maintenance. All planting shall be maintained in a good growing condition. Maintenance shall include, where appropriate, pruning, mowing, weeding, cleaning, fertilizing, and regular watering. Wherever necessary, plantings shall be replaced with other plant materials to insure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements. Trees shall be maintained by property owners to be free from physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage, accidents, vandalism, insects and disease. Any tree showing such damage shall be replaced with another tree of comparable size and value.

D.    Maintenance Agreement. Before final building inspection or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and before the recordation of a final subdivision map where applicable, the applicant shall enter into a landscape maintenance agreement with the city to guarantee proper maintenance in compliance with subsection C of this section. The form and content of the agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and the director.

E.     Water Waste Prohibited. Water waste in existing developments resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation leading to excessive runoff, low head drainage, overspray, and other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures is prohibited. Efficient watering practices shall be conducted in compliance with Section 4.30.045: Water Efficient Landscaping, below. See also Section 11.4.10.020.H: Storm Drainage and Storm Water Runoff.

F.     Enforcement. Failure to maintain landscape areas in compliance with this section shall be deemed a nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement in compliance with Municipal Code Chapter 7.35: Public Nuisances and Chapter 7.40: Nuisance Abatement, and/or the applicable planning permit may be revoked. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.040 Buffer Yards.
A.     Applicability. The buffer yard standards of this section shall apply to:

1.     All new development on vacant land.

2.     Redevelopment or expansion of existing development by 15% or more of existing floor area, except for new construction of single units, second units, or two-unit dwellings.

3.     Any change from a residential use to a commercial or light manufacturing use, a commercial use to a light manufacturing use; or any other change from one land use classification to another nonresidential land use classification that increases development intensity and results in increased traffic, processes, noise, or pollution, as determined by the director.

B.     Exceptions.

1.     Where a proposed use is separated from an existing use by a public right-of-way, drainage channel, or stream corridor, no buffer yard is required provided such right-of-way, drainage channel, or stream corridor is at least equal in width to the required buffer yard.

2.     Where a development lot is 25 feet or less in width, an 8-foot high solid masonry wall may be provided in lieu of any required buffer yard.

3.     Compliance with the buffer yard standards shall not necessitate the demolition or relocation of any portion of any existing building.

4.     Other exceptions to the standards of this section may be granted with a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

C.    Required Buffer Yards—Minimum Dimensions and Standards. Required buffer yards are indicated in Table 11.4.30.040.A: Required Buffer Yards. A buffer yard shall be provided on any lot containing a use listed in the first column of Table 11.4.30.040.A when it abuts a lot containing a use listed in the second column of the same row. Buffer yards shall consist of both a landscaped area and a screening wall in the dimensions prescribed in the table and shall comply with all applicable standards of this subsection. See also Figure 11.4.30.040.C: Buffer Yards.

 

Table 11.4.30.040.A

REQUIRED BUFFER YARDS

Proposed Land Use on Project Site

Existing Land Use on Adjacent Lot

Minimum Buffer Yard Width (ft.)

Required Screening Wall Height (ft.)

Commercial Use, Mixed-Use Use

Residential Use; Residential Care Facility; Park and Recreation Facility; Day Care Center

10

8

Light Manufacturing Use

Residential Use; Residential Care Facility; Park and Recreation Facility; Day Care Center

20

10

Public and Semi-Public Uses

Residential Use

5

6

Multiple-Unit Residential; Transitional Housing; Senior Housing with 3 or more units on a lot; Group Housing; Residential Care Facility; Large Family Day Care

Single-Unit Dwelling; Single-Unit Dwelling with Second Unit; or Two-Unit Dwelling

5

7

 

1.     Location. Required buffer yards shall be developed along the perimeter of the lot and extend inward from the property line of the project site as illustrated in Figure 11.4.30.040.C: Buffer Yards.

Figure 11.4.30.040.C

Buffer Yards



 

2.     Landscaping of Required Buffer Yards. Buffer yards shall be planted with a mix of trees, a minimum of 24-inch box in size, and shrubs. At least 1 tree shall be planted per 20 lineal feet or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over the buffer yard. In addition, a minimum of 5 shrubs shall be planted per 20 lineal feet.

3.     Screening Walls. All screening walls must provide a solid screening wall of stucco, decorative block, or concrete panels. Chain-link fencing is prohibited.

4.     Uses of Buffer Yards. Buffer yards may be used as yards, open space, or natural areas, or for any use that does not interfere with its effectiveness as a buffer between potentially incompatible uses. Buffer yards shall not be used for parking, driveways, trash enclosures, mechanical equipment, or as a building area.

5.     Buffer Yard Plan. A buffer yard plan shall be submitted in conjunction with other application materials for a permit. A buffer yard plan shall show the location of all buffer yards on the project site, proposed plant locations, a plant list and key, and existing and proposed structures on the site. Where a landscaping plan is also required, the buffer yard plan may be incorporated into the landscaping plan.

6.     Maintenance. All required planting shall be permanently maintained in good growing condition and replaced with new plant materials when necessary to ensure compliance with applicable standards. All required walls shall be permanently maintained in good condition and repaired or replaced when necessary to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.045 Water Efficient Landscaping.
A.     Applicability. This section shall apply to all proposed development and new land uses, except the following:

1.     Any landscaped area which is irrigated with reclaimed water;

2.     Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;

3.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; and

4.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.

5.     Cemeteries, golf courses, parks, playgrounds, schools, and sports fields are exempt from the turf area limit of this section. Turf will be allowed for these uses in all areas where the functional need for turf can be demonstrated. The other provisions of this section shall apply to these uses.

B.     Plant Selection, Water Features, and Use Limitation.

1.     Limitation on High Water Uses. Turf, high water use plants, and water features shall be considered high water uses and shall be limited to not more than 25% of the entire project’s landscaped area. The installation of turf shall be in compliance with Section 11.4.30.020.B.4: Turf.

2.     Plant Selection. Plants selected in all other landscaped areas shall be well-suited to the climate, geology, and topographic conditions of the site, and shall be low water use once established.

3.     Size Limitation—Turf Areas. No turf shall be allowed in areas less than 8 feet wide, excepting parking strips between the curb and sidewalk where there will be foot traffic.

4.     Re-Circulating Water Features. Re-circulating water shall be used for all water features and shall be maintained in good operating order.

C.    Soil Conditioning and Mulching.

1.     A minimum one-foot depth of non-mechanically compacted soil shall be available for water absorption and root growth in planted areas.

2.     In areas with overhead irrigation, organic amendment shall be incorporated into the soil to a minimum depth of 6 inches at a minimum rate of 5 cubic yards for each 1,000 square feet, or in compliance with specified amendment recommendations from a soils laboratory report.

3.     A minimum of a 2-inch layer of porous mulch shall be applied to all exposed soil surfaces of non-turf areas within the landscaped area. Nonporous material (e.g., plastic sheeting), shall not be placed under the mulch; however, a porous landscape fabric is allowed.

D.    Irrigation.

1.     All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with automatic controllers with repeat start-time potential.

2.     When the landscape contains more than one type of plant type (e.g., annual, ground cover, turf) or a variety of sun exposures, controllers shall have multiple-program potential.

3.     Separate irrigation circuits shall be provided for different plant types, irrigation methods, solar exposures, microclimates (e.g., understory, courtyard) slopes, and soil types.

4.     Pressure regulation shall be installed to effect correct operating pressure for each type of irrigation head or drip method.

5.     Point application methods (e.g., drip, bubbler) shall be used wherever feasible.

6.     Irrigation delivery systems shall be designed so that water does not run off or overspray onto adjacent pavement, sidewalks, structures, or other non-landscaped areas.

7.     Sprinkler heads shall have precipitation rates matched within 20% of one another on each irrigation circuit; however, pressure compensating bubbles may be included in circuits serving shrub areas.

8.     Rain shut-off devices shall be installed on each irrigation controller.

9.     Check valves shall be installed where elevation differential may cause extreme low head drainage

E.     Documentation for Compliance. The following documentation shall be submitted to the director as part of the requirements of this section.

1.     Preliminary Landscape Statement. The preliminary landscape statement shall contain a brief description of the planting and design actions that are intended to meet the requirements of this section.

2.     Building Permit. The documentation identified in Section 11.4.30.010.E: Statement of Surety, shall be submitted with the building permit application.

3.     Completion of Installation. Upon completion of installation of the landscape, the landscape design principal or owner shall submit to the director a certificate of completion and a certificate of conformance, stating that the project has been installed as designed, or with documentation of suitable substitutions.

F.     Alternative Provisions. The director shall:

1.     Consider and may allow the substitution of design alternatives and innovations that will lead to a greater reduction in water consumption than the measures identified in this section; and

2.     Accept documentation methods, water allowance determinations, and landscape and irrigation design requirements of Title 9, Public Property, Public Works, and Building Regulations, Chapter 9.70, Water Efficient Landscaping, and the accompanying “Guidelines for Implementation of the City of Seal Beach Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance No. 1588” in lieu of the requirements of this section in cases where it is demonstrated that compliance with those requirements will lead to a greater or equivalent reduction in water consumption than the measures identified in this section. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.30.050 Invasive Plant Species.
No plant species listed as problematic and/or invasive by the California Native Plant Society, the California Exotic Pest Plant Council, or as may be identified from time to time by the State of California shall be employed or allowed to naturalize or persist on a site. No plant species listed as a “noxious weed” by the State of California or the U.S. Federal Government shall be utilized within the site. Any existing landscaping that does not meet the above requirements shall be removed. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.35 COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
Chapter 11.4.40 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
11.4.40.005 Purpose.
Certain structures, uses and lots no longer comply with all Zoning Code requirements due to regulations adopted after such structures, uses and lots were legally established. Provided the structures, uses and lots comply with the terms and regulations contained herein and do not cause an adverse impact upon public health, safety, and welfare, this chapter allows the:

A.     Use and occupancy of nonconforming structures.

B.     Continued operation of nonconforming uses.

C.    Development and use of nonconforming lots. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.010 Maintenance and Repair of Nonconforming Structures.
A.     Continuation of Nonconforming Structures. A lawful nonconforming structure may be used, occupied and maintained in its current size and configuration.

B.     Maintenance, Nonstructural Repairs and Interior Alterations. An owner may perform non-structural repairs and interior alterations to structures that are nonconforming or contain nonconforming uses, provided the structure is not enlarged, the life of the structure is not extended or the nonconforming use is not expanded.

C.    Structural Repairs Requiring Only a Building Permit. An owner shall apply for and obtain a building permit prior to performing any structural repair, including modification or repair of bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, to:

1.     Nonconforming Single-Unit Residences. Provided:

a.     The residence is located in a residential zone;

b.     The residence has an existing garage that meets minimum dimensional requirements under this code; and

c.     The improvement will not increase habitable space.

2.     All Other Nonconforming Structures. Provided:

a.     The structure is not enlarged;

b.     The life of the structure is not extended;

c.     The nonconforming use is not expanded; and

d.     The cost of any structural repair during a 12-month period does not exceed 40% of the appraised value of all improvements.

D.    Structural Repairs Requiring a Minor Use Permit. An owner shall apply for and obtain a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, prior to performing any structural repair not governed by subsection C of this section. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.015 Minor Improvements to Nonconforming Residential Structures.
A.     Minor Improvements Requiring Only a Building Permit.

1.     Skylights.

2.     Solar systems.

3.     Windows.

4.     Decorative exterior improvements.

5.     Utilities.

6.     Other similar minor structural improvements approved by the planning commission.

B.     Minor Improvements Requiring a Minor Use Permit.

1.     Open roof decks.

2.     Balconies and porches (not enclosed).

3.     Roof additions over balconies and porches.

4.     Roof eaves projecting 5 feet into the required rear yard setback in the RLD-9 District, along Ocean Avenue between First Street and Eighth Street.

5.     Exterior doors.

6.     Garages, carports, and additional covered parking spaces.

7.     Interior wall modifications and remodeling which involves removal of or structural alteration to less than 25% of the structure’s interior walls. Such interior wall modifications or remodeling may increase the number of bathrooms provided that the number does not exceed the following bedroom/bathroom ratio: one bath for each bedroom plus an additional half-bath. The number of bedrooms shall not be increased if the subject property is nonconforming due to density or parking.

8.     Reduction in the number of units involving removal or structural alteration to less than 50% of the structure’s interior walls.

9.     Other similar minor improvements, as determined by the director. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.020 Structural Alterations or Additions to Single Unit Residences Require a Conditional Use Permit (All Residential Districts).
A.     Conditionally Permitted Alterations and Additions. Subject to subsection B of this section, the planning commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, for structural alterations or additions to any single unit residence that is nonconforming only with respect to one or more of the following required development standards:

1.     Maximum building height;

2.     Minimum building setbacks.

B.     Required Features for Conditionally Permitted Alterations and Additions. No conditional use permit shall be issued pursuant to subsection A unless both of the following requirements are met:

1.     Applicable minimum yard dimensions are maintained; and

2.     The nonconforming side yard setback is no less than 3 feet in width. Notwithstanding this requirement:

a.     Existing legal nonconforming exterior stairways that comply with all other applicable provisions of the California Building Code may be located in the setback.

b.     Side yard setbacks may be less than 3 feet in width on properties developed pursuant to a precise plan or planned unit development. (Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.025 Valuation of Improvements.
The building official shall determine the value of improvements by considering the total cost of all construction for which a permit is required, including: finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and any permanent work or permanent equipment. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.030 Nonconforming Multi-Unit Residential and Nonresidential Structures May Not Be Structurally Altered or Expanded; and Exceptions.
A.     Multi-Unit Residential Property. A multi-unit residential structure may not add any habitable space. A multi-unit residential structure may add a patio enclosure not exceeding 200 square feet, as defined in Section 11.6.05.010, provided that the open or glazed area of 2 or more walls shall be equal to at least 50% of the area between the floor plate and ceiling plate within the RHD-PD zone; and 65% of the area between the floor plate and ceiling plate within all other residential zones, and provided all other development standards for the residential zone in which the property is located can be met. A nonresidential structure that is nonconforming or contains a nonconforming use may not be structurally altered or expanded unless such alteration or expansion makes the structure conforming.

B.     Nonresidential Property.

1.     Substandard Yards or Open Space. A structure that is nonconforming only because of substandard yards or open space may be altered or expanded; provided that any alteration or expansion does not further reduce the size of required yards and open space.

2.     Commercial Centers over 20 Acres—Inadequate Landscaping. A commercial center over 20 acres in size that is nonconforming only because of inadequate landscaping may be altered or expanded:

a.     Upon receiving a building permit if 7% or more of its total lot area is landscaped.

b.     Upon the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, if less than 7% of its total lot area is landscaped. Provided the center remains in compliance with the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit, a building permit may be issued for subsequent alterations and expansions.

i.      Landscape Program. All applications for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a: proposed landscape program showing landscaping proposed for a minimum of 7% of the total lot area; schedule; and site plan of the center, drawn to scale and indicating, but not limited to, the following information:

(a)    Lot dimensions;

(b)    Location, size and total square footage of all structures;

(c)    Location and number of parking spaces;

(d)    Pedestrian, vehicular and service access;

(e)    Common areas; and

(f)     Location and square footage of existing landscaping.

ii.     Approval of Landscape Program. The planning commission shall approve a proposed landscape program if such program provides for the installation of the required amount of landscaping within a reasonable period of time, taking into consideration, among other factors, the total lot area of the center, the number of businesses within the center, the existing amount of landscaping, and the cost to comply with the landscaping required.

3.     Main Street Specific Plan District. A structure located within the Main Street Specific Plan District that is nonconforming only because of inadequate parking may be altered or expanded, and/or its use expanded or changed, provided:

a.     The alteration, expansion or change does not further reduce the existing number of parking spaces, and

b.     The owner supplies additional parking spaces to meet the parking requirements for the difference in area between the existing building and the altered or expanded building, and

c.     The owner supplies additional parking spaces to meet any increase in parking requirements for the expanded or new use.

If a property owner cannot meet off-street parking requirements, the owner may pay an in-lieu fee pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.4.20.020.D: Main Street Specific Plan District In-Lieu Parking Program. (Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.035 Changes, Substitutions or Expansions of Nonconforming Uses.
A.     Replacement with a More Conforming Use. The commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to replace a nonconforming use with another nonconforming use only if the commission finds that the new use is more conforming to the general plan and zoning ordinance than the previous use.

B.     Expansion Within a Conforming Structure. The commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to expand a nonconforming use occupying a portion of a legally conforming structure.

C.    Expansion within a Nonconforming Structure. The commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to expand a nonconforming use in a nonconforming structure, provided the structure conforms to the requirements of the California Building Code and any structural expansion meets the requirements of this zoning code and the California Building Code.

D.    Expansion within a Structure That Does Not Conform to the California Building Code. The commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to expand a nonconforming use in a structure that does not conform to the California Building Code only if the structure is brought into conformance with all applicable California Building Code requirements. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.040 Conditional Use Permit to Change Nonconforming Status.
Any property owner may apply for a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to conform a use that became nonconforming upon the adoption of an ordinance requiring a use permit for the use. Such application shall be filed within one year of the effective date of such ordinance unless the planning commission provides additional time to file. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.045 Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses; Conditional Use Permit for Reestablishment of Abandoned Uses.
A.     Nonconforming Uses Abandoned After 6 Months. Except as provided in subsection B: Conditional Use Permit Required for Reestablishment of Abandoned Uses, no nonconforming use may be resumed, reestablished, re-opened or replaced by another nonconforming use after it has been abandoned or vacated for 6 months or more.

B.     Conditional Use Permit Required for Reestablishment of Abandoned Uses. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the planning commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, reestablishing a nonconforming use in a legally established structure. In addition to making any other findings required pursuant to this code, the commission shall consider whether:

1.     The structure has been abandoned or vacant less than one year, and the owner has made diligent efforts to replace the nonconforming use with a similar use or a more conforming use.

2.     The structure cannot be used for any conforming use because of its original design or because of lawful structural changes made for a previous use.

3.     The structure can be reasonably expected to remain in active use for a period of 20 years without requiring repairs or maintenance in excess of 50% of the assessed value of the structure, as determined in accordance with this chapter, within any 5-year period.

4.     The structure can be modified to decrease the extent of any nonconformities and to increase compliance with current development standards.

5.     The use will be detrimental to surrounding uses.

In addition to imposing other reasonable conditions of approval, the commission may impose a time limit on the duration of the nonconforming use. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.050 Restoration of Damaged Nonconforming Structures.
A.     Damage Equal to or Less than 50%. A nonconforming structure damaged 50% or less of its replacement cost by fire, explosion or other occurrence may be restored and the use that existed therein at the time of the occurrence may be continued in the same manner that lawfully existed prior to the occurrence. For the purposes of this section, replacement cost shall be determined as of the day immediately prior to the occurrence.

B.     Residential Structure—Damage Greater than 50%. A nonconforming residential building damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost by fire, explosion or other occurrence may be restored and reoccupied in the same residential manner that lawfully existed prior to the occurrence, as follows:

1.     Reconstruction Pursuant to Building Permit. The director may issue a building permit to reconstruct the damaged structure, provided:

a.     The owner provides the applicable minimum number of standard, open and accessible covered parking spaces.

b.     The property meets or exceeds minimum setbacks required by this title.

c.     The reconstructed building does not exceed the maximum height standards of this title.

d.     The number of units on the property shall not exceed the number of units legally existing at the time of the occurrence, or one unit for each 950 square feet of lot area, whichever is less. For the purpose of calculating density, all fractions of units shall be rounded to the next highest whole number.

2.     Reconstruction Pursuant to Minor Use Permit. If the owner is unable to provide the minimum number of required parking spaces, the planning commission may issue a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to reconstruct the damaged structure, provided:

a.     The owner provides a minimum of one standard, open and accessible covered parking space for each unit. Tandem spaces existing at the time of the occurrence shall be restored, but interior spaces shall not be counted in satisfying the requirement of one space per unit.

b.     The property meets or exceeds minimum setbacks required by this title.

c.     The reconstructed structure does not exceed the maximum height standards of this title.

d.     The number of units on the property shall not exceed the number of units legally existing at the time of the occurrence, or one unit for each 950 square feet of lot area, whichever is less. For the purpose of calculating density, all fractions of units shall be rounded to the next highest whole number.

3.     General Provisions. In addition to the specific provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, above:

a.     There shall be no increase in the habitable area, unless this title allows additional habitable space.

b.     There shall be no increase in the number of units, unless this title allows additional units.

c.     No units measuring less than 500 square feet may be restored unless the director makes the following findings:

i.      All units and rooms meet the minimums established for residential occupancies under the California Building Code.

ii.     All feasible area has been utilized to enlarge substandard units, given the availability and location of space on the site, or the constraints imposed by parking requirements and the existing sound primary structure.

d.     Any entitlement conferred by a permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire if reconstruction does not commence within one year from the date of issuance, in which case the nonconforming structure or use shall be considered abandoned and subject to Section 11.4.40.045: Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses; Conditional Use Permit for Reestablishment of Abandoned Uses.

e.     The building official shall determine replacement cost, using valuation methods adopted by the building official. If the property owner disputes the building official’s determination, the owner may, at its own cost, hire a licensed appraiser, approved by the building official, to determine replacement cost.

C.    Minor Use Permit; Nonresidential Structure Damaged More than 50%. The planning commission may issue a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to restore a nonconforming nonresidential structure damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost by fire, explosion or other occurrence provided:

1.     The owner provides, at a minimum, the same number of on-site parking spaces as were provided as of the day immediately prior to the occurrence. The owner shall increase the ratio of parking to square footage, either by reducing the square footage or by providing additional parking on-site. The city may not require a reduction in square footage of more than 25%.

2.     The property meets or exceeds minimum setbacks required by this title.

3.     The reconstructed structure does not exceed the maximum height standards of this title.

D.    Director and Building Official Review—Legality of Existing Improvements. The owner of any damaged nonconforming structure is responsible for establishing the lawful existence of all improvements in the course of the reconstruction process. The owner may apply for a city determination of the structural integrity of the structure and the legality of improvements. The master fee schedule establishes the fee for such determination. Upon application, the building official shall inspect the interior and exterior of the structure and review city planning and building files. Following the review, the director shall issue a statement of findings, which shall be final and conclusive unless appealed to the planning commission. The owner may obtain information contained in the city’s public records regarding the owner’s nonconforming structure without filing the application provided hereunder.

E.     Alternate Procedures After a Natural Disaster. The city council may adopt alternative procedures for the approval of the reconstruction of nonconforming structures damaged by a natural disaster. See also Part I: General Provisions; Section 11.1.05.025.F: Application During Local Emergency.

F.     Reassessment Procedure. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 43007, every person who on the lien date of any year was the owner of, or had in such person’s possession, or under such person’s control, any taxable improvement, which improvement was thereafter destroyed without such person’s fault by fire or by any other means prior to July 31st of that year and cannot be thereafter rebuilt because of a zoning prohibition, may on or before such date as may be prescribed by the county assessor, or by state law, apply for the reassessment of such improvement and deliver to the county assessor a written statement under oath, accompanied by a certificate of a disinterested competent person or authority showing the condition and value, if any, of the improvement immediately after the destruction, and the county assessor shall, on or before October 31st of that year assess the improvement, or reassess it if it has already been assessed, according to the condition and value immediately after the destruction and upon such notice as it may find to be proper the board of supervisors of the county may, until November 30th of that year equalize any such assessment or reassessment. The tax rate fixed for property on the roll on which the improvement so assessed appears or the improvement so reassessed appeared at the time of its original assessment shall be applied to the amount of equalized assessment or reassessment determined in accordance with the provisions hereof. In the event that the resulting figure is less than the tax theretofore computed, the taxpayer shall be liable for tax only for the lesser amount and the difference shall be cancelled. If the taxpayer has already paid the tax previously computed, such difference shall be refunded to the taxpayer. (Ord. 1598)

`

11.4.40.055 Nonconforming Historic Buildings.
A.     The planning commission may issue a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, to preserve, renovate or rebuild any locally recognized historic nonconforming building, provided it finds, in addition to the findings required by Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, that:

1.     The building has local historic significance; or

2.     The architecture has local historic significance.

B.     The planning commission may authorize deviations from the municipal code necessary to preserve the structure or its historical significance, provided it finds that:

1.     The deviation is necessary to preserve the existing architecture.

2.     The owner has executed and recorded all agreements necessary to ensure preservation.

3.     The building is structurally sound.

C.    The commission may impose any reasonable conditions. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.060 Nonconforming Use of Land Where No Structure Involved.
The nonconforming use of vacant land shall cease within one year from the date such use became nonconforming. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.065 Nonconforming Lots.
A.     Minimum Legal Area and Dimensions of Lots of Record. Any lawfully created lot that does not have applicable minimum area, frontage, width or depth may be developed for any use permitted by applicable zoning, provided:

1.     The lot is shown on a duly approved and recorded subdivision map or record of survey map or described in a deed or valid contract of sale of record prior to the adoption of the ordinance that made the lot nonconforming.

2.     The lot’s area, frontage, width and depth were legal at the time that the instrument creating the lot became of record.

3.     The lot conforms to all applicable regulations, other than minimum area, frontage, width or depth.

Table 11.4.40.065: Minimum Legal Area and Dimensions of Lots of Record, sets forth legally acceptable minimum lot areas and widths.

B.     No lot area, yard or open space shall be reduced below minimum zoning requirements, nor shall the density be increased except in conformity with the regulations established by this chapter.

C.    The minimum width of corner lots shall be 10% greater than the minimum width for non-corner lots.

D.    When any lot contains a greater area than the required minimum lot area for the zone in which it is located, said lot may be divided into individual lots provided each resulting lot contains the applicable minimum required area, frontage, width or depth.

E.     These provisions notwithstanding, the city may merge substandard lots as provided for in Title 10: Subdivisions, Chapter 10.35: Lot Line Adjustments, Mergers, Certificates of Compliance and Reversion to Acreage, and pursuant to the Map Act.

Table 11.4.40.065

Minimum Legal Area and Dimensions of Lots of Record

Time Period

Ordinance/Section

Area Zone

Minimum Area (Square Feet)

Minimum Width (Feet)

Prior to 1-18-55

Ordinance 406

 

 

 

 

 

R-1

2,400

25

 

 

R-2

2,400

25

 

 

R-3

2,400

25

1-18-55 to 1-15-66

Section 21-8

 

 

 

 

 

R-1

5,000

50*

 

 

R-2

5,000

50*

 

 

R-3

5,000

50*

1-15-66 to 6-26-74

Section 21-8

 

 

 

 

 

R-1 (RLD)

7,000

70

 

 

R-2 (RMD)

7,000

70

 

 

R-3 (RHD)

7,000

70

6-26-74 to 4-10-91

Ordinance 948

 

 

 

 

 

R-1 (RLD)

5,000

50*

 

 

R-2 (RMD)

5,000

50*

 

 

R-3 (RHD)

5,000

50*

*      Minimum corner lot width - 55 feet.

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.40.070 Nonconforming Light Manufacturing Uses or Structures in a Residential Zone.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning code, including but not limited to Section 11.4.40.045, any use or structure legally established on a property previously zoned for light manufacturing that is made nonconforming by the city-initiated rezoning of the property for residential use may continue as or convert to any nonconforming use or structure consistent with the prior light manufacturing designation of the property. (Ord. 1626)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.45 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
11.4.45.005 Purpose and Intent.
A.     This article is intended to comply with Section 65089.3(a)(2) of the California Government Code, which requires the city to adopt a trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance.

B.     New commercial, industrial, and mixed-use developments which employ 100 or more persons adversely impact existing transportation and parking facilities, resulting in increased motor vehicle emissions, deteriorating levels of service on roadways, and can require significant capital expenditures to augment the existing transportation system. In order to more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions, it is the policy of the city to:

1.     Reduce the number of peak-period vehicle trips generated by development;

2.     Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, and the development of facilities that support such modes;

3.     Reduce vehicle trips, traffic congestion, and public expenditure and improve air quality pursuant to existing project review and permit processing procedures;

4.     Promote coordinated implementation of strategies to reduce transportation demand on a county-wide basis;

5.     Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated and consistent regional and local TDM programs. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.45.010 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

Applicant: a person who is responsible for the planning, design or construction of a development project.

Decision-maker: the city council for a development project that requires any approval required by this code to be considered by the city council in the absence of an appeal. “Decision-maker” means the planning commission for a development project that requires no approval which is required by this zoning code to be considered by the city council in the absence of an appeal but does require at least one approval which is required by this zoning code to be considered by the planning commission in the absence of an appeal. “Decision-maker” means the director for a development project that requires no approval which is required by this zoning code to be considered by the planning commission or city council in the absence of an appeal.

Development Project and Project: any project, other than an exclusively residential project, which requires at least one discretionary approval by the city and which meets or exceeds the employment thresholds set forth in Section 11.4.45.015: Application, below.

Employee: any person employed by an employer.

Employer: any person or persons, firm, business, educational institution, government agency, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs 100 or more persons at a single worksite.

Floor Area: the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors within a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating 2 buildings. The floor area of any basement, cellar or attic with headroom of more than 6.5 feet shall be included. A basement, cellar or attic floor space with 6.5 feet of headroom or less, as well as the area of courtyards and floor area devoted to parking and maneuvering of vehicles, shall be excluded.

Mixed-Use Project: a development that combines any of the following land uses with one or more of the others: residential uses, retail, and professional offices, as defined in Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, of this zoning code.

Peak-Period: the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.

Property Owner: the legal owner or owners of real property on which a development project is located.

Tenant: an employer which leases space in a development project.

Transportation Demand Management (TDM): the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM includes, but is not limited to, programs which encourage alternatives to the single occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of vehicle trips, and efforts to encourage rescheduling of peak period trips to non-peak periods.

Trip Reduction: reducing the number of work-related trips in single-occupancy vehicles during the peak period.

Worksite: a building, or group of buildings located on one or more adjacent lots, as that term is defined in Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, of this zoning code, which are owned or operated by one employer or by 2 or more employers under common control. Two or more employers shall be deemed to be “under common control” if any person or entity possesses, directly or indirectly, the power to direct, or to cause the direction of, the management and policies of those employers. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.45.015 Application.
A.     The provisions of this article apply to all development projects that are estimated to employ 100 or more persons under the methodology set forth in subsection B, below.

B.     Total employment of a development project shall be estimated as follows:

1.     Subject to the approval of the decision-maker, an applicant may prepare employment projections for a project; or

2.     The decision-maker may estimate the number of employees to be generated by a project under the criteria of Section 11.4.45.015.B.3: Employment Generation Standards, below. Alternatively, the decision-maker may approve a different estimate on the basis of substantial credible evidence that the employment generated by a project will differ from the estimate calculated under the standards of that section.

3.     Employment Generation Standards.

a.     Commercial land uses as defined in Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, of this zoning code are deemed to generate one employee for each 500 square feet of floor area.

b.     Offices, as that term is defined in Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, of this zoning code, are deemed to generate one employee for each 250 square feet of floor area.

c.     Industrial park uses, as that term is defined in Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, of this zoning code, are deemed to generate one employee for each 525 square feet of floor area.

d.     Hotels, as that term is defined in Section 11.6.05.010: Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, of this zoning code, are deemed to generate one employee per room.

e.     Mixed use developments are deemed to employ a number of persons equal to the total of the estimates generated by applying paragraphs 3.a. through 3.d. of this section to the various components of the project. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.45.020 Development Standards.
An applicant shall incorporate into a project the following improvements in the manner and to the extent required by the decision-maker:

A.     Preferential Parking for Carpool Vehicles.

1.     The applicant shall reserve employee parking spaces for carpool vehicles in a number specified by the decision-maker and shall mark those spaces “Carpool Only.”

2.     The applicant shall permit carpool spaces to be used only for vehicles in which at least 2 employees or tenants of the project, or employees or tenants of neighboring projects as to which the city has approved a reciprocal preferential carpool parking agreement for the benefit of the instant project, regularly travel to the project.

3.     Such carpool spaces shall be located near employee entrances or at other preferential locations approved by the director.

B.     Bicycle Parking and Shower Facilities.

1.     An applicant shall provide secure, adequate and convenient storage for bicycles.

2.     An applicant shall provide showers and locker rooms for employees of each sex in each building with a floor area of 100,000 or more square feet. The decision-maker may require an applicant to provide such facilities in any development with a total floor area of 100,000 or more square feet, even though no single building has a floor area of 100,000 or more square feet.

C.    Bus Stop Improvements. An applicant who proposes a development adjacent to one or more roadways on which public transit is provided may be required to provide bus pullouts, bus pads, and bus shelters to the extent specified by the decision-maker if the decision-maker determines that the project will generate significant transit ridership and that the provision of such improvements is required to avoid traffic congestion or other public safety hazards due to the loading and unloading of transit passengers at the development site. Such improvements may also be required of developments adjacent to roadways on which the decision-maker determines that it is reasonably foreseeable that public transit will be provided within the estimated useful life of those improvements.

D.    Information on Transportation Alternatives.

1.     An applicant who proposes a development with a floor area of 25,000 or more square feet shall provide a bulletin board, computer display or other information area that offers appropriate information on available transportation alternatives to the single-occupancy vehicle. This area shall be centrally located and accessible to all employees and tenants of the development project.

2.     The information provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subsection may include:

a.     Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit;

b.     Ridesharing match lists;

c.     Available TDM incentives; and

d.     Ridesharing promotional material.

E.     Pedestrian Access. An applicant shall provide paved pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.45.025 Property Owner Responsibility.
The property owner shall be responsible for providing and maintaining the facilities and services specified in the development standards set forth in this chapter and for otherwise complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.45.030 Enforcement and Penalties.
A.     No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other entitlement for use may issue pursuant to this code unless an appropriate officer of the city determines that the development project for which the permit is sought fully complies with the requirements of this chapter.

B.     If during the construction of a development it comes to the attention of the director that construction is deviating from the plans approved by the city in a manner that will result in a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the director shall authorize the issuance of one or more stop work orders pursuant to this code.

C.    The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any other means permitted by this code or by other law. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.45.035 Appeal.
Any decision under this chapter may be appealed pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.50 ADULT BUSINESSES
11.4.50.005 Zone Conformance Application.
It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment business as that term is defined in Title 5: Business Licenses and Regulations, Chapter 5.15: Adult Entertainment, Section 5.15.010: Definitions unless the owner of such business first obtains from the director a zone clearance for such business.

A.     Applications for a zone clearance shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council pursuant to Title 5: Business Licenses and Regulations, Chapter 5.15: Adult Entertainment, Section 5.15.095: Fees.

B.     If the director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall return the application unprocessed. On request of the applicant, the director shall grant the applicant an extension of time 10 days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying the requested zone clearance shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.50.010 Approval or Denial of Zone Conformance.
The director of development services shall, within 30 city business days of the filing of a complete application, approve and issue a zone clearance if the provisions of Section 11.4.50.015: Location Criteria have been satisfied; otherwise the zone clearance shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the zone clearance shall be given to the applicant in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service on the date of such decision. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The time period set forth in this paragraph shall not be extended except upon the written consent of the applicant. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.50.015 Location Criteria.
A.     Separation Requirements. An adult entertainment business may be located in the districts specified in this code, provided that the business satisfies all of the following requirements:

1.     The adult entertainment business is not within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment business located within or outside the city.

2.     The adult entertainment business is not within 400 feet of any residential district boundary located within or outside the city.

3.     The adult entertainment business is not within 1,000 feet of any public park, educational or religious facility located within or outside the city.

B.     Measurement of Distances. The distances set forth in subsection A above shall be measured as a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the property containing the adult entertainment business to the property line of the property so used at the time of submission of the permit application; provided, however that the distances between adult entertainment businesses as set forth in paragraph 1 of subsection A, above, shall be measured from the outside wall of the tenant space of each adult entertainment business.

C.    No adult entertainment business may be located within the city except as provided in this section. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.55 AFFORDABLE HOUSING BONUS
11.4.55.005 General Affordable Housing Provisions.
A.     State Law Governs. The provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the requirements of Government Code Section 65915, as that statute is amended from time-to-time. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this chapter and state law, the state law provisions shall govern, unless otherwise specified.

B.     Compatibility. All affordable housing units shall be dispersed within market-rate projects whenever feasible. Affordable housing units within market-rate projects shall be comparable with the design and use of market-rate units in appearance, use of materials, and finished quality. The design and appearance of the affordable housing units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing project and consistent with the surrounding neighborhood. Forms, materials and proportions that are compatible with the character of the surroundings shall be used.

C.    Availability. All affordable housing units shall be constructed concurrently with, and made available for qualified occupants at the same time as, the market-rate housing units within the same project unless both the city and the developer agree in the affordable housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

D.    Affordable Housing Agreement. An affordable housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits for all projects granted a density bonus, pursuant to this chapter. The agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the affordable housing units will be constructed. The agreement shall be consistent with Section 11.4.55.025.D: Affordable Housing Agreement Required.

E.     Median Income Levels. For the purpose of determining the income levels for households under this chapter, the city shall use the Orange County income limits found in Title 25, Section 6932 of the California Code of Regulations, and regularly updated and published by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, or other income limits adopted by the city council if the State Department of Housing and Community Development fails to provide regular updates.

F.     Effect of Granting Density Bonus. The granting of a density bonus shall not, in and of itself, be interpreted to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 1598)

11.4.55.010 State Affordable Housing Density Bonus.
A.     Density Bonus. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the city shall grant a density bonus in the following amounts over the otherwise allowable maximum residential density permitted by this chapter and the general plan, and one or more of the affordable housing incentives set forth in Section 11.4.55.020: Affordable Housing Concessions and Incentives, below, if the applicant agrees or proposes to construct any one of the following:

1.     Lower Income Units. A density bonus of 20% if 10% of the total units of a housing development are target units affordable to lower income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

2.     Very Low Income Units. A density bonus of 20%, if 5% of the total units of a housing development are target units affordable to very low income households, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code.

3.     Senior Citizen Housing Development. A density bonus of 20%, if a housing development qualifies as a senior citizen housing development, as defined in Section 51.3 of the Civil Code.

4.     Moderate Income Units in Condominium and Planned Unit Developments. A density bonus of 5% if 10% of the total dwelling units in a condominium project, as defined in subdivision (f) of, or in a planned development, as defined in subdivision (k) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, are target units affordable to persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code.

5.     Housing Accompanied by Land Donation. A density bonus of 15%, if a housing developer agrees to donate land to the city, subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.55.030: Density Bonuses for Housing Developments Accompanied by Land Donation, below.

B.     Applicability. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall be applicable to residential projects of 5 or more units, and senior citizen housing developments of at least 35 units.

C.    Calculation of Density Bonuses.

1.     Density Bonus Units. When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, all fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of target affordable or senior housing units to be provided in a development project.

2.     Sliding Scale for Greater Density Bonus. An applicant is entitled to receive a bonus larger than the percentages specified in subsection A if the percentage of affordable housing exceeds the percentages specified in subsection A, subject to the following provisions:

a.     Lower Income Dwellings. For each additional 1% increase above 10% in the proportion of units affordable to lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 1.5% up to a maximum of 35% of the maximum allowable residential density for the site.

b.     Very Low Income Dwellings. For each additional 1% increase above 5% in the proportion of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 2.5% up to a maximum of 35% of the maximum allowable residential density for the site.

c.     Condominium and Planned Unit Developments. For each additional 1% increase above 10% in the proportion of units affordable to moderate income households in condominium and planned unit developments, the density bonus shall be increased by 1% up to a maximum of 35% of the maximum allowable residential density for the site.

d.     Housing Accompanied by Land Donation. For each additional 1% increase above the minimum 10% land donation described in Section 11.4.55.030: Density Bonuses for Housing Developments Accompanied by Land Donation, below, the density bonus shall be increased by 1%, up to a maximum of 35% of the maximum allowable residential density for the site.

D.    Applicant May Request Smaller Density Bonus. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may award a smaller density bonus than specified in this section if the applicant so requests. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.55.015 State Childcare Facility Density Bonus.
A.     Density Bonus. When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section 11.4.55.010.A: Density Bonus, above, and includes a childcare facility other than a family day care home that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the city shall grant either of the following:

1.     Additional Density Bonus. A density bonus of additional residential units equal in square footage to the amount of square feet of the childcare facility, or

2.     Additional Concession or Incentive. An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility.

B.     Conditions of Approval. The city shall require as a condition of approving the housing development that the following occur:

1.     Length of Operation. The childcare facility remains in operation for a period of time that is as long as, or longer than the length of time during which Section 11.4.55.025.B: Duration of Affordability of Rental Units, following, requires that the affordable housing units remain affordable.

2.     Attending Children. The percentage of children of very low, low or moderate income households who attend the childcare facility shall be the same or greater than the percentage of dwelling units in the project that are required for households at each income level, pursuant to Section 11.4.55.015.A: Density Bonus, above.

C.    Exceptions. The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a childcare facility if it finds that, based upon substantial evidence, the community has adequate childcare facilities. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.55.020 Affordable Housing Concessions and Incentives.
A.     Number of Incentives or Concessions. In addition to a density bonus, an applicant is entitled to receive incentives or concessions as follows:

1.     One incentive or concession for projects that include at least 10% of the total units for lower income households, at least 5% for very low income households, or at least 10% for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development, or

2.     One incentive or concession for senior citizen housing developments, or

3.     Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 20% of the total units for lower income households, at least 10% for very low income households, or at least 20% for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development, or

4.     Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 30% of the total units for lower income households, at least 15% for very low income households, or at least 30% for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

B.     Proposal of Incentives and Findings. An applicant may propose specific incentives or concessions that would contribute significantly to the economic feasibility of providing affordable units pursuant to this chapter and state law. In addition to any increase in density to which an applicant is entitled, the city shall grant one or more incentives or concessions that an applicant requests, up to the maximum number of incentives and concessions required pursuant to subsection A of this section, unless the city makes a written finding that either:

1.     The concession or incentive is not necessary in order to provide the proposed targeted units, or

2.     The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact that can not be feasibly mitigated on public health and safety or the physical environment or any property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

C.    Types of Affordable Housing Incentives. Affordable housing incentives may consist of any combination of the items listed below. In addition to the incentives listed, the city may allow for fast track and priority processing for a project with affordable housing.

1.     Modification of Development Standards. Up to 20% in modification of site development standards or zoning code requirements that exceed minimum building code standards and fire code standards, including, but not limited to:

a.     Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.

b.     Reduced minimum building setbacks and building separation requirements.

c.     Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area requirements.

d.     Increased maximum lot coverage.

e.     Increased maximum building height.

2.     Reduced Parking.

a.     Upon the applicant’s request, the city shall allow a reduction in required parking, excluding handicapped parking. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the parking must satisfy at least the following minimum ratios:

i.      One on-site space for 0 to 1 bedroom units;

ii.     Two on-site spaces for 2 to 3 bedrooms;

iii.     Two and a half spaces for 4 or more bedrooms.

b.     If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

c.     At the applicant’s request, tandem parking may be counted toward meeting these parking requirements.

3.     Mixed Use Zoning. Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and such uses are compatible with the housing project and the surrounding area.

4.     Other Incentives. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable cost reductions or avoidance.

D.    Additional Affordable Housing Incentives. The city may allow for additional affordable housing incentives to be granted on a case-by-case basis, when requested by an applicant when more than 50% of the affordable housing units provided contain 3 or more bedrooms to meet the needs of large families. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.55.025 Administration.
A.     Application and Review Process. A preliminary review of development projects proposed pursuant to this chapter is encouraged pursuant to Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures, to discuss and identify potential application issues, including proposed modifications to development standards. The applicant shall request in the application the incentives the applicant wishes to obtain. The application shall include financial data showing how the incentives are necessary to make the affordable units feasible. Applications shall be reviewed and processed according to the provisions of Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures.

B.     Duration of Affordability of Rental Units. All lower income and very low income housing units shall be kept affordable for a minimum period of 30 years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program, consistent with state law.

C.    Definition of Affordability. Those units targeted for lower income households as defined in Section 11.4.55.010: State Affordable Housing Density Bonus, above, shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 30% of 60% of the area median income. Units targeted for very low income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 30% of 50% of area median income. Units targeted for moderate income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 35% of 110% of area median income. Median income levels shall be the income limits for Orange County households as provided for in Section 11.4.55.005.E: Median Income Levels, above.

D.    Affordable Housing Agreement Required. All affordable housing projects shall be subject to the approval of an affordable housing agreement conforming to the provisions of Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4, Article 2.5 of the Government Code, which shall be recorded as a covenant on the title to the property. The terms of the agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the director and/or city attorney, who shall formulate a recommendation to the planning commission for final approval. This agreement shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

1.     Number of Units. The total number of units approved for the projects, including the number of affordable housing units.

2.     Target Units. The location, unit sizes (in square feet) and number of bedrooms of the affordable housing units.

3.     Target Group. A description of the household income groups to be accommodated by the project and a calculation of the affordable rent or sales price, or a commitment to provide a senior citizen housing development.

4.     Certification Procedures. The party responsible for certifying rents or sales prices of inclusionary units, and the process that will be used to certify renters or purchasers of such units.

5.     Schedule. A schedule for the completion and occupancy of the affordable housing units.

6.     Remedies for Breach. A description of the remedies for breach of the agreement by either party.

7.     Required Term of Affordability. For lower income and very low income units, duration of affordability of the housing units, pursuant to Section 11.4.55.025.B: Duration of Affordability of Rental Units, above. Provisions should also cover resale control and deed restrictions on targeted housing units that are binding on property upon sale or transfer.

8.     Expiration of Agreement. Provisions covering the expiration of the agreement, including notice prior to conversion to market rate units and right of first refusal option for the city and/or the distribution of accrued equity for for-sale units.

9.     Other Provisions. Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter.

10.   Condominium and Planned Unit Developments. In the case of condominium and planned unit developments, the affordable housing agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and initial resale and use of affordable housing units:

a.     Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible very low, lower, or moderate income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost, or to qualified residents as defined by this chapter.

b.     Target units shall be initially owner-occupied by eligible very low, lower, or moderate income households.

c.     Upon resale, the seller of a target unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the downpayment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be used to promote home ownership opportunities as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2. The city’s proportionate share shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial sale price to the targeted household was less than the fair market value of the dwelling unit at the time of initial sale.

11.   Rental Housing Developments. In the case of rental housing developments, the affordable housing agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period:

a.     The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent rates, filling vacancies, and maintaining target units for qualified tenants.

b.     Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.

c.     Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the city, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying target units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit.

E.     Notice of Conversions. Notice of conversions of affordable units to market-rate units shall be provided pursuant to the following requirements:

1.     General. At least a one-year notice shall be required prior to the conversion of any rental units for affordable households to market-rate.

2.     Required Notice. Notice shall be given to the following:

a.     The city;

b.     The State Housing and Community Development Department (HCD);

c.     The Orange County Housing Authority;

d.     The residents of the affordable housing units proposed to be converted; and

e.     Any other person deemed appropriate by the city.

F.     Conversion of Affordable Rental Units. If an owner of a housing development issues a notice-of-intent to convert affordable housing rental units to market-rate housing, the city shall consider taking one or more of the following actions:

1.     Meet with the owner to determine the owner’s financial objectives;

2.     Determine whether financial assistance to the current owner will maintain the affordability of the rental housing development or whether acquisition by another owner dedicated to maintaining the affordability of the development would be feasible; and

3.     If necessary to maintain the affordability of the housing unit or facilitate sale of the rental development, consider the use of redevelopment housing set-aside funds or assistance in accessing state or federal funding. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.55.030 Density Bonuses for Housing Developments Accompanied by Land Donation.
The city shall grant a density bonus pursuant to Section 11.4.55.010: State Affordable Housing Density Bonus, above, to a housing development if the applicant agrees to donate land to the city and the applicant satisfies all of the following requirements:

A.     The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application;

B.     The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than 10% of the number of residential units of the proposed development;

C.    The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure, as determined by the director;

D.    The transferred land has appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible, as determined by the director;

E.     Prior to the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or of the residential development, the transferred land has all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land, except that the city may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer;

F.     The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units meeting the requirements of an affordable housing agreement as set forth in Section 11.4.55.025.D: Affordable Housing Agreement Required;

G.    The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the developer; and

H.    The transferred land is within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the city agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.60 HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
11.4.60.005 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards, land use regulations, and a permit process for controlling the location, design, maintenance and safety of off-site hazardous waste facilities. The zoning ordinance has been amended to implement general policies regarding hazardous waste management facilities pursuant to State Assembly Bill No. 1201 - Tanner, 1989; Assembly Bill 2948 - Tanner, 1986; and Assembly Bill 477 - Greene, 1987 (Chapter 6.5 of the California Health and Safety Code), and Program A-3 in the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this section the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows; provided, however, references to statutes or regulations in existence at the time this chapter is adopted shall also include references to such statutes or regulations as they may be amended or changed in the future:

Applicant: any person applying to the city for a conditional use permit or a land use decision concerning a specified hazardous waste facility, as defined under the term “proponent” of State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(i).

General Fund: the State of California General Fund.

Governor’s Appeal Board: a board formed to review the appeal by an “applicant,” as defined herein, of a specified hazardous waste facility land use decision disapproved by the city or of one or more conditions of approval placed on an approved specified hazardous waste facility or an appeal by an “Interested person,” as defined herein. The Governor’s Appeal Board’s membership, purpose and procedures are defined by State Health and Safety Code Sections 25199.9 through 25199.14.

Hazardous Waste: any material identified in:

1.     Section 25115 or 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code as set forth in Section 66680 and 66684 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code; or

2.     The Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Sections 261.31 through 261.33.

Health and Safety Assessment: a technical and environmental evaluation of a proposed facility, site, and surrounding area prior to consideration of a conditional use permit application. The assessment shall consider the qualities and the physical and chemical characteristics of those specific types of waste that would be handled. The assessment shall include a hydraulic evaluation as well as an evaluation of the risks due to flooding, earthquakes and potential water or air pollution. It is not intended that the Health and Safety Assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, state or federal regulations.

Immobile Populations: schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, prisons, facilities for the mentally ill, and other similar facilities.

Interested Person: a person who participated in one or more public meetings or hearings held to consider an application for a land use decision for a specified hazardous waste facility project. “Participation” as defined by State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(c) includes, but is not limited to, the giving of oral or written testimony at a meeting or hearing, submission of questions at a meeting or hearing, or attendance at the meeting or hearing.

Land Use Decision: a discretionary decision of the city concerning a specified hazardous waste facility including the issuance of land use permit, a conditional use permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of property and the modification of existing property lines pursuant to Title 7 (commencing with Section 65000) of the Government Code.

Local Assessment Committee (LAC): a state-required committee of locally appointed representatives, designed to represent, generally, the interests of the residents in the city and residents in adjacent communities in meetings with the applicants of a proposed hazardous waste facility. The membership, duties, and mission of the committee are defined by State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.7(d), as reiterated under Section 11.4.60.035: Local Assessment Committee, below.

Off-site Hazardous Waste Facility: any structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land serving more than one producer of hazardous waste and used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous waste including but not limited to:

1.     Incineration facility (i.e., rotary kiln, fluid bed, etc.);

2.     Residual repository (receives only residuals from hazardous waste treatment facilities);

3.     Stabilization/solidification facilities;

4.     Chemical oxidation facilities;

5.     Neutralization/precipitation facilities; or

6.     Transfer/storage facilities.

Office of Permit Assistance (OPA): the State of California Office of Permit Assistance.

Office of Planning and Research (OPR): the State of California Office of Planning and Research.

Residuals Repository: a waste disposal facility specifically restricted to receiving only residuals from hazardous waste treatment facilities.

Specified Hazardous Waste Facility: a specific off-site facility project proposal. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.015 Applicability.
The specific requirements of this section are applicable to the siting and development of off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage, and transfer and disposal facilities as defined in Section 11.4.60.010: Definitions.

A.     The off-site facility definition does not apply to:

1.     Transportable Treatment Units (TTU), which are designed to be moved either intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited period of time; or

2.     Permanent on-site hazardous waste facilities at locations where hazardous waste are produced, and which are owned by, leased to, or under the control of the producer of the waste.

B.     All such facilities (i.e., off-site, on-site, and TTUs) shall require state licensing to install and operate. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.020 Procedure.
The following procedures are for the purpose of identifying the steps for processing a conditional use permit application pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, for a specified off-site hazardous waste facility. These procedures include the steps to be taken by the applicant, state and city.

A.     At least 90 days before filing an application with the city for a conditional use permit for a specified hazardous waste facility project, the applicant shall file, with the Office of Permit Assistance (OPA) in the State’s Office of Planning and Research and with the city, a notice of intent to make an application. The notice of intent shall specify the location to which the notice of intent is applicable and shall contain a complete description of the nature, function and scope of the project. The OPA shall immediately notify the affected state agencies of the notice of intent. The city shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed project, shall post notices in the location where the project is proposed, and shall notify, by a direct mailing, the owners of contiguous property, as shown in the latest equalized assessment role. A notice of intent is not transferable to a location other than the location specified in the notice and shall remain in effect for one year from the date it is filed with a local agency or until it is withdrawn by the proponent, whichever is earlier. The project applicant shall pay a city-imposed fee equal to the cost of notification required by this section (requirement of Section 25199.7(a) of the California Health and Safety Code).

B.     Within 90 days after a notice of intent is filed with the OPA, the OPA shall convene a public meeting within the city to inform the public of the nature, function, and scope of the proposed facility project and the procedures that are required for considering applications for the project. OPA shall provide notice to the city setting forth the location and time of the meeting so that City representatives may attend. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(c) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

C.    Any time after receiving notification of the filing of a notice of intent but no later than 30 days after the application for a specified hazardous waste facility project is accepted as complete, the city council shall appoint a 7-member Local Assessment Committee (LAC) pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.4.60.035: Local Assessment Committee. The project applicant shall pay a fee to cover the city’s costs of establishing and convening the local assessment committee. The fee shall accompany the application for a land use decision. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(d) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

D.    The city shall notify the OPA within 10 days after an application for a land use decision (conditional use permit) for a specified hazardous waste facility project is accepted as complete by the city. Within 60 days after receiving this notice, the OPA shall convene a meeting of the lead and responsible agencies for the project, the applicant, the LAC and the interested public, for the purpose of determining the issues which concern the agencies that are required to review the project and the issues which concern the public. The meeting shall take place in the city. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(4)(e) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

E.     Following the meeting as contemplated in Section 11.4.60.020.D., the applicant and the LAC shall meet and confer on the specified hazardous waste facility project proposal for the purpose of establishing the terms and conditions under which the project may be acceptable to the community. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(4)(f) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

F.     At the request of the applicant, the city council shall, within 60 calendar days after the city has determined that an application for a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility is complete, issue an initial written determination on whether the hazardous waste facility project is consistent with both the city General Plan and Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the application was received, and the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. (Requirement of Section 25199.5(a) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

1.     If the LAC finds that it requires assistance and independent advice to adequately review a proposed hazardous waste facility project, it may request technical assistance grants from the city to enable the LAC to hire a consultant to assist and/or advise the LAC. The LAC may use technical assistance grant funds made available to it to hire a consultant to do either, or both, of the following:

a.     Assist the committee in reviewing and evaluating the application for the project, the environmental documents prepared for the project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Division 13, commencing with Section 21000, of the Public Resources Code) and any other documents, materials, and information that are required by a public agency in connection with the application for a land use decision or a permit.

b.     Advise the LAC in its meetings and discussion with the facility proponent to seek agreement on the terms and conditions under which the project may be acceptable to the community.

2.     The project applicant shall pay a fee equal to the amount of any technical assistance grant provided to the LAC from the city.

3.     The city shall deposit any fee imposed in an account created in the city, maintain records of all expenditures from the account, and return any unused funds and accrued interest to the project applicant upon completion of the review of the proposed hazardous waste facility project. (Requirement of Section 25199.7 of the California Health and Safety Code.)

G.    An applicant may file an appeal of a use permit determination made by the final approval body for a specified hazardous waste facility project with the Governor or the Governor’s designee. (Requirement of Section 25199.9 of the California Health and Safety Code.) (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.025 Applicant Requirements.
In connection with a submittal of a conditional use permit application pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, for an off-site hazardous waste facility, the applicant shall submit:

A.     A completed application form.

B.     A completed environmental assessment form.

C.    Property owner verification/permission for request.

D.    A deposit/fee as required by city council resolution.

E.     A scaled site plan and development plan drawn in sufficient detail to clearly describe the following:

1.     Physical dimensions of property and structures;

2.     Location of existing and proposed structures;

3.     Setbacks;

4.     Methods of circulation;

5.     Ingress and egress;

6.     Utilization of property under the requested permit;

7.     The distance from the project property lines to the nearest residential structure;

8.     Proximity of the project to 100-year floodplain areas;

9.     Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones;

10.   The relationship of the proposed project to all above-ground water supplies as well as known underground aquifers that could conceivably suffer contamination;

11.   Topographic description of the property and surrounding area;

12.   Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be needed to service the facility;

13    Identification of surrounding zoning and land uses;

14.   Landscape plans showing theme and location of all landscape areas;

15.   Building elevations showing building height, exterior materials, and architectural theme; and

16.   Other information as required by the director.

F.     A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area which incorporates as deep a soils analysis as there are known aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers.

G.    A report identifying of all wastewater, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility and the method and place of final discharge.

H.    A report identifying the amounts (tonnage) and types of hazardous wastes to be treated at the proposed facility; the sources of these wastes; the ultimate disposition of the wastes; and the anticipated life of the facility. Information shall be provided on the amount, sources, and types of hazardous wastes to be treated based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and, thereby, be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility.

I.      Within 45 days of a scheduled public hearing on an environmental document or the conditional use permit, 5 sets of mailing labels and an original copy as outlined in Section 11.4.60.040: Public Hearings.

J.     A schedule that clearly sets forth ample opportunity for public input into the proposed project prior to any formally advertised and scheduled public hearings, in order to ensure adequate public testimony on the project in an effort to mitigate all public concerns prior to the formal review.

K.     A written plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program to ensure no unintentional release of any hazardous substance from the site. This shall include any ongoing monitoring necessary by other permitting agencies such as State Department of Health Services, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, Environmental Protection Agency, Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board, etc.

L.     A preliminary contingency plan for emergency procedures designed to minimize hazards to human health or the environment from fires, explosions or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, or surface water. The plan shall provide for its immediate implementation whenever there is a fire, explosion, or release of hazardous waste constituents which could threaten human health or the environment. The preliminary contingency plan shall address the requirements included in Section 11.4.60.060.C: Contingency Plan.

M.    A letter of justification describing how the proposed project will meet the findings in Section 11.4.60.045: Findings.

N.    Other information as required by the director to demonstrate compliance with the facility siting criteria as outlined in Section 11.4.60.055: Facility Siting Criteria and Permitting Requirements. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.030 Environmental Review.
A.     The project shall be subject to environmental analysis pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000-21177; 15000-15387).

B.     The environmental analysis shall address but not be limited to the following:

1.     At least 2 reasonable alternatives to the project which shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 15060(d)).

2.     Visual, noise and any olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures.

3.     All anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area.

4.     All probabilities of accidents or spills at the site, as well as, transportation-related accidents from the point of origin to the facility. Such health and safety assessment shall identify mitigation measures to reduce identified risks. The assessment shall identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous wastes to the facility from within Orange County and Los Angeles County.

5.     Traffic impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigated measures.

6.     All anticipated water quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation to ensure no degradation of water quality in the area.

7.     Other information as required by the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.035 Local Assessment Committee.
Pursuant to Section 11.4.60.020.C: Procedure, the city council shall appoint a local assessment committee (LAC) comprising at least 7 members.

A.     Membership. The membership of the LAC shall:

1.     Be broadly constituted to reflect the makeup of the community and shall include 3 representatives of the community at large, 2 representatives of environmental or public interest groups, and 2 representatives of affected businesses and industries. Members of the LAC shall have no direct financial interest, as defined in Section 87103 of the California Government Code, in the proposed specified hazardous waste facility project. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(1) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

2.     Advise the city of the terms and conditions under which the proposed hazardous waste facility project may be acceptable to the community. The LAC shall do the following:

a.     Enter into a dialogue with the applicant for the proposed hazardous waste facility project to reach an understanding with the applicant on:

i.      The measures that should be taken by the applicant in connection with the operation of the proposed hazardous waste facility project to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the environment of the city.

ii.     The special benefits and remuneration the applicant will provide the city as compensation for the local costs associated with the operation of the facility. (Requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(2)(a) of the California Health and Safety Code.)

3.     Represent generally, in meetings with the applicant, the interests of adjacent communities (requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(2)(B) of the California Health and Safety Code).

4.     Receive and expend the technical assistance grants made available as specified in Section 4.60.020.F (requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(2)(C) of the California Health and Safety Code).

5.     Adopt rules and procedures which are necessary to perform its duties as outlined herein (requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(2)(D) of the California Health and Safety Code).

6.     Advise the city of the terms, provisions, and conditions for project approval which have been agreed upon by the LAC and the applicant and of any additional information which the LAC deems appropriate. The legislative body of the city may use this advice for its independent consideration of the project (requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(2)(E) of the California Health and Safety Code).

7.     Cease to exist after final administrative action has been taken by the State and local agencies on the permit applications for the project for which the LAC was formed (requirement of Section 25199.7(d)4) of the California Health and Safety Code).

B.     The approval body shall provide staff resources to assist the LAC in performing its duties (requirement of Section 25199.7(d)(3) of the California Health and Safety Code).

C.    If the LAC and the applicant cannot resolve any differences through the meetings specified in Section 11.4.60.020: Procedure; subsection E, the OPA may assist pursuant to Section 25199.4 of the California Health and Safety Code (requirement of Section 25199.7(h) of the California Health and Safety Code). (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.040 Public Hearings.
A.     Information Required for Public Hearing. The applicant shall provide the following information on 5 sets of mailing labels and an original set within 45 days of a scheduled public hearing:

1.     A listing of all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed project as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of Orange County.

2.     A listing of all addresses within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed project if:

a.     The property is not occupied by the property owner (tenant occupied); or

b.     The property is not yet listed on the latest equalized assessment roll of Orange County.

3.     A listing of all owners associations governing property within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed project.

4.     A map which is keyed to all of the above listings.

B.     Public Notices.

1.     Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days prior to the date of the hearing.

2.     Notices shall contain information on the project, including a brief description of the proposal, the environmental review status, and the hearing date, time and location.

3.     Notices shall be mailed out to all names on the list required by Section 11.4.60.040.A: Information Required for Public Hearing.

4.     Notices shall be displayed on the property and at public posting sites designated by the city council and/or published in newspaper(s) of general circulation.

C.    Public Hearings.

1.     The director shall set the time and place of public hearings required to be held by the planning commission.

2.     The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing and shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the request by resolution based on the findings required in Section 11.4.60.045: Findings.

D.    Time Limits. The conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility shall become valid 15 days after the date of the decision by the planning commission unless appealed. If appealed and then approved by the city council, it shall become valid on the date of city council adoption of the resolution of approval. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.045 Findings.
No conditional use permit shall be granted pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, unless the planning commission adopts a resolution setting forth the following findings:

A.     The project will be consistent with the general plan.

B.     The project will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community.

C.    The project site is or will be adequately served by roads and other public or private service facilities.

D.    The project will be consistent with the regional fair share facility needs assessment and siting policies established in the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

E.     The project will comply with the facility siting criteria per Section 11.4.60.055: Facility Siting Criteria and Permitting Requirements. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.050 Appeals.
A.     Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by the applicant, the city council, or any interested person as defined in Section 11.4.60.010: Definitions within 15 days of the date of the decision.

B.     Appeals shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a letter stating the reasons for the appeal. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for a hearing within 60 days of receipt of the appeal.

C.    An appeal shall be accompanied by a deposit/fee as required by the city council. An appeal by a member of the city council shall not be subject to the payment of a deposit/fee.

D.    The city council shall hold at least one public hearing on any appeal in accordance with Section 11.4.60.040: Public Hearings.

E.     The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the previous decision. The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed pursuant to subsection F of this section.

F.     An applicant or an interested person may file an appeal of a conditional use permit determination made by the city council to the Governors Appeals Board within 30 days after the date the city takes final action on the land use decision pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code Section 25199.9. An interested person may appeal only on the basis that the conditions imposed do not adequately protect the public health, safety or welfare. Procedures for filing an appeal are outlined in Sections 25199.9 through 25199.14 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.055 Facility Siting Criteria and Permitting Requirements.
The following siting criteria has been established for use by hazardous waste facility applicants in locating and designing suitable facility sites and appropriate facilities, and by the city in evaluating proposed sites and facility projects. The purpose of the criteria are to reduce public health and environmental risks and governmental costs associated with development of the facility (reference: “January 1989 Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, with Amendments June 1991” - Table V-3).

A.     Protect the Residents of Orange County (and Seal Beach).

1.     Health and Safety Assessment.

All Facilities: Facilities shall be sited so as not to create significant risks or cause adverse impacts to the health and safety of populations in surrounding public and private areas, as determined by a Health and Safety Assessment. A Health and Safety Assessment by a qualified preparer is required for a proposed facility prior to approval of a local permit, to provide technical and environmental evaluation of the proposed facility, site, and surrounding area. A Health and Safety Assessment will provide the information and analysis needed to demonstrate compliance of the proposed facility with the siting criteria. The scope of the assessment will vary according to the size, type and proposed location of the facility. It is not intended that the Health and Safety Assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, state or federal regulations. When environmental impact reports and health risk assessments are required, their scopes should provide the information and analysis required, and thereby suffice for the Health and Safety Assessment.

The Health and Safety Assessment shall evaluate, at minimum, the area within 2,000 feet of the site, which is designated as a sensitive area, and shall evaluate the potential impact on sensitive populations. Sensitive populations include residential populations, employment populations, and immobile populations such as those in schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, jails and other similar facilities within the area of potential impact. The Health and Safety Assessment must consider the quantities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of waste that would be handled, the facility design features and planned operational practices. The need and distance for any buffering of the facility from residential areas or other sensitive land uses will be identified. The Assessment must include a hydrologic evaluation, and must assess risks due to physical hazards such as flooding and earthquakes and potential water or air pollution. The Assessment will detail credible potential accidents, including the distance over which effects would carry a variety of options for reducing risks, and procedures for dealing with the effects. The Assessment will identify the capabilities (including equipment and trained personnel) and response times of existing emergency services with regard to accidents at the facility, and will provide an emergency evacuation plan. If existing emergency services are deemed inadequate, the local agency may require the developer to supplement those services with onsite trained personnel and equipment.

Avoidance or mitigation of potential significant health or safety risks must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local permitting agency and the California Department of Health Services.

2.     Distance from Populations.

Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities: Facilities shall comply with local minimum zoning code setbacks, unless a greater buffer distance from other uses is deemed necessary, based on a required Health and Safety Assessment.

Residuals Repositories: A minimum buffer distance of 2,000 feet from residences and other sensitive land uses is required for a hazardous waste residuals repository per Health and Safety Code Section 25202.5(b) and (d). The size of the buffer zone necessary to protect public health and safety will be identified based on a required Health and Safety Assessment.

B.     Ensure the Structural Stability of the Facility.

1.     Floodplains.

All Facilities: Facilities must be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to preclude failure due to flooding, per flood control authorities and requirements. Provisions must be made to contain and test storm runoff prior to discharge in areas subject to contamination by waste or treated material. The required Health and Safety Assessment will address flooding risks associated with the facility.

Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities: Facilities may be located in areas subject to 100-year flooding only if protected by offsetting engineered improvements, such as berms or raising the facility above flood levels. This includes areas subject to flooding by dam or levee failure and natural causes such as river flooding, flash floods, rainfall or snowmelt, tsunamis (tidal waves), seiches (earthquake-induced waves in lakes), and coastal flooding. A structural analysis or engineering design study must be provided which shows methods to prevent inundation or washout.

Residuals Repositories: Repositories are prohibited from locating in floodplain areas subject to 100-year flooding from natural causes or dam failure, even with protection, per Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 40, Section 264.18(b), and California Administrative Code (CAC), Title 22, Section 66391(a)(11)(b).

2.     Earthquakes.

All Facilities: Facilities must have a minimum of 200-foot setback from active or recently active earthquake faults, per the California Administrative Code (CAC), Title 22, Section 6391(a)(11)A(1) and (2). The required Health and Safety Assessment will address earthquake safety of the facility.

3.     Unstable Soils.

Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities: Facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change, unless the facility and its containment structures have engineered design features to assure structural stability. This includes areas with unstable soils, steep slopes, and areas subject to liquefaction, subsidence or other severe geologic constraints. The required Health and Safety Assessment will include a geologic report defining any such constraints and engineered solutions.

Residuals Repositories: Repositories are prohibited form locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change, subsidence, or liquefaction per California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Subchapter 15, Section 2531(e). The required Health and Safety Assessment will include a geologic report.

C.    Protect Surface and Groundwater Quality.

1.     Containment and Groundwater Monitoring.

All Facilities: Facilities shall be fully enclosed by containment structures of impermeable materials which would contain any unauthorized release of hazardous material. Facilities shall be equipped with leak detection, spill control and recovery capability. Groundwater monitoring wells must be located around each facility to determine background vadose zone and groundwater quality, and to detect leaks and spills from the facility, unless demonstrated to be safe without them through the Health and Safety Assessment. An ongoing groundwater monitoring program should be developed in consultation with local, state and water district representatives.

2.     Water Quality.

All Facilities: Facilities shall not be sited within watershed areas which flow to open reservoirs or aqueducts that contain drinking water supplies. Facilities shall not be located such that domestic water supply wells can be adversely affected from unauthorized releases of contaminants. As a guideline, facilities should not be located within 1 mile of domestic supply wells in the Forebay area (principal recharge area to the Orange County groundwater basin), or 0.5 miles from domestic supply wells in the pressure area of the Orange County groundwater basin, unless demonstrated to be safe at closer proximity through the Health and Safety Assessment. Facilities shall not be located within wellhead protection zones as identified by EPA guidelines or municipal water supply agencies and local water districts, unless demonstrated to be safe at closer proximity through the Health and Safety Assessment. Facilities shall not be located where they may impact the quality of surface waters (lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, etc.) or groundwater resources which have been identified for beneficial uses by the Regional Water Quality Control Board Basin Plan (per State Water Resources Control Board Policy Resolution 88-63, or subsequent Board Resolution). The required Health and Safety Assessment will identify water quality issues. Facilities must meet federal, state and local water quality requirements.

Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities: Facilities are encouraged to locate outside of structured recharge areas to regional aquifers as defined in local or state plans, including injection barrier well areas. Facilities may locate in the following areas only with increased engineered design features such as horizontal and vertical containment and monitoring systems to ensure protection:

a.     Major aquifer recharge areas;

b.     Areas of permeable strata and soils;

c.     Areas where the existing groundwater has beneficial uses as described in the Basin Plan.

Facilities with subsurface storage or treatment must be sited, designed and operated to ensure that hazardous materials will be above the tension-saturated zone.

Residuals Repositories: Repositories are prohibited from locating in principal recharge areas to regional aquifers as defined in local or state plans, including the Forebay area. Repositories are prohibited in areas of high permeability (such as sand and gravel) per the requirements of the State Water Quality Control Board and California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Subchapter 15, Section 2531(b). Repositories may locate only where the uppermost water-bearing zone or aquifer is presently mineralized (by natural or man-induced conditions) to the extent that it is not considered for beneficial use by the Basin Plan. Repositories must be sited, designed and operated to ensure that hazardous materials will always be above the tension-saturated zone.

3.     Wastewater.

All Facilities: Facilities generating wastewaters should locate in areas with adequate industrial sewer capacity. The quality of wastewater must meet all federal, state and local agency discharge requirements and the facility must obtain a valid industrial wastewater discharge permit.

D.    Protect Air Quality.

1.     Air Quality Non-Attainment and PSD Areas.

All Facilities: Facilities are prohibited in Class I areas as identified in the Clean Air Act, and within wilderness, national parks, memorial areas and similarly dedicated areas. Facilities may be sited in other non-attainment and PSD (Prevention of Significant Deterioration) areas only if they meet the requirements of the South Coast Air Quality Management District. The required Health and Safety Assessment will identify air emissions, impacts and mitigations associated with the facility.

E.     Protect Environmentally Sensitive Areas.

1.     Wetlands.

All Facilities: Facilities are prohibited from locating in wetlands such as saltwater, fresh water and brackish marshes, swamps and bogs, as defined in local, regional and state plans and policies (generally, areas inundated by surface or groundwater with a frequency to support, under normal circumstances, a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life which requires saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction).

2.     Animal and Plant Habitats.

All Facilities: Facilities are prohibited from locating within critical or significant habitat areas of animal and plant species (including threatened or endangered species), as defined in local, regional or state plans and policies.

 

3.     Prime Agricultural Lands.

All Facilities: Facilities are prohibited from locating on prime agricultural lands, as defined in California law and local plans, unless an overriding public need is served and demonstrated.

4.     Recreational, Cultural and Aesthetic Resources.

Collection Facilities: Low-volume transfer and storage facilities may locate in protected, recreational, cultural or aesthetic resource areas, as defined by local, regional, state or national plans or policies, only if necessary to handle hazardous wastes generated by workers, residents, or visitors in these areas.

Treatment and Recycling Facilities and Residuals Repositories: Facilities are prohibited from locating in protected recreational, cultural and aesthetic resource areas, as defined by local, regional, state or national plans or policies.

5.     Mineral Resource Areas.

All Facilities: Facilities are prohibited from locating on lands containing significant mineral deposits, as classified by local plans or California’s mineral land class maps and reports, if the extraction of the mineral deposit would be precluded.

6.     Military Lands.

All Facilities: Facilities are prohibited from locating on military lands by the policy of the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD).

F.     Ensure Safe Transportation of Hazardous Waste.

1.     Proximity to Waste Generation Areas.

Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities: Facilities should locate close to sources of hazardous waste generation (generally industrial areas) to minimize the risks of transportation.

Residuals Repositories: Repositories may be located further from the sources of hazardous waste generation than other facilities because of the need for greater operating areas and buffer zones.

2.     Proximity and Access to Major Routes.

All Facilities: Facilities shall be located to minimize distance from major transportation routes. Facilities must have good access by roads designed to accommodate heavy vehicles. Travel routes from facilities to major transportation routes shall not pass through residential neighborhoods, shall minimize residential frontages, and shall be demonstrated as safe with regard to road design and construction, accident rates, excessive traffic, etc. The required Health and Safety Assessment will evaluate risks associated with transportation of hazardous wastes.

G.    Protect the Social and Economic Goals of the Community.

1.     Consistency with General Plan.

All Facilities: Facilities must be consistent with local planning policies, including the city or county general plan and zoning ordinances.

 

2.     Fiscal Impact.

All Facilities: A facility’s fiscal impact upon the city must be delineated.

3.     Socioeconomic Impacts.

All Facilities: The city shall require the facility developer to fund an independent study on socioeconomic impacts of the facility.

4.     Consistency with Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

All Facilities: Facilities shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, and must demonstrate compliance with the siting criteria established herein.

Facilities shall be consistent with the fair share principal, and with any inter-jurisdictional agreements on hazardous waste management. Local needs are to be the primary basis for facility siting criteria decisions, along with regional commitments; facilities are to be designed and sized primarily to meet the hazardous waste management needs of Orange County, or to meet the county’s broader regional commitments under an inter-jurisdictional agreement. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.60.060 Special Development Requirements.
A.     General Conditions. The city may impose conditions on the granting of a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter and the general plan and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community.

B.     Safety and Security.

1.     The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry, and minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons or livestock onto any portion of the facility.

2.     The operator shall provide a 24-hour surveillance system (e.g., television monitoring or surveillance by guards or facility personnel) which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility.

3.     An artificial or natural barrier (e.g., a wall or a wall combined with a landscaped berm) shall be constructed which completely surrounds the facility.

4.     All gates or other entrances into the facility shall be provided with adequate means to control entry at all times. Signs with the legend, “Danger - Hazardous Waste Area - Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out,” shall be posted at each entrance to the facility, and at other locations, in sufficient numbers to be seen from any approach. The legend shall be written in English, Spanish and any of the language predominate in the area surrounding the facility, and shall be legible from a distance at least 50 feet. Existing signs with a legend other than “Danger - Hazardous Waste Area - Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out” may be used if the legend on the sign indicates that only authorized personnel are allowed to enter the active portion, and that entry onto the active portion can be dangerous.

 

C.    Contingency Plan.

1.     The hazardous waste facility is required to have a contingency plan designed to minimize hazards to human health and the environment from fires, explosions, or unplanned release of hazardous waste to air, soil, or surface water. The plan shall be carried out immediately whenever a fire, explosion, or unplanned release occurs.

2.     The contingency plan shall include:

a.     The actions employees must take in response to a fire, explosion, unplanned release of hazardous waste;

b.     Arrangements agreed to by local emergency response officials;

c.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers (office and home) of all persons qualified to act as emergency coordinator. (If more than one name is listed, the order in which they may assume authority shall be given, with one person designated as primary coordinator.) The emergency coordinator shall be available to respond to an emergency and shall have the responsibility for coordinating all emergency response measures. The emergency coordinator shall be familiar with all aspects of the contingency plan, all operations and activities of the facility, the location and characteristics of wastes handled, and general facility layout. The emergency coordinator shall have the authority to commit the resources needed to carry out the contingency plan;

d.     A listing of all emergency equipment at the facility, including its location and an outline of its capabilities;

e.     An evacuation plan for employees where evacuation may be necessary, including signals used to begin evacuation, primary evacuation routes and alternate routes.

3.     Facility emergency coordinator responsibilities shall be identified in the contingency plan to include, at minimum, the following:

a.     In event of emergency (imminent or natural) fire, the emergency coordinator shall immediately activate facility alarms to notify employees and shall contact appropriate state or local emergency response agencies.

b.     In the event of a fire, explosion, or release of any hazardous material, the emergency coordinator shall immediately identify the character, exact source, amount and real extent of any released materials. Concurrently, the emergency coordinator shall assess possible hazards, both direct and indirect, to human health or the environment that may result from the emergency.

c.     If the emergency coordinator determines that the facility has had a release, fire or explosion which could threaten human health and the environment outside the facility, the emergency coordinator shall report his or her findings as per the following subparagraphs d and e.

d.     If evacuation is necessary, local officials shall be so notified.

e.     The emergency coordinator shall, in every situation, notify the State Office of Emergency Services at 1-800-852-7550 providing the following information:

i.      Name and telephone number of person reporting;

ii.     Name and address of facility;

iii.     Time and type of incident;

iv.    Name and quantity of material(s) involved;

v.     Extent of injuries; and

vi.    Possible hazard to human health and the environment outside facility.

f.      During the emergency, the emergency coordinator shall take all reasonable measures to ensure that fires, explosions, and releases do not occur or spread, including such measures as:

i.      Stopping operations;

ii.     Collecting and containing released waste; and

iii.     Removing or isolating containers.

g.     If the facility stops operations during an emergency, the emergency coordinator shall monitor for leaks, pressure build-ups, gas generation or ruptures in valves, pipes or other equipment as appropriate.

h.     Immediately after an emergency, the emergency coordinator shall provide for treating, storing or disposing of recovered waste, contaminated soil or surface water, or any other material resulting from a release, fire or explosion.

i.      Other activities required of the emergency coordinator after an emergency are:

i.      No wastes incompatible with the release material is handled until clean-up is completed; and

ii.     Emergency equipment is cleaned and ready for use before operations are resumed.

4.     Owner/operator responsibilities shall be identified in the contingency plan to include, at minimum, the following:

a.     Notify the State Department of Health Services and appropriate state and local authorities that the above requirements have been met before operations are resumed in the affected area.

b.     Record the time, date and details of any incident which requires implementing the contingency plan.

c.     Within 15 days submit a written report on the incident to the State Department of Health Services. The report shall include:

i.      Name, address and telephone number of the owner/operator;

ii.     Name, address and telephone number of the facility;

iii.     Date, time and type of incident;

iv.    Name and quantity of materials involved;

v.     Extent of any injuries;

vi.    Assessment of actual or potential hazards to human health or the environment, where applicable; and

vii.    An estimate of the quantity of material recovered and its disposition.

d.     A copy of the contingency plan shall be maintained at the facility. A copy shall be sent to Public Safety, Orange County Fire Authority, surrounding hospitals, Orange County Health Care Agency, and other regulatory agencies as deemed appropriate.

e.     The contingency plan shall be reviewed and amended when any of the following occur:

i.      The facility permit is revised;

ii.     Applicable regulations are revised;

iii.     The plan fails in an emergency;

iv.    Operations at the facility change in a way that materially increases the potential of fire, explosion or unplanned release of hazardous waste;

v.     The list of emergency coordinators changes;

vi.    The list of emergency equipment changes.

D.    Monitoring.

1.     Upon reasonable notice, the city, their designated representatives and representatives of other agencies may enter a parcel on which a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility has been granted for the purpose of monitoring the operation of the facility.

2.     The holder of a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility shall report quarterly to the city the amount, type and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility. Included in the report will be copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous waste materials. The report should also include a map showing the exact location (coordinates and elevation) by quantity and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise stored or disposed of on-site.

3.     All structures shall remain accessible for inspection purposes.

E.     Closure Plan. The owner or operator of a hazardous waste management facility shall submit a written closure plan. A copy of the approved plan and all revisions to the plan shall be kept at the facility until closure is completed. The plan shall identify steps necessary to completely or partially close the facility at any point during its intended operating life and to completely close the facility at the end of its intended operating life. The closure plan shall include at least:

1.     A description of how and when the facility will be partially closed, if applicable, and finally closed. The description shall identify the maximum extent of the operation which will be open during the life of the facility.

2.     An estimate of the maximum inventory of wastes in storage and in treatment at any time during the life of the facility.

3.     A description of the steps needed to decontaminate facility equipment during closure.

4.     An estimate of the expected year of closure and a schedule for final closure. The schedule shall include a minimum, the initial time required to close the facility and the time required for intervening closure activities which will allow tracking of the progress of closure.

The owner or operator may amend the closure plan at any time during the active life of the facility. (The active life of the facility is that period during which wastes are periodically received.) The owner, or operator shall amend the plan whenever changes in operating plans or facility design affect the closure plan, or whenever there is a change in the expected year of closure. When the owner or operator requests a permit modification to authorize a change of operating plans or facility design, a modification of the closure plan shall be requested at the same time.

5.     The plan shall clearly indicate an effective and ongoing use for the facility after closure. The plan will identify how the subject property will be used after the anticipated life of the project; the nature and type of reclamations, provisions for maintenance of the project and finally the requirements for long-term monitoring of the reclaimed area to insure no hazardous materials are leaking from the site.

6.     The plan shall indicate financial arrangements (irrevocable trust or other form of security arrangement) for the purpose of providing funds for the closure of its site and its long-term post-closure monitoring maintenance, per Section 4.60.060.F: Financial Responsibility, paragraph 3.

F.     Financial Responsibility. The owner/operator shall show proof of liability insurance as follows:

1.     The types, amounts, periods of coverage, and provisions for periodic review as to adequacy of coverage shall be specified in the conditions of approval. Required insurance shall include, but not be limited to: general liability insurance, automotive liability insurance, environmental impairment liability insurance, and architect’s and engineer’s professional liability insurance. All such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall be maintained for the life of the site and such additional periods as shall be specified in the conditions of approval.

2.     Additionally, coverage will be provided for workers compensation insurance and such other insurance as may be required. Such insurance will name the city as either additional insured or as an additional loss payee. Certificates of insurance will be submitted to the city annually.

3.     An irrevocable trust will be established to provide funds for closure of the site and its long-term post-closure and monitoring and maintenance. Funds for this trust would be provided by the owner/operator of the facility quarterly based on quantity and types of hazardous wastes received and processed or percentage of gross income. The terms of the trust would be as agreed upon by the project owner/operator and the city. The terms will be reviewed annually in regards to the amount of funds in the trust and anticipated closure, monitoring and maintenance costs. Applicant shall provide a bond in an amount to be determined by the city for purposes of closure of the site.

4.     The owner/operator shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, servants, and employees from all claims, actions or liabilities arising out of the issuance of this permit, operations at the facility and transportation of wastes to and from the facility.

 

G.    Use of Permit.

1.     A conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility shall be granted for only those substances and quantities identified in the conditions of approval. No additional types of wastes or increases in the quantity of approved wastes shall be allowed beyond those specified in the approved permit, unless a separate application is made therefor which shall satisfy the same procedures and contents as those required in an initial application.

2.     Conditional use permits granted for an off-site hazardous waste facility shall be used within 3 years from the effective date thereof, or within such additional time as may be set in the conditions of approval, which shall not exceed a total of 5 years; otherwise, the permit shall be null and void. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a permit is required to be used within less than 5 years, the permittee may, prior to its expiration, request an extension of time in which to use the permit. A request for extension of time shall be made to the final approval body, on forms provided by the development services department and shall be filed with the director, accompanied by the appropriate fee. Within 60 days following the filing of a request for an extension, the director shall set the matter as an advertised public hearing on the regular agenda of the final approval body. An extension of time may be granted by the final approval body upon a determination that valid reason exists for permittee not using the permit within the required period of time. If an extension is granted, the total time allowed for use of the permit shall not exceed a period of 10 years, calculated from the effective date of the issuance of permit. The term “use” shall mean the beginning of substantial construction of the use that is authorized, which construction must thereafter be pursued diligently to completion.

3.     Permit Review and Renewal. Permit review and renewal shall be determined at the time of approval and shall not exceed 5 years. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.65 TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
11.4.65.005 Permit Requirement.
A conditional use permit is required to establish a tattoo establishment pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.010 Definitions.
As used in the chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively.

Health Officer: that person or office designated by order of the city council of the city or by contract approved by the council as the person or office having responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.

Operator: any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a tattoo to any customer or a tattooing establishment.

Proprietor: the person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a tattooing establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business.

Tattoo: an indelible mark or figure fixed upon a body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars.

Tattoo Establishment: any premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.015 Location.
Tattoo establishments shall be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from other tattoo establishments. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.020 License Requirements.
Tattoo establishments shall have all licenses required by the state, county or city. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.025 Maintenance of Premises.
A.     All tattooing establishments shall be equipped with running hot and cold water, with adequate toilet facilities and with all such appliances, furnishings, and materials as may be necessary to enable persons employed in and about such establishments to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

B.     The floors, furnishings, and equipment of tattooing establishments shall be kept clean at all times during business hours. For the purposes of this paragraph a floor shall not be considered clean if it has not been swept and mopped within the preceding 24-hour period.

C.    All operating tables in tattooing establishments shall be constructed of metal with white enamel or porcelain finish, or stainless steel.

D.    Each tattooing establishment shall have adequate lighting and ventilation. For purposes of this paragraph lighting or ventilation shall be considered as inadequate if it fails to comply with a standard prescribed by the health officer.

E.     No tattooing establishment shall be used as a sleeping room or dormitory. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.030 Source of Dyes and Inks.
A.     Proprietors of tattooing establishments shall, on request of the health officer, submit in writing to the health officer the source of all dyes or inks retained for use in tattooing operations, and thereafter shall notify the health officer in writing of any dyes or inks obtained for use in tattooing operations from any source other than those previously submitted.

B.     No dyes or inks from any sources which have been disapproved by the health officer shall be retained available for use in tattooing operations. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.035 Maintenance of Pigments, Dyes and Equipment.
No pigments, dyes, or equipment shall be retained available for use in tattooing operations unless cleaned and sterilized as provided in this section. For purposes of the section, equipment shall include needles, needle lubes, towels, blade holders, wiping cloths, paper towels and napkins, charcoal, gauze bandages (unless purchased in individual sterile packages), and all similar items.

A.     All equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. Instruments shall be cleaned with soap or detergent by use of a brush. The interior of needle barrels shall be brushed. After cleaning, equipment shall be thoroughly rinsed under running fresh tap water.

B.     All equipment shall be sterilized by autoclaving. Each piece of equipment shall be individually wrapped with paper in an approved method for autoclaving. Metal foil may not be used. Tattooing needles shall be threaded through the metal tube that attaches to the tattooing vibrator and shall be placed in a glass (or autoclavable plastic test tube) with a cotton plug for autoclaving. Wiping tissues shall be sterilized in a single pack to be used for one tattoo and then be discarded. All packs shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels.

C.    Dyes or inks shall be used from containers with a cap that completely covers the opening and is attached to the neck of the dye container, sterilized in an autoclave after first being filled with the dye. Dye shall be handled utilizing antiseptic techniques and the dye containers filled with dye shall be autoclaved at least once a week or more often if necessary to keep the dye in a sterile condition. The dyes may be placed in Teflon squeeze bottles that will withstand autoclaving.

D.    Steam sterilization of the above listed equipment shall be accomplished in an autoclave with at least 15 pounds pressure per square inch (251°F) for at least 15 minutes. Other means of sterilization may be approved by the health officer.

E.     All sterilized dyes, pigments and equipment shall be stored in a manner which will insure sterility at the time of use.

F.     Proprietors shall maintain sufficient sterilized equipment available at the beginning of each workday to allow completion of such workday without requiring resterilization of such equipment. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.040 Maintenance of Stencils.
No stencil, whether new or used, shall be retained in a manner available for use in any tattooing operation unless it has been pre-cleaned and disinfected in the following manner:

A.     Each stencil must be pre-cleaned by being scrubbed with soap and brush to the extent necessary to remove any accumulations of carbon and Vaseline in the etched grooves of the stencil.

B.     Each stencil, after being pre-cleaned and dried, must be disinfected by being soaked, design-cut side down, in a closed container of 70% alcohol for not less than 30 minutes at room temperature.

C.    Each stencil, after being disinfected, shall be air dried for not less than 30 minutes by being suspended in a manner exposing both sides to the air, and thereafter shall be stored for next use in a clean envelope. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.045 Tattooing Operations.
All tattoo establishments shall comply with the following operation standards.

A.     Skin Condition of Customers. No tattooing operation shall be performed on skin surface areas containing any rash, pimples, boils, or infection or otherwise manifesting any evidence of unhealthy conditions.

B.     Potential Health Risks. The establishment owner shall provide written information as required by the health officer about blood-borne diseases and their transmission to all tattoo operators and maintain records to verify operator receipt of this information. The tattoo operator shall inform the customer, of any potential health risks involved whenever the skin is violated as required by the health officer.

C.    Health Conditions of Operator. No tattooing operations shall be performed unless the operator is free of communicable diseases and pustular skin lesions.

D.    Smoking. No operator shall smoke while performing a tattooing operation.

E.     Apparel of Operator. The operator must wear a clean, light-colored, short-sleeved smock while performing the tattooing operation.

F.     Cleanliness of Operator. No operator shall perform a tattooing operation with unclean hands. For purpose of this paragraph hands shall not be considered clean unless they have been thoroughly washed with soap from a single service dispenser and warm water vigorously rubbing all surfaces of lathered hands for at least 10 seconds, followed by thorough rinsing under a stream of water. Hands shall be dried using single service towels from a dispenser or hot air blower. If a liquid soap is used, the dispenser shall be cleaned and filled with fresh soap only when empty.

Tattoo operators shall wear protective gloves while handling needles or blades, or doing any procedure that may cause bleeding. Gloves shall be discarded between each customer.

G.    Shaving. No tattooing operation involving shaving shall be performed unless the skin is washed with soap prior to the shaving and unless the blade used in shaving is previously unused and unless the blade holder has been autoclaved since its previous use.

H.    Skin Preparation. No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the skin is adequately prepared prior to the operation. For purposes of this paragraph, skin shall be considered adequately prepared if it is thoroughly washed with soap following shaving and thereafter scrubbed gently 3 times with 70% Isopropyl alcohol, using a separate sterile gauze pad each such time; and no alternate method of skin preparation shall be considered adequate unless approved in writing by the health officer.

I.      Use of Stencils. No tattooing operation involving the use of stencils shall be performed unless all of the following requirements have been complied with:

1.     Each stencil must be precleaned pursuant to Section 4.65.040: Maintenance of Stencils.

2.     Each stencil, having been precleaned, must be wiped with sterile gauze soaked in 70% alcohol and air dried immediately prior to its use, in the tattooing operation.

3.     Petroleum jelly used for stencils must be obtained from a collapsible tube which has not previously been used in any tattooing operation and must be applied to the skin with sterile gauze which has not previously been used.

J.     Use of Approved Dyes. No tattooing operation shall be performed using dyes or inks of a type that has been disapproved for use by the health officer pursuant to Section 11.4.65.030: Source of Dyes and Inks.

K.     Use of Sterile Dyes. No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the following requirements have been complied with:

1.     The dye or ink used for the tattoo must be obtained from pre-sterilized dye or ink bottles and, prior to the tattooing operation, aseptically transferred from such bottles into sterile paper cups which have not previously been used in any tattooing operation. No refilling of the dye cup is permitted.

2.     No dye or ink shall be used in which needles used on another person have been dipped.

L.     Use of Sterile Equipment. No tattooing operation shall be performed using equipment that has not been cleaned and sterilized in the manner set forth in Section 11.4.65.035: Maintenance of Pigments, Dyes and Equipment.

M.    Discarding of Certain Equipment. Operators shall discard the following items immediately alter use in any tattooing operation:

1.     Blades used in shaving;

2.     Tubes and gauze used in application of petroleum jelly used for stencils; and

3.     Paper cups used for dye or ink. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.65.050 Inspections—Health Services Fee Schedule.
The county health officer shall periodically make inspections of tattooing establishments located in the city to determine if the proprietor or operator of such establishment is complying with the provisions of this chapter. The county shall, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the tattoo establishment. Such fees to be paid directly to the county health officer and retained by the county as reimbursement for such services related to this chapter. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.70 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
11.4.70.005 Purpose.
This chapter provides a uniform and comprehensive set of standards and procedures to regulate the development, placement, installation, and operation of wireless telecommunications antennas and related facilities (“wireless telecommunications facilities”) consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and the applicable requirements of federal law. The regulations are intended to provide for the appropriate development of wireless telecommunications facilities within the city to meet the needs of residents, business-owners, and visitors while protecting public health and safety and preventing visual blight and degradation of the community’s aesthetic character and scenic vistas.

It is the city’s intent to apply these regulations to accomplish the following:

A.     Provide incentives for well-designed and appropriately located antennas and wireless communications facilities.

B.     Encourage the leasing of publicly owned properties where feasible or desirable.

C.    Encourage the use of existing facilities by multiple service providers.

D.    Encourage the placement of antennas on existing structures.

E.     Provide a competitive and broad range of telecommunications services and high quality telecommunications infrastructure to meet the community’s needs and serve as an important and effective part of Seal Beach’s emergency response network. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

Antenna: any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals, including devices with active elements extending in any direction, and directional parasitic arrays with elements attached to a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted on a vertical support structure.

Amateur Radio Antenna: any antenna used for transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

Building or Roof Mounted: an antenna mounted on the side or top of a building or another structure (e.g., water tank, billboard, church steeple, freestanding sign, etc.), where the entire weight of the antenna is supported by the building, through the use of an approved framework or other structural system which is attached to one or more structural members of the roof or walls of the building.

Co-location: the location of 2 or more wireless, hard wire, or cable communication facilities on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location. Co-location shall also include the location of communication facilities with other facilities (e.g., water tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures).

Communication Facility: an unstaffed facility, generally consisting of antennas, and equipment cabinet or structure, and related equipment, which receives and/or transmits electromagnetic waves, light waves, radio frequencies or other types of signals.

Dish Antenna: a dish-like antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless transmissions of voice or data. Also called microwave dish antenna.

Electromagnetic Field: the local electric and magnetic fields caused by voltage and the flow of electricity that envelop the space surrounding an electrical conductor.

Equipment Cabinet: a cabinet or structure used to house equipment associated with a wireless, hard wire, or cable communication facility.

Ground Mounted: any freestanding antenna, the entire weight of which is supported by an approved freestanding platform, framework, or other structural system which is attached to the ground by a foundation.

Monopole: a single freestanding pole, post, or similar structure, used to support equipment associated with a single communication facility.

Multipoint Distribution Service: a microwave communication service that delivers video programming, data and/or voice communication directly to subscribers, including multi-channel multipoint distribution series, instructional television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services, or as defined by Section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 1.4000 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and any interpretative decisions thereof issued by the Federal Communications Commission.

Panel: an antenna or array of antennas that are flat and rectangular and are designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as a directional antenna.

Satellite Antenna: an antenna for the home, business, or institutional reception of television, data, and other telecommunications broadcasts from orbiting satellites.

Service Provider: any authorized provider of communication services.

Stealth Facility: a communications facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally integrated into a structure. Also referred to as a concealed antenna.

Tower: any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus above grade.

Whip Antenna: an antenna consisting of a single, slender, rod-like element, which is supported only at or near its base. They are typically less than 6 inches in diameter and measure up to 18 feet in height. Also referred to as omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.015 Applicability.
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all telecommunications facilities that transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals including, but not limited to personal communications services (cellular and paging) and radio and television broadcast facilities. The following facilities are exempt from these requirements provided that the primary use of the property is not a telecommunications facility and that the antenna use is accessory to the primary use of the property:

A.     Licensed amateur (ham) radio and citizen band operations that:

1.     Comply with the applicable height limits of the zoning district, and

2.     Are not located within any yard abutting a public right-of-way or any required setback;

B.     Hand-held, mobile, marine, and portable radio transmitters and/or receivers;

C.    Emergency services radio;

D.    Radio and television mobile broadcast facilities;

E.     Equipment cabinets or rooms to service existing antennas when completely located inside of permitted structures; and

F.     Minor modifications to existing wireless facilities, including replacement in-kind or with smaller or less visible equipment that meets the standards set forth in this chapter and will have little or no change in the visual appearance of the facility following written notification to the director.

G.    Ground or building-mounted receive-only radio or television antennas not exceeding the maximum height permitted by this zoning code, including any mast, or receive-only radio or television satellite dish antennas subject to the following restrictions:

1.     Residential Districts.

a.     Satellite antennas that do not exceed 39 inches in diameter and are for the sole use of a resident occupying the same residential parcel so long as it does not exceed the height of the ridgeline of the primary structure on the same parcel. Such antennas shall not be located in any area between a building and the adjacent public right-of-way.

b.     Satellite antennas may be installed on, or attached to, any existing building or other structure so long as the height of the antenna measured from existing grade does not exceed the permitted height in the applicable base district zone. The antennas must be for the sole use of residents occupying the same residential parcel on which the antennas are located and shall not be located in any required parking or loading area.

c.     No more than the number of antennas necessary to receive the programming available for reception in the viewer’s local viewing area or listener’s local receiving area shall be installed.

2.     Commercial, Public, and Semi-Public Districts.

a.     A satellite antenna that does not exceed 79 inches in diameter is permitted anywhere on a parcel in a commercial, public, or semi-public district provided the location does not reduce required parking or loading, diminish pedestrian or vehicular access, or require removal of landscaping maintained as a condition of project approval. Such antennas shall not be located within a required front yard or side yard abutting a street unless screened from view from any public right-of-way or adjoining property.

b.     A satellite antenna that is mounted on any existing building or other structure such that it is not visible from any vantage point exterior to the building or structure, for example an antenna on a roof behind a parapet wall. All wires and/or cables necessary for operation of the antenna shall be placed underground or attached flush with the surface of the building or the structure of the antenna.

c.     Satellite antennas mounted on the roof of an existing building so long as the height of the antenna measured from existing grade does not exceed the permitted height in the Base District Zone.

H.    Any antenna or wireless communications facility that is exempt from local regulation pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or permit issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). The owner or operator of such facility shall provide the director with a copy of a current CPUC or FCC permit or a copy of applicable FCC regulations prior to its installation.

I.      All antennas and related wireless communications facilities existing on the date of adoption of this chapter and installed in accordance with applicable federal regulations shall be considered nonconforming legal uses that shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist. Routine maintenance and repairs shall be permitted on existing antennas and facilities but the replacement or upgrade of existing facilities and all new antennas, structures, and other facilities shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.020 Submittal Requirements.
An applicant shall file a written application for a conditional use permit with the director in accordance with the application procedures under Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures. In addition to any other requirements, applications shall, at a minimum, include the following information:

A.     Inventory. An inventory list and map of existing wireless communication facilities operated by the applicant within 2 miles of the proposed site (“service area”). The inventory list must include specific information as to location, height, and design of each facility. The city may share such information with other applicants seeking to locate wireless communication facilities within the service area, in order to encourage co-location.

B.     Report on Alternatives. A report explaining why the wireless communication facility is needed at the requested location. If applicant is seeking to construct a new monopole, applicant shall explain why co-location or location on another kind of support structure is not feasible, including efforts made to develop such an alternative. If the city has requested that the applicant co-locate its wireless communication facility on a site, applicant shall explain why co-location is not feasible, including efforts made to develop such an alternative.

C.    Wireless Communication Facility Plans. Plans shall include a fully dimensioned diagram of the proposed facility and antennas, including height, shape, size and nature of construction. The plans for a monopole must provide sufficient detail to demonstrate that the structure will be able to accommodate at least one other similar telecommunications provider in addition to the applicant. The plans should include a diagram showing the separation between the proposed wireless communication facility and any existing facility or facilities on the same support structure or site, if co-location is planned.

D.    Site Plans. A fully-dimensioned site/landscaping plan that includes, at a minimum, the following information: specific placement of the proposed tower, equipment shelters, and any other wireless communication facility on the site; setbacks from adjacent property lines; the location of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features identifying those features proposed to be removed; the type and locations of plant materials proposed to screen wireless communication facility components; and the proposed materials and color(s) for the wireless communication facility.

E.     Visual Analysis. Photo-simulations showing views of the proposed facility from surrounding residential properties and public rights-of-way at varying distances with a map indicating the locations used for the analysis and their distances from the site.

F.     Documentation of Compliance. Copies of all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission and any other agency of the federal or state government with authority to regulate wireless communication facilities including documentation of compliance with all conditions imposed in conjunction with such licenses or approvals. In addition, the application shall include any environmental documentation required to obtain such license or approval together with such engineering calculations demonstrating that the proposed wireless communication facility will comply with all applicable FCC requirements and standards.

G.    Fees. In addition to any other fees required by this zoning code, applicants shall pay a permit fee as established by the master fee schedule to cover the reasonable actual cost and a reasonable administrative fee for consulting services required by the city to evaluate any technical aspect of the wireless communication facility application. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.025 Additional Standards.
In order to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses, protect public safety and natural, cultural, and scenic resources, preserve and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and promote attractive nonresidential areas, in addition to all other applicable requirements of this zoning code, all wireless telecommunications facilities subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards unless the planning commission approves a use permit subject to the findings required by Section 11.4.70.035: Required Findings, based on information in the record, that approval of an exception will not increase the visibility of the facility, decrease public safety, degrade the appearance and aesthetic appeal of the community or degrade cultural or natural resources. All new telecommunications facilities in any zoning district shall meet the following requirements and standards:

A.     Location and Siting. All facilities shall be designed and sited to minimize their visibility, prevent visual clutter, and reduce conflicts with surrounding land uses. As used in this chapter, “readily visible” means that a person with normal vision can see the facility and distinguish it as an antenna or other component of a wireless telecommunications facility.

1.     Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 through 9 of this subsection A, new antennas and other similar facilities may be located on the existing utility towers that exist in the linear utility easements in the city, provided that they do not project more than 2 feet beyond the exterior of the tower structure.

2.     No facility shall be sited within 100 vertical feet of a ridge top unless it has been designed to blend with the surrounding natural or existing built environment so that it is effectively unnoticeable or due to the specific location, existing development or existing vegetation, the facility will be screened from public view.

3.     No facility shall be sited where it will be silhouetted against the sky as viewed from a public park or other public recreation area or intrude into a significant or sensitive view corridor.

4.     No facility shall be sited where it will be readily visible from a public right-of-way, public park or cultural facility.

5.     No facility shall be located in a residential zoning district where it is readily visible from the habitable area of a dwelling unit within 300 feet.

6.     No telecommunications antenna or ancillary facility shall be established as the primary use on any site unless the site has already been developed with a legally established wireless facility.

7.     Antennas, support structures, and equipment shelters may be installed on the roof or directly attached to any existing building or structure if they are not visible from the public right-of-way or from the habitable portion of any dwelling unit within 300 feet or are architecturally integrated into the design of the building or structure so long as such facilities do not protrude more than 2 feet horizontally from the building or structure, and comply with the height requirements of the applicable base district zone.

8.     No wireless facility that is readily visible from an off-site location shall be installed closer than 1 mile from another wireless telecommunications facility that is readily visible or un-camouflaged, unless it is a collocated facility on a multiple-user site, has been designed or camouflaged so that it blends into the surrounding natural or existing built environment.

9.     Sites that require construction or grading on slopes of 30% or more shall be avoided unless environmental review shows that all drainage and erosion impacts can be mitigated to less than significant levels.

B.     Support Structures. Support structures for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be any of the following:

1.     A single pole (monopole) sunk into the ground and/or attached to a foundation. Any new monopole must be constructed to allow for co-location of at least 1 other similar wireless communications provider.

2.     A monopole mounted on a trailer or a portable foundation if the use is for a temporary wireless communications facility.

3.     An existing nonresidential building.

4.     An existing structure other than a building including but not limited to, light poles, electric utility poles, water towers, steeples, smokestacks, billboards, lattice towers, and flag poles. This term includes an electric utility pole erected to replace an existing electric utility pole, if the replacement pole will serve both electric and wireless communications functions, and if the replacement pole is substantially equivalent to the predecessor pole in placement, height, diameter and profile.

5.     A new alternative tower structure such as a clock tower, steeple, functioning security light pole, functioning recreational light pole, or any similar alternative-design support structure that is designed to conceal or camouflage the facility. The term “functioning” as used here means the light pole serves a useful and appropriate lighting function as well as a wireless communications function.

C.    Height. The height of a telecommunication tower shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of the tower to the top of the tower itself or, if higher, to the tip of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached to it. In the case of building-mounted towers the height of the tower includes the height of the portion of the building on which it is mounted. In the case of “crank-up” or other similar towers whose height can be adjusted, the height of the tower shall be the maximum height to which it is capable of being raised.

1.     A freestanding antenna or monopole shall not exceed the height limit of the applicable base district zone in which the antenna or monopole is located.

2.     Building-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with the height requirements of the applicable base district zone.

3.     A functioning security light pole or functioning recreational light pole shall have a height consistent with existing poles in the surrounding area or height usually allowed for such light poles, except wireless telecommunications facility antennas may extend up to 15 feet above the lights array of a ball field light pole.

4.     Wireless telecommunications facilities mounted on an existing tower or monopole structure may exceed the height of the existing structure by 5 feet, up to the maximum height allowed by the applicable base district zone, if camouflaged as part of the structure design.

5.     Satellite dish and parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as possible to reduce visual impact without compromising their function.

D.    Setback. When determining whether a wireless telecommunications facility complies with the following requirements, the setback shall be measured from the closest point on the base of the tower or structure to the applicable property line or structure.

1.     Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, all wireless facilities that are not building mounted or mounted on an existing structure shall meet the following setback standards:

a.     Set back a minimum distance of 100 feet from any residentially zoned property, dwelling unit, school or day care facility, public park, or outdoor recreation area, unless it is designed as a flagpole, tree, or other stealth structure approved by the director;

b.     Set back from any adjacent property line a minimum distance that is equal to 110% of the height of the facility (including attached antennae) or a minimum distance equal to the building setback for the district in which it is located, whichever is greater.

c.     Guy wire anchors shall be set back at least 20 feet from any property line.

2.     Any equipment cabinet or building shall comply with the required setbacks for accessory structures of the zoning district in which it is located.

3.     A satellite dish that is greater than 39 inches in diameter shall not be located within a required front, side or rear setback and shall not be located in any area between a building and the adjacent public right-of-way.

4.     A satellite dish that is greater than 79 inches in diameter shall not be located within a required front yard or side yard abutting a street in any nonresidential district.

E.     Design and Screening. Facility structures and equipment shall be located, designed and screened to blend with the existing natural or built surroundings, as well as any existing supporting structures, so as to reduce visual impacts to the extent feasible.

1.     Based on their potential aesthetic impact, the order of preference for facility type is: façade-mounted, roof-mounted, ground-mounted, and freestanding tower or monopole. A proposal for a new ground-mounted or freestanding tower shall include factual information to explain why other facility types are not feasible.

2.     All freestanding antennas, monopoles, and lattice towers shall be designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed antenna installation unless it can be demonstrated that a higher antenna, monopole, or tower will facilitate co-location or other objectives of this chapter.

3.     Telecommunications facilities that are mounted on buildings or structures shall be designed to match existing architectural features, incorporated in building design elements, camouflaged, or otherwise screened to minimize their appearance in a manner that is compatible with the architectural design of the building or structure.

4.     To the extent technologically feasible, wireless telecommunications facilities, including all components thereof, shall be painted or textured to camouflage the installation, achieve architectural compatibility, or otherwise minimize the facility’s visibility. Paint colors, which must be non-reflective, are subject to approval.

5.     All telecommunications facilities subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be installed in such a manner so as to maintain and enhance existing native vegetation and minimize disturbance of existing topography unless the decision-making authority determines that such changes will help to minimize the visual impact of the facility. Site plans shall include suitable mature landscaping to screen the facility, where necessary. For purposes of this section, “mature landscaping” shall mean trees, shrubs or other vegetation of a size that will provide the appropriate level of visual screening immediately upon installation.

6.     No actions shall be taken subsequent to project completion with respect to the vegetation present that would increase the visibility of the facility itself or the access road and power/telecommunication lines serving it. The owner(s)/operator(s) of the facility shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement of all required landscaping.

7.     Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be not be lighted except when authorized personnel are present on-site at night or unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. A motion-sensor light may be used for security purposes, if the beam is directed downwards, shielded from adjacent properties and kept off when personnel are present at night.

8.     No advertising shall be placed on wireless telecommunications facilities, equipment cabinets, or associated structures.

9.     In residential districts ground-mounted satellite dishes with a diameter greater than 39 inches shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way and adjoining property.

10.   At the time of modification or upgrading of facilities, providers shall, to the extent feasible, replace existing equipment with equipment of equal or greater technical capacity and reduced size so as to reduce visual impacts.

F.     Equipment Cabinets and Buildings.

1.     Equipment cabinets shall be located within the building upon which antennas are placed, if technically feasible. Otherwise, equipment cabinets and buildings, and associated equipment such as air conditioning units and emergency generators, shall be screened from view by a wall or landscaping, as approved by the director. Any wall shall be architecturally compatible with the building or immediate surrounding area.

2.     An equipment cabinet shall not exceed 8 feet in height and a building shall not exceed one story. An equipment cabinet or building may contain an area of up to 300 square feet for a single provider or 600 square feet for multiple wireless providers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an equipment cabinet or building for servicing a public safety communications tower may exceed the size limitations set forth herein.

G.    Security Features. All facilities shall be designed to minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti, and other conditions that would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight, or attractive nuisances.

1.     Security fencing, if any, shall not exceed 6 feet to 10 feet in height, consistent with fencing in the area. Fencing shall be no less than the above grade height of the equipment cabinet. Fencing shall be effectively screened from view through the use of landscaping. No chain link fences shall be visible from public view.

2.     Anti-climbing features shall be incorporated into wireless telecommunications facilities, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury.

3.     The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the site and facilities free from graffiti.

H.    Radio Frequency Standards; Noise.

1.     Wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with federal standards for radio frequency (RF) emissions and interference. No wireless telecommunications facility or combination of facilities shall at any time produce power densities that exceed the FCC’s limits for electric and magnetic field strength and power density for transmitters or operate in a manner that will degrade or interfere with existing communications systems as stipulated by federal law. Failure to meet federal standards may result in termination or modification of the permit.

2.     Wireless facilities and any related equipment, including backup generators and air conditioning units, shall not generate continuous noise in excess of 40 decibels (dBa) measured at the property line of any adjacent residential property, and shall not generate continuous noise in excess of 50 dBa during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 40 dBa during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. measured at the property line of any nonresidential adjacent property. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.

I.      Co-Location. The applicant and owner of any site on which a wireless facility is located shall cooperate and exercise good faith in co-locating wireless facilities on the same support structures or site. Good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of co-location, and may include negotiations for erection of a replacement support structure to accommodate co-location. A competitive conflict to co-location or financial burden caused by sharing information normally will not be considered as an excuse to the duty of good faith.

1.     All facilities shall make available unused space for co-location of other telecommunication facilities, including space for these entities providing similar, competing services. Co-location is not required if the host facility can demonstrate that the addition of the new service or facilities would impair existing service or cause the host to go offline for a significant period of time. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the director may require the applicant to obtain a third party technical study at applicant’s expense. The director may review any information submitted by applicant and permittee(s) in determining whether good faith has been exercised.

2.     All co-located and multiple-user telecommunication facilities shall be designed to promote facility and site sharing. Telecommunication towers and necessary appurtenances, including but not limited to parking areas, access roads, utilities and equipment buildings, shall be shared by site users whenever possible.

3.     No co-location may be required where it can be shown that the shared use would or does result in significant interference in the broadcast or reception capabilities of the existing telecommunications facilities or failure of the existing facilities to meet federal standards for emissions.

4.     When antennas are co-located, the planning commission may limit the number of antennas with related equipment to be located at any one site by any provider to prevent negative visual impacts.

5.     Failure to comply with co-location requirements when feasible or cooperate in good faith as provided for in this chapter is grounds for denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit.

J.     Fire Prevention. All telecommunication facilities shall be designed and operated in a manner that will minimize the risk of igniting a fire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. At a minimum, such facilities shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     At least one-hour fire resistant interior surfaces shall be used in the construction of all buildings.

2.     The exterior walls and roof covering of all above-ground equipment shelters and cabinets shall be constructed of materials rated as non-flammable in the California Building Code.

3.     Monitored automatic fire extinguishing systems approved by the Orange County Fire Authority shall be installed in all equipment buildings and enclosures.

4.     Openings in all above-ground equipment shelters and cabinets shall be protected against penetration by fire and wind-blown embers to the extent feasible.

K.     Surety Bond. As a condition of approval, an applicant for a building permit to erect or install a wireless telecommunications facility may be required to post a cash or surety bond pursuant to Section 11.5.10.065: Performance Guarantees, in a form and amount acceptable to the director to cover removal costs of the facility in the event that its use is abandoned or the approval is otherwise terminated. This requirement shall always be imposed if the facility is located in a residential zone. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.030 Procedures.
A wireless telecommunications facility subject to the requirements of this chapter shall not be established, expanded, or otherwise modified except in conformance with the following requirements.

A.     Permitted When in Compliance with Standards. The following wireless telecommunications facilities shall be permitted in any residential, commercial, semi-public, or public district subject to the director’s determination of compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter:

1.     Satellite antennas pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.4.70.015.G.

2.     A facility co-located on an existing legally established monopole, utility tower, or support structure in any zoning district provided the following conditions are met:

a.     The existing facility on which the co-located facility will be located: (i) was approved after January 1, 2007 by discretionary permit; (ii) was approved subject to an environmental impact report, negative declaration, or mitigated negative declaration; and (iii) otherwise complies with the requirements of Government Code Section 65850.6(b) for wireless telecommunications collocation facilities.

b.     The co-located facility does not increase the height or location of the existing permitted tower/structure, or otherwise change the bulk, size, or other physical attributes of the existing permitted wireless communication facility.

3.     Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities.

B.     Conditional Use Permit. All other wireless telecommunications facilities, specifically including but not limited to any new ground-mounted tower or monopole, and public safety communications towers 65 feet in height or less shall require the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

C.    Minor Modifications. The director may approve minor modifications to any legally established wireless telecommunications facility, including replacement in-kind with smaller or less visible equipment and aesthetic upgrades, without notice or hearing. Such modifications shall be subject to compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter and all existing conditions of approval based on written notification to the director. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.035 Required Findings.
A.     General Findings. The planning commission may approve or approve with conditions any use permit required under this chapter after making the following findings in addition to any other findings required pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits:

1.     The proposed use conforms with the specific purposes of this chapter and any special standards applicable to the proposed facility.

2.     The applicant has made good faith and reasonable efforts to locate the proposed wireless facility on a support structure other than a new ground-mounted antenna, monopole, or lattice tower or to accomplish co-location.

3.     The proposed site results in fewer or less severe environmental impacts than any feasible alternative site.

4.     The proposed facility will not be readily visible or it is not feasible to incorporate additional measures that would make the facility not readily visible as defined in Section 11.4.70.025.A: Location and Siting.

B.     Additional Findings for Facilities not Co-Located. To approve a wireless telecommunications antenna that is not co-located with other existing or proposed facilities or a new ground-mounted antenna, monopole, or lattice tower, the planning commission shall find that co-location or siting on an existing structure is not feasible because of technical, aesthetic, or legal consideration including that such siting:

1.     Would have more significant adverse effects on views or other environmental considerations;

2.     Is not permitted by the property-owner;

3.     Would impair the quality of service to the existing facility; or

4.     Would require existing facilities at the same location to go off-line for a significant period of time.

C.    Additional Findings for Facilities in a Residential Zone. To locate a facility in a residential zoning district where it is readily visible from the habitable area of a dwelling unit within 300 feet, or at any location where it is readily visible from a public right-of-way, public park, or other public recreation or cultural facility, the planning commission shall find that:

1.     It is not feasible to provide the service at another location; or to incorporate additional measures such as a decrease in height, increase in setback, change in design, relocation relative to other structures or natural features, that would further reduce its visibility; and

2.     The proposed facility provides an important link in applicant’s service area build-out and is necessary to provide personal wireless services to city residents.

D.    Additional Findings for Setback Reductions. To approve a reduction in setback, the planning commission shall make one or more of the following findings:

1.     The facility will be co-located onto or clustered with an existing, legally established telecommunication facility.

2.     The reduced setback enables further mitigation of adverse visual and other environmental impacts than would otherwise be possible.

E.     Additional Findings for Any Other Exception to Standards. The planning commission may waive or modify requirements of this chapter upon finding that strict compliance would result in noncompliance with applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.70.040 Exercise of Permits—Cessation.
A.     Cessation of Operations. If use of the facility is discontinued for more than 90 consecutive days, the permit shall expire and permittee must remove the facility or the director or city engineer may cause the facility to be removed at the expense of the permittee/owner of the facility. Within 30 days of cessation of operations of any wireless telecommunications facility approved pursuant to this chapter, the operator shall notify the director in writing.

1.     The permit for such wireless telecommunications facility shall be deemed lapsed and of no further effect 6 months thereafter unless:

a.     The director has determined that the same operator resumed operation within 6 months of the notice; or

b.     The city has received an application to transfer the permit to another operator.

2.     No later than 30 days after a permit has lapsed under the preceding subsection, the operator shall remove all wireless telecommunication facilities from the site. If the operator fails to do, the property owner shall be responsible for removal, and may use any bond or other assurances provided by the operator pursuant to the requirements of Section 11.4.70.025.K: Surety Bond, to do so. If such facilities are not removed, the site shall be deemed to be a nuisance pursuant to Title 7: Public Peace, Morals and Welfare, Chapter 7.40: Nuisance Abatement and the city may call the bond to pay for removal.

3.     Failure to inform the director of cessation of operations of any existing facility shall constitute a violation of the zoning code and be grounds for:

a.     Prosecution;

b.     Revocation or modification of the permit;

c.     Calling of any bond or other assurance secured by the operator pursuant to the requirements of Title 7: Public Peace, Morals and Welfare, Chapter 7.40: Nuisance Abatement; and/or

d.     Removal of the facilities.

B.     Exercise of Permits. Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire automatically if the use is not commenced pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures.

C.    Transfer of Permit. Any FCC-licensed telecommunications carrier that is buying, leasing, or considering a transfer of ownership of an already approved facility, shall provide written notification to the director and request transfer of the existing use permit. The director may require submission of any supporting materials or documentation necessary to determine that the proposed use is in compliance with the existing use permit and all of its conditions including, but not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, models, and analysis by a state-licensed radio frequency engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable regulations and standards of the Federal Communications Commission and the California Public Utilities Commission. If the director determines that the proposed operation is not consistent with the existing use permit, he/she shall notify the applicant who may revise the application or apply for modification to the use permit pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.75 COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS
11.4.75.005 Permit Requirement.
Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits shall be required for the subdivision of land or airspace for the creation of common interest developments. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.75.010 Site Planning and Design Standards.
Common interest developments shall comply with this section, the requirements of the applicable zoning district in Part II: Base District Regulations of this zoning code; and

A.     Residential common interest developments shall also comply with the provisions of Section 11.4.05.110: Residential Uses—Multi-Unit Project Standards; and

B.     Nonresidential common interest developments shall also comply with Section 11.2.10.015.J: Design Provisions—Main Street Specific Plan District where applicable, and any provision of this chapter applicable to the specific nonresidential use proposed. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.75.015 Residential Projects—Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&Rs).
To achieve the purposes of this section, the declarations of conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs) or other applicable documents relating to the management of common area and facilities shall be subject to approval by the director and the city attorney. In addition to the CC&Rs that may be required by the California Department of Real Estate in compliance with Title 6 of Part IV of Division II of the Civil Code or other state laws or policies, the declaration, proprietary lease, cooperative housing corporation bylaws, or other similar document shall provide for the following:

A.     Assignment or Conveyance of Private Open Space. The surface area and appurtenant airspace of private open space areas including an atrium, balcony, deck, private patio, or solarium required by Section 11.4.05.110: Residential Uses—Multi-Unit Project Standards, and any integral portion of those spaces that may exceed the minimum area requirements, shall be available for the exclusive use of its respective unit as described and recorded in the recorded map, except that where the private open space is totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, it shall be assigned, conveyed, or leased as an integral part of the dwelling unit.

B.     Assignment or Conveyance of Private Storage Areas. The surfaces and appurtenant airspace of private storage areas including the private storage space required by Section 11.4.05.110: Residential Uses—Multi-Unit Project Standards, shall be available for the exclusive use of its respective unit as described and recorded in the recorded map, except that where the private storage space is totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, as it would be in a closet opening upon a unit’s room or hallway, it shall be assigned, conveyed, or leased as an integral part of the dwelling unit.

C.    Maintenance. The CC&Rs and other management documents shall contain a provision establishing the obligation and duty of the governing body of the project to continually maintain the common areas in a manner which, at a minimum, ensures compliance with this zoning code and all other applicable laws, regulations, and standards.

D.    Assessment for Maintenance of Common Areas and Facilities. In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, provisions shall be made both for annual assessments for maintenance and for capital improvements.

E.     Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas. The commission may require public utility easements adjacent to public streets or over other portions of the project to accommodate electrical lines, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage, street furniture, water and gas mains and meters, and similar urban infrastructure. The commission may also require access routes necessary to ensure that fire fighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project.

F.     Limitation on Exterior Changes. The CC&Rs shall include a provision stating that the association or individual owners or occupants of units in the development shall not, without the written approval of the director cause, permit or approve any material additions, alterations, or changes to the exterior of the development, or reduce or fail to maintain assessments for the maintenance and upkeep of the exterior of the development.

G.    Authorization for Governmental Access and Enforcement. The CC&Rs shall include the following provisions in addition to those identified above in this section.

1.     A provision stating that the city, county, state and federal government, and any authorized agency, bureau, or department shall have the right of immediate access to all portions of common areas of the project not assigned for the exclusive use of the owner of a particular unit at all times for the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare except in those instances where a common area is accessible only through a private unit. Notice of the right of government agency access shall be prominently displayed in the common areas of the project.

2.     A provision stating that authorized city representatives shall have the right to enter the development for the purpose of performing required maintenance and repairs in the event the association fails to do so, and for correcting or abating any nuisance or violation of state law or the municipal code, in compliance with Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.15: Enforcement, of the municipal code.

3.     A written procedure for the reimbursement of costs incurred by the city in performing any of the acts authorized by this section or the CC&Rs.

4.     A provision stating that the city shall have the right to enforce the provisions contained in the CC&Rs as a third-party beneficiary to them, or in connection with the maintenance, repair, or utilization of any easement or other property rights held by the city, either on, appurtenant to, or nearby the project.

5.     A provision stating that the city shall be entitled to an award of reasonable legal expenses in any action to enforce the provisions of this section or the conditions, covenants, and restrictions.

6.     Any other provisions which the director and city attorney determine are necessary and reasonable for ensuring compliance with the provisions of the municipal code or the conditions of approval of the project.

H.    Amendment of the CC&Rs or Other Management Document. An amendment to the CC&Rs or other management documents that would amend, delete, modify, or otherwise affect any provision required by this section shall require the prior written approval of the director. To that end, the amendment shall not be effective unless:

1.     The text of the amendment shall have been submitted to the city 60 days before its adoption by the owners;

2.     The city has either approved the amendment or failed to disapprove it within the 60-day period; and

3.     The recorded or other instrument effecting the amendment shall recite that it was submitted and approved or not disapproved in compliance with this subsection.

I.      Partition and Sale of Condominiums and Community Apartments. One or more of the project owners may initiate the partition (or the dissolution of the cooperative housing corporation) by sale of the entire project as if the owners of all units in the project were tenants in common in the entire project, in the same proportion as the interests in the common areas or in the stock or members of the cooperative housing corporation. However, a partition shall be made only upon a showing of the existence of one or more of the conditions identified in state law (Civil Code Section 1354), or that:

1.     Two years after damage or destruction to the project which renders a material part unfit for its use, the project has not been rebuilt or repaired substantially to its former condition before its damage or destruction;

2.     One-half or more of the project has been destroyed or substantially damaged and owners holding in aggregate more than 50% interest in the common area or the cooperative housing are opposed to repair or restoration of the project; or

3.     The structure has existed for more than the number of years shown in Table 11.4.75.015.I.3: Criteria for Partition or Sale, and is obsolete and uneconomic, and the percentage of owners shown in Table 11.4.75.015.I.3: Criteria for Partition or Sale, holding in aggregate a percentage interest in the common areas or cooperative housing corporation, are opposed to the repair or restoration of the project.

Table 11.4.75.015.I.3

CRITERIA FOR PARTITION OR SALE

Age of Structure

Percentage of Interest Held by Owners

30 years

70%

40 years

60%

50 years

50%

60 years

40%

70 years

30%

(Ord. 1598)

 

Chapter 11.4.80 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
11.4.80.005 Purpose.
The requirements of this chapter for the conversion of existing multi-unit rental housing to condominiums are intended to:

A.     Reduce the impact of conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums;

B.     Ensure that the purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed of the physical condition of the structure offered for purchase;

C.    Ensure that converted housing achieves high quality appearance and safety, is consistent with the goals of the general plan, and complies with the density requirements of the general plan;

D.    Attempt to provide an opportunity for housing ownership of all types, for all levels of income and in a variety of locations; and

E.     Attempt to maintain a supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons and families. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.010 Permit Requirement.
Conditional use permit approval pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits shall be required to convert existing dwelling units to a condominium subdivision. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.015 Date of Conversion.
As used in this section, the date of conversion for condominium conversions shall mean the date that the final map for the project is approved by the council. (Ord. 1598)

11.4.80.020 Application Requirements.
In addition to the application requirements in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures, Section 11.5.10.010: Application Forms and Fees, the application for a condominium conversion shall include the following.

A.     Physical Elements Report. The applicant shall provide a physical elements report, which shall include the following.

1.     Property Condition. A report detailing the condition and estimating the remaining useful life of each element of the project proposed for conversion:

a.     Roofs;

b.     Foundations;

c.     Exterior paint;

d.     Paved surfaces;

e.     Mechanical systems;

f.      Electrical systems;

g.     Plumbing systems, including sewage systems;

h.     Swimming pools;

i.      Sprinkler systems for landscaping;

j.      Utility delivery systems;

k.     Central or community heating and air conditioning systems;

l.      Fire protection systems including automatic sprinkler systems, alarm systems or standpipe systems; and

m.    Structural elements.

The report shall be prepared by a licensed architect or by a registered civil or structural engineer other than the owner. A replacement cost shall be provided for any element with a useful life of less than 5 years;

2.     Structural Pest Control Report. A structural pest control report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator in compliance with Business and Professions Code 8516; and

3.     Building History. A building history report including the following information:

a      The date of construction of all elements of the project.

b.     A statement of the major uses of the project since construction.

c.     The date and description of each major repair or renovation of any structure or structural element since the date of construction. For the purposes of this subsection, the term “major repair” means any repair for which an expenditure of more than $50,000.00 was made.

Failure to provide information required by paragraphs 3.a through 3.c, above, shall be accompanied by a declaration, given under penalty of perjury, setting forth reasonable efforts undertaken to discover the information and reasons why the information cannot be obtained.

B.     Additional Information Required. The application shall also include the following information:

1.     Rental rate history for each type of unit for the previous 5 years;

2.     Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants, and whether any tenants are receiving federal or state subsidies:

3.     Proposed sale price of unit;

4.     Proposed homeowner’s association fees;

5.     Names and addresses of all tenants; and

6.     Evidence that a certified letter of notification of intent to convert was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of the notice is not submitted.

Failure to provide the above information shall be accompanied by declaration given under penalty of perjury setting forth reasonable efforts undertaken to discover the information and reasons why the information cannot be obtained.

C.    Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. A draft “Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions” (CC&Rs) document shall be submitted for review and approval by the department of development services and the city attorney. At a minimum, the document shall address the formation of a “community association” or “homeowners association” that will be responsible for the maintenance of common areas, disclosure of management agreements, allocation of off-street parking for residents and guests, and operating and maintenance budgets. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.025 Public Hearing Notice.
In addition to the public hearing notice requirements in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures, notice of the hearing shall be mailed to each tenant at least 10 days prior to the public hearing on the conditional use permit application. Notice of the hearing shall also be posted on the property at least 10 days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.030 Physical Development Standards.
The conversion of an existing condominium shall require compliance with the following standards prior to a unit being offered for sale.

A.     Compliance with other Codes, Standards and Policies.

1.     Each residential building shall comply with the minimum standards of city and state housing codes as of the date of conversion.

2.     Each building shall on the date of conversion comply with the exit and occupancy requirements and the height and area requirements for the type of construction and occupancy involved as set forth in the California Building Code.

3.     Each building as of the date of conversion shall comply with all applicable requirements of this zoning code, the municipal code, and the goals and policies of the general plan, except where the building is nonconforming in compliance with Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots.

4.     Multiple units proposed for condominium conversion shall conform to all applicable standards of the zoning code, including but not limited to height, setbacks, parking and minimum floor area, but excluding density. Condominium conversions shall observe the following standards for density.

a.     RMD-18 District: 2,500 sq. ft. of land per dwelling unit.

b.     RHD-20 District: 2,178 sq. ft. of land per dwelling unit.

c.     RHD-33 District: 1,350 sq. ft. of land per dwelling unit.

d.     RHD-46 District: 960 sq. ft. of land per dwelling unit.

e.     For the purpose of calculating density all fractional numbers of units where the fractional portion is greater than 0.5 may be rounded to the next highest number.

f.      Proposed condominium conversions for which a final tract map has been filed with the County of Orange on or before September 1, 1987, shall have the right to rebuild the number of units legally existing at the time of approval, subject to minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits, only to consider the possibility of increasing the number of on-site parking spaces subject to the availability and location of space on the site and the constraints imposed by the existing structure(s).

5.     Each condominium project shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code 66410 et seq.).

B.     Utility Metering.

1.     The consumption of water, gas, and electricity within each unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility. A water shutoff valve shall be provided for each unit and plumbing fixture. Each unit shall have access which shall not require entry through another unit to its own meter and heater.

2.     Each unit shall have its own panel or access thereto for all electrical circuits which serve the unit.

C.    Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The applicant shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit on the initial sale after conversion that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, and air conditioners that are provided are in proper working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowner’s association takes over management of the development, the applicant shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association are in proper working condition.

D.    Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, irrigation systems, and additional elements as required by the conditional use permit shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve high quality appearance and safety. The building official shall provide recommendations, based on a physical inspection of the premises, regarding recommended refurbishing and restoration as part of the conditional use permit consideration.

E.     Common Attic Area. All common attic areas over individual dwelling units shall be separated by sound-rated assemblies from the top of wall to bottom of roof sheathing over all common or party walls, and the appropriate access to each attic space shall be provided in compliance with the California Building Code. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.035 Tenant Rights.
A.     Notice of Intent. A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant’s dwelling unit. Evidence of delivery shall be submitted with the conditional use permit application for conversion. The form of notice shall be as approved by the director and shall contain not less than the following:

1.     Name and address of current owner;

2.     Name and address of the proposed subdivider;

3.     Approximate date on which the conditional use permit application is to be filed;

4.     Approximate date on which the tentative map is proposed to be filed;

5.     Approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be filed;

6.     Approximate date on which the use is to be vacated by non-purchasing tenants;

7.     Tenant’s right to purchase;

8.     Tenant’s right of notification to vacate;

9.     Tenant’s right of termination of lease;

10.   Statement of limitations on rent increase;

11.   Provision for special cases; and

12.   Provision of moving expenses.

B.     Tenant’s Right to Purchase. As provided in Government Code 66427.1.D, any present tenant of any unit shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a price no greater than the price offered to the general public. The right of first refusal shall extend for at least 90 days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report or commencement of sales, whichever date is later. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.040 Vacation of Units.
Each non-purchasing tenant not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he or she occupies his or her unit shall have not less than 180 days from the date of receipt of notification from the owner of his or her intent to convert, or from the filing date of the final subdivision map, whichever date is later, to find substitute housing and to relocate. Once notice of intent to convert is served to a tenant, any existing long-term lease agreement may be rescinded by the tenant without penalty. Notification of such termination shall be submitted in writing to the landlord 30 days prior to the termination of the lease. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.045 Increase in Rents.
From the date of approval of the tentative map until the date of conversion, no tenant’s rent shall be increased more frequently than once every 6 months, and at a rate not greater than 50% of the rate of increase in the Consumer Price Index (all items, Los Angeles-Long Beach), on an annualized basis, for the same period. This limitation shall not apply if rent increases are provided for in leases or contracts in existence prior to the filing date of the tentative map. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.050 Moving Expenses.
The subdivider shall provide moving expenses of 2.0 times the monthly rent, but in no case less than $3,000.00, to any tenant who relocates from the building to be converted after approval of the condominium conversion by the city, except when the tenant has given notice of his or her intent to move prior to receipt of notification from the subdivider of his or her intent to convert. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.055 Notice to New Tenants.
After submittal of the application to convert, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit and shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 11.4.80.020: Application Requirements and Section 11.4.80.025: Public Hearing Notice of this chapter. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.060 Project Reports—Copy to Buyers.
For a condominium conversion, the original owner shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports, in their final, acceptable form, along with the Department of Real Estate White Report, prior to the purchaser’s completing an escrow agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, and the developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review the reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the director, at the project site. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.065 Disturbance to Tenants During Conversion.
A written agreement shall be filed with the department of development services that no tenant shall be unreasonably disturbed by building, remodeling or sales activity. Such agreement shall also provide that except in an emergency situation, tenants shall be granted 2 days notice prior to required access for repairs, improvements, or showing to prospective buyers or mortgagees. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.80.070 Exception—Leisure World.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to that certain area of the city commonly known as Leisure World. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.85 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
11.4.85.005 Applicability.
Use classifications describe one or more uses of land having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. Part II: Base District Regulations and Part III: Overlay District Regulations rely on these defined use classifications and specify in separate schedules the land uses permitted, subject to specific limitations, and those requiring approval of an administrative or conditional use permit. These use classifications are also referred to in Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.010 Classification of Uses.
A.     Uncertainty of Uses. When there is uncertainty, the director shall determine whether a specific use should be considered within one or more use classifications or not within any classification in this chapter, pursuant to Section 11.1.10.015: Rules of Interpretation. The director may determine that a specific use is not within a classification if its characteristics are substantially incompatible with those typical of uses named within the classification. Decisions by the director may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.

B.     Accessory or Primary Use. The director shall determine whether a use or activity is a primary or accessory use of a building or space. Decisions by the director may be appealed to the planning commission. The director shall use the following criteria in making the determination:

1.     The description of the activity or activities in relationship to the characteristics of each use category.

2.     The relative amount of site or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity.

3.     The relative amounts of sales from each activity.

4.     The relative number of employees in each activity.

5.     Building and site arrangement.

6.     How the use advertises itself.

7.     Whether the activity would be likely found independent of the other activities on the site.

8.     Whether the use would be harmonious and compatible with surrounding land uses.

C.    Separate Classification of Each Establishment. Where a single lot contains activities which resemble 2 or more different activity types, each of the principal activities conducted on a single lot by each individual establishment, management, or institution shall be classified separately. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.015 Residential Use Classifications.
A.     Residential Housing Types.

1.     Single Unit Dwelling. One dwelling unit, attached or detached, located on a single lot. This use includes manufactured housing but not mobile homes.

2.     Second Unit. An attached or detached accessory residential dwelling unit per state law that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on the same lot as a primary, single-family dwelling. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same lot as the primary dwelling.

3.     Two-Unit Dwelling (Duplex). A single building that contains 2 primary dwelling units, or a single lot with 2 freestanding buildings, each of which is designed for occupancy by one household.

4.     Multiple Unit Residential. Three or more dwelling units on a single site or lot. Types of multiple-family dwellings include: townhouses, garden apartments, and other apartment buildings.

B.     Family Day Care. A day-care facility licensed by the California State Department of Social Services that is located in a single-family residence or other dwelling unit where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for children.

1.     Small Family. A facility which provides care for 8 or fewer children.

2.     Large Family. A facility which provides care for 7 to 14 children.

C.    Group Housing. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes rooming and boarding houses, dormitories, and private residential clubs, offering shared living quarters, but excludes hotels, residential care facilities and transitional housing facilities.

D.    Senior Citizen Housing. Housing that is available only to households occupied by senior citizens, qualifying residents, and permitted health care residents, subject to the limitations of Civil Code Section 51.3 or any successor statute. Notwithstanding the foregoing, residents of senior citizen housing may host guests that are not senior citizens, qualifying residents, or permitted health care residents, for up to 60 days per year.

E.     Transitional Housing. Establishments providing temporary housing in a structured living environment and where residents have access to various voluntary support services, such as health, mental health, education and employment/training services to obtain skills necessary for independent living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bath facilities for each room or unit. The occupancy period shall be at least 30 days. This category excludes temporary housing that does not include support services and community social service facilities such as emergency shelters. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.020 Public, Semi-Public and Service Use Classifications.
A.     Cemetery. Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains and/or cremating the dead. This classification includes mausoleums, burial places, and memorial gardens.

B.     Clubs and Lodges. Meeting, recreational, or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests, including residential accommodations that are available to members or guests on a temporary basis for periods of less than 30 consecutive days, but excluding residential hotels. This classification includes union halls and social clubs.

C.    Community Center. Any noncommercial facility established primarily for the benefit and service of the population of the community in which it is located. Examples include youth centers and senior centers. This classification excludes community facilities operated in conjunction with an approved residential or commercial use that are not generally available to the public.

D.    Community Social Service Facilities. Any noncommercial facility, such as homeless shelters, emergency shelters and facilities providing social services such as job referral, housing placement and which may also provide meals, showers, and/or laundry facilities, typically for less than 30 days. Specialized programs and services related to the needs of the residents may also be provided. This classification excludes transitional housing facilities that provide living accommodations for a longer term.

E.     Cultural Institutions. Public or non-profit institutions engaged primarily in the display or preservation of objects of interest in the arts or sciences that are open to the public on a regular basis. This classification includes performing arts centers for theater, dance, and events; libraries; museums; historical sites; aquariums; art galleries; and zoos and botanical gardens.

F.     Day Care Center. Establishments providing non-medical care for one or more persons on a less than 24-hour basis. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care centers for children or adults and any other day care facility licensed or certified by the California State Department of Social Services, excluding small or large family day care.

G.    Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or other public offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles. This classification excludes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities that primarily provide maintenance and repair services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment.

H.    Hospitals and Clinics. Facilities licensed by the California State Department of Health Services providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons. This classification includes facilities for in-patient and outpatient treatment including drug and alcohol abuse programs as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.

1.     Hospitals. Institutions providing medical and surgical care to the sick or injured including operating facilities and beds for patients to stay overnight. These establishments may include nursing facilities, extended care facilities, physical therapy, gift shops, retail pharmacies, employee housing, temporary housing for patient families, cafeterias or restaurants, and related uses operated primarily for the benefit of patients, staff, and visitors.

2.     Clinics. Noncommercial, public, community-based facilities, other than hospitals, where patients are admitted for examinations and treatment by one or more physicians, usually on a “walk-in” basis. Patients are treated on an outpatient basis and are not admitted for overnight treatment or observation. This classification includes licensed facilities offering substance abuse treatment, blood banks and plasma centers, and emergency medical services offered exclusively on an out-patient basis. These facilities are distinguished from private medical and dental offices which are generally smaller-scale in nature.

I.      Park and Recreation Facilities. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, wildlife preserves, and open spaces. This classification also includes public and non-commercial playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools, picnic facilities, tennis courts, and golf courses, as well as related food concessions or community centers within the facilities.

J.     Parking Facilities, Public. The exclusive or primary use of a parcel for parking in either an open paved area or structure used for parking motor vehicles, owned by a public agency or under contract to a public agency.

K.     Public Maintenance and Service Facilities. Facilities providing maintenance and repair services for vehicles and equipment and material storage areas. This classification includes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar public facilities.

L.     Public Safety Facilities. Facilities for public safety and emergency services, including a facility that provides police and fire protection and other emergency medical services.

M.    Religious Facilities. A facility used primarily for religious services, including churches, temples, and similar religious facilities. This classification excludes private schools (as defined in this section), other educational facilities, administrative facilities and offices, community centers, and other uses when not incidental to a facility used primarily for religious services.

N.    Residential Care Facilities. Facilities that are licensed by the State of California to provide permanent living accommodations and 24-hour primarily non-medical care and supervision for persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including hospices, nursing homes, convalescent facilities, and group homes for minors, persons with disabilities, and people in recovery from alcohol or drug additions. This category excludes transitional housing and community social service facilities.

1.     Residential Care, General. A residential care facility providing 24-hour non-medical care for more than 6 persons in a single unit in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those facilities licensed for residential care by the State of California.

2.     Residential Care, Limited. A residential care facility providing 24-hour non-medical care for 6 or fewer persons in a single unit, in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those facilities licensed for residential care by the State of California.* This classification includes residential care facilities restricted to persons 60 years of age or older if there are 6 or fewer residents. Six or fewer persons does not include the licensee or members of the licensee’s family or persons employed as facility staff.

3.     Residential Care, Senior. A housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by the resident, the resident’s guardian, conservator or other responsible person; where residents are 60 years of age or older and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided as agreed to at time of admission or as determined necessary at subsequent times of reappraisal. Any younger residents must have needs compatible with other residents, as provided in Health & Safety Code Section 1569.316 or a successor statute. This classification includes continuing care retirement communities and lifecare communities licensed for residential care by the State of California.

O.    Schools, Public or Private. Facilities for primary or secondary education, including public schools, charter schools, and private institutions having curricula comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California.

*      A residential care facility with 6 or fewer persons and not licensed by the State of California is considered a residential use.

(Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.025 Commercial Use Classifications.
A.     Animal Sales and Services. Retail sales and services of animals, including grooming, and/or veterinary care for animals on a commercial basis. This classification allows 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services but does not include kennels. This classification also excludes dog walking and similar pet care services not carried out at a fixed location, and retail stores selling pet supplies only.

B.     Kennel. Facilities for keeping, boarding, training, breeding or maintaining for commercial purposes, 4 or more dogs, cats, or other household pets not owned by the kennel owner or operator. This classification excludes pet shops and animal hospitals that provide 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services.

C.    Artists’ Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied art or craft. Incidental retail sales of items produced on the premises is required.

D.    Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services.

1.     Automobile Rentals. Rental of automobiles, including storage and incidental maintenance.

2.     Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing. Sales or leasing of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, and/or lawn and garden-type tractors, including storage and incidental maintenance.

3.     Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Major. Repair of automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes auto repair, body and fender, transmission, tire, muffler, and wheel and brake shops, as well as auto glass services, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvaging and tire re-treading or recapping.

4.     Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. Establishments engaged in the retail sale of gas or diesel fuel, lubricants, parts, and accessories, including gasoline service stations; gas convenience marts; quick-service oil, tune-up; and tire sales and installation, where repairs are made or service provided in enclosed bays and vehicles are not typically stored overnight. This classification excludes establishments providing engine repair, body and fender work, vehicle painting, and repair of heavy trucks or construction vehicles.

5.     Automobile Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles.

6.     Large Vehicle Sales, Service, and Rental. Sales, servicing, and rental of trucks, motor homes, recreational trailers and equipment, boats, and other similar vehicles.

E.     Banks and Other Financial Institutions. Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of money, including credit unions, and businesses offering check-cashing facilities.

1.     With Drive-Through Facilities. Financial institutions providing retail banking services to patrons remaining in automobiles.

2.     Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). Automated devices that perform banking or financial functions operated by the consumer.

F.     Bed and Breakfasts. Establishments providing guest rooms for lodging on a less-than-weekly basis, within a single-family dwelling, with incidental eating and drinking service provided from a single kitchen for lodgers and residents only.

G.    Building Materials and Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their own use. This definition does not include building contractors’ yards, large-scale “warehouse” stores (see Home Improvement Sales and Services), hardware stores with less than 10,000 square feet in floor area, or plant nurseries.

H.    Business Services. Establishments that primarily provide goods and services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing and copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, equipment rental and leasing, office security, custodial services, photo finishing, and model building.

I.      Commercial Recreation. Provision of participant or spectator recreation to the general public, excluding public park and recreation facilities.

1.     Large-Scale. This classification includes large indoor or outdoor facilities including: sports stadiums and arenas; amusement and theme parks; bowling centers; racetracks; amphitheatres; driving ranges not in conjunction with a golf course; large fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball, or tennis club facilities greater than 20,000 square feet; ice or roller skating rinks; swimming or wave pools; miniature golf courses; archery or indoor shooting ranges; riding stables; campgrounds; stables, etc. This classification may include restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.

2.     Small-Scale. This classification includes small, generally indoor facilities, although some facilities may be outdoor, including: billiard parlors, dance halls, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball, or tennis club facilities less than 20,000 square feet, poolrooms, and amusement arcades. This classification may include restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.

J.     Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses primarily engaged in serving prepared food and/or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.

1.     Bars. Businesses serving beverages for consumption on the premises as a primary use and including on-sale service of beer.

2.     Restaurants, Fast Food. Establishments where ready-to-eat prepared foods and beverages are: (a) sold for immediate consumption on- or off-premises; (b) are available upon a short waiting time; and (c) are packaged and served in or on disposable wrappers, containers, or plates. Fast-food restaurants may also exhibit other design and operating characteristics, including: a limited menu, food is paid for prior to consumption, the facility in which the activity/use is occurring provides a take-out counter space and substantial delineated area for customer queuing, employees generally wear a standard uniform, and the facility has late or long hours of operation.

3.     Restaurants, Full Service. Restaurants providing food and beverage services to patrons who order and are served while seated and pay after eating. Takeout service may be provided.

4.     Restaurants, Limited Service. Establishments where food and beverages are prepared and may be consumed on the premises, taken out, or delivered, but where no table service is provided and patrons pay before eating. This classification includes cafeterias, delis, coffee shops, and snack bars but excludes fast-food restaurants and take-out only establishments.

5.     Restaurants, Take-Out Only. Establishments where food and beverages are prepared and may be taken out or delivered, but may not be consumed on the premises. No seating is provided on the premises.

6.     With Drive-Through Facilities. Establishments providing food and beverage services to patrons remaining in automobiles. Includes drive-up service.

7.     With Outdoor Eating Areas. Provision of outdoor dining facilities on the same property or in the adjacent public right-of-way.

K.     Food and Beverage Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include markets, groceries, liquor stores, and retail bakeries.

1.     Catering Services. Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or consumption.

2.     Convenience Market. Retail establishments that sell a limited line of groceries, prepackaged food items, tobacco, magazines, and other household goods, primarily for off-premises consumption and typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation and a relatively small building. This classification includes small retail stores located on the same parcel as or operated in conjunction with a service station but does not include delicatessens or specialty food shops. It excludes establishments which have a sizeable assortment of fresh fruits and vegetables or fresh cut meat.

3.     General Market. Retail markets of food and grocery items for primarily offsite consumption. Typical uses include supermarkets, and specialty food stores such as bakeries, candy, nuts and confectionary stores, meat or produce markets, vitamin and health food stores, cheese stores and delicatessens.

4.     Liquor Stores. Establishments primarily engaged in selling packaged alcoholic beverages such as ale, beer, wine and liquor.

L.     Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of the human dead. Typical uses include a crematory, columbarium, mausoleum, or mortuary.

M.    Home Improvement Sales and Services. Retail sales, rental, and related services of hardware, plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning, building supplies, lumber, tools and equipment, plants and garden products, rocks and soils, patio furniture, swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, lighting fixtures, kitchen and bathroom fixtures and cabinets, paint, carpeting, floor coverings, or wallpaper. This use classification does not include hardware stores with less than 10,000 square feet of area, or plant nurseries. See also subsection W: Retail Sales, of this section.

N.    Hotels and Motels. Establishments offering lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or recreation facilities available to guests or to the general public. This classification includes motor lodges, motels, hostels, extended-stay hotels, and tourist courts, but does not include rooming hotels, boarding houses, or residential hotels designed or intended to be used for sleeping for a period of 30 consecutive days or longer. This classification also excludes bed and breakfast facilities and similar accommodations that an occupant of single-family housing provides on the same premises incidental to the primary residential use of the property.

O.    Laboratories. Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory services or establishments providing photographic, analytical, research and development or testing services.

P.     Live/Work Unit. An artist, commercial or industrial unit with incidental residential accommodations that includes adequate working space reserved for artist, commercial or industrial use and regularly used for such purpose by one or more persons residing in the unit and a cooking space and sanitary facilities in conformance with applicable building standards. Up to 50% of the gross floor area may be reserved for and primarily used as living space.

Q.    Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments providing appliance repair, office machine repair, janitorial services, or building maintenance services. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats and pest control services.

R.    Offices, Business and Professional. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as accounting, advertising, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, insurance, interior design, investment, and legal offices. This classification excludes hospitals, banks, and savings and loan associations.

Walk-in Clientele. Offices of firms or organizations providing services to the public that rely on heavy pedestrian activity and constant visits by clients, including real estate offices, landlord-tenant services, credit counseling, and financial tax services.

S.     Offices, Medical and Dental. Offices of firms or organizations providing medical or dental services, such as physicians, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, and similar medical professionals. This classification includes medical/dental laboratories within medical office buildings but excludes clinics or independent research laboratory facilities.

T.     Parking Facilities, Commercial. Surface lots and structures offering parking to the public for a fee when such use is not incidental to another activity.

U.    Personal Improvement Services. Provision of instructional services or related facilities, including photography; fine arts; crafts; dance or music studios; driving schools; business and trade schools; diet centers, reducing salons, single-purpose fitness studios such as yoga studios or aerobics studios. This classification is intended for more small-scale storefront locations and is distinguishable from small-scale commercial recreation uses that tend to occupy larger sites and generate more noise. This classification does not include massage except as an accessory use.

Massage, Accessory. A use where massages occur as an accessory to a personal improvement services use, either permanently or temporarily, and the area where the massage occurs occupies less than 20% of the gross floor area of the principal personal improvement services use.

V.     Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, seamstresses, tailors, dry cleaning agents (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service laundries, and travel agencies. This classification does not include massage except as an accessory use.

Massage, Accessory. A use where massages occur as an accessory to a personal services use, either permanently or temporarily, and the area where the massage occurs occupies less than 20% of the gross floor area of the principal personal services use.

W.    Retail Sales. The retail sale and rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes drug stores, pharmacies, department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, pawn shops, pet supply shops, hardware stores, video rental stores, and businesses retailing goods including: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services (including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and equipment, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware (under 10,000 square feet of sales area), appliances, antiques, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be combined with other services such as office machine, computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs.

Large Format. Retail establishments having over 20,000 square feet of sales area with a primary façade over 100 feet in length that sells merchandise and bulk goods for individual consumption, including membership warehouse clubs and superstores.

X.     Tattoo Parlors. Facilities that apply tattoos to the human body.

Y.     Theaters. Live and motion picture theaters. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.030 Industrial Use Classifications.
A.     Contractors’ Yards. On- or off-site storage of contractors’ materials or equipment.

B.     Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing. Manufacture of crafts, art, sculpture, stained glass, and similar items. Incidental sales of products produced by an artist on-site may also be conducted within this space.

C.    Manufacturing, Light. Establishments engaged in any of the following types of activities taking place within enclosed buildings: manufacturing finished parts or products primarily from previously prepared materials; food and beverage manufacturing/distribution; providing industrial services; or conducting industrial or scientific research, including product testing. This classification excludes basic industrial processing and recycling of cans, bottles, cardboard and similar consumer materials.

D.    Manufacturing, Medium. Manufacturing or assembly of products from extracted, raw or finished materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. This classification includes: tobacco product manufacturing, textile mills, textile product mills, apparel manufacturing, leather and allied product manufacturing, wood product manufacturing, paper manufacturing, chemical manufacturing, plastics and rubber products manufacturing, nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing, primary metal manufacturing, and fabricated metal product manufacturing.

E.     Warehousing and Storage. Storage and distribution facilities without onsite sales to the public on-site or direct public access.

1.     Indoor Commercial Storage. Storage within an enclosed building of commercial goods prior to their distribution to wholesale and retail outlets.

2.     Outdoor Storage. Storage of vehicles or commercial goods in open lots.

3.     Personal Storage. Facilities offering storage for individual use, including mini-warehouses. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.035 Transportation, Communication, and Utilities Use Classifications.
A.     Communication Facilities.

1.     Antennae and Transmission Towers. Broadcasting, recording, and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, as well as structures designed to support one or more reception/transmission systems. Examples of transmission towers include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone exchange/microwave relay towers, and cellular telephone transmission/personal communications systems towers.

2.     Facilities Within Buildings. Includes radio, television, or recording studios and telephone switching centers; excludes antennae and transmission towers.

B.     Recycling Facilities. Facilities for receiving, temporarily storing, and transferring materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal.

1.     Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip.

2.     Recycling Collection Point. An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but where the processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on-site.

3.     Recycling Processing Facility. Facilities that receive, sort, store and/or process recyclable materials.

C.    Utilities, Major. Generating plants, electric substations, solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery (recycling processing) facilities, solid waste treatment and disposal, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities.

D.    Utilities, Minor. Facilities necessary to support established uses involving only minor structures, such as electrical distribution lines, and underground water and sewer lines.

E.     Hazardous Waste Facility. All contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal or recycling of hazardous waste management units, or combinations of these units. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.4.85.040 Agriculture Use Classifications.
Nurseries. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products—such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod—that are predominantly grown elsewhere but which may sell a limited amount of product they grow themselves. All merchandise is kept within an enclosed building or a screened enclosure and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only. This classification includes wholesale and retail nurseries. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.4.90 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Chapter 11.4.100 MARIJUANA USES
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1650 and 1651.

 

11.4.100.005 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean:

A.     “AUMA” means the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act approved by the voters on November 8, 2016, as the same may be amended from time to time.

B.     “Commercial marijuana activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana and/or marijuana products whether or not for profit. “Commercial marijuana activity” also includes the activities of any business or other activity licensed by the State or other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

C.    “Commercial marijuana uses” means any business, use or person engaged in commercial marijuana activity.

D.    “Compassionate Use Act” or “CUA” means the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, or Proposition 215, approved by the voters on November 5, 1996, and codified in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

E.     “Concentrated cannabis” shall have the same meaning as “cannabis concentrate” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

F.     “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana. “Cultivation” includes, but is not limited to, “cultivation” as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(l), as the same may be amended from time to time.

G.    “Identification card” means a document issued by the State Department of Health Services which identifies a person authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana and the person’s designated primary caregiver, if any.

H.    “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.

I.      “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. “Marijuana” does not include:

1.     Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; or

2.     The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

“Marijuana” also includes “cannabis” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(f), as the same may be amended from time to time. “Marijuana” also includes “medical marijuana” as defined in subsection K of this section.

J.     “Marijuana accessories” means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the human body.

K.     “Marijuana product” means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. “Marijuana product” includes both medical marijuana products and non-medical marijuana products.

L.     “MCRSA” shall collectively mean the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as contained, codified, enacted, and signed into law on October 9, 2015, as Assembly Bill No. 243, Assembly Bill No. 266, and Senate Bill 643, and as amended by Assembly Bill 21 in 2016, as the same may be amended from time to time. The MCRSA was formerly known as the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act.

M.    “Medical marijuana” shall mean marijuana used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other serious medical condition for which marijuana is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as such section may be amended from time to time, or as otherwise defined by state law.

N.    “Medical marijuana product” shall have the same meaning as “cannabis product” or “medical cannabis product” as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(ag), as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include marijuana, as well as concentrates and extractions, intended to be sold for use by medical marijuana patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215).

O.    “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

P.     “Primary caregiver” means the individual, designated by a qualified patient or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person.

Q.    “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling lawfully used as a residence.

R.    “Qualified patient” means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as such section may be amended from time to time, but who does not have an identification card issued by the State Department of Health Services. (Ord. 1664)

 

11.4.100.010 Prohibited Uses—Exceptions.
A.     Commercial marijuana uses are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts and specific plan areas in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow or engage in commercial marijuana uses anywhere within the city. The city shall not approve any application for a building permit, conditional use permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement authorizing the establishment, operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any commercial marijuana use.

B.     The outdoor cultivation of marijuana for any purpose is expressly prohibited in all zoning districts and all specific plan areas in the city. No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any building, structure, lot, or parcel shall cause or allow such building, structure, lot or parcel to be used for outdoor cultivation of marijuana.

C.    Exceptions.

1.     Subsection A of this Section 11.4.100.010 shall not prohibit the indoor cultivation of 6 or fewer live marijuana plants within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured, to the extent such indoor cultivation is authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, and further to the extent the indoor cultivation complies with Chapter 5.70 of this code. As used herein, “fully enclosed and secured” means a space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors, and further complies with all other requirements of Section 5.70.025 of this code.

2.     Subsection A of this Section 11.4.100.010 shall not prohibit a person 21 years of age or older from: (a) possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or older, without compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of marijuana not in the form of concentrated cannabis or up to 8 grams in the form of concentrated cannabis; (b) smoking or ingesting marijuana or marijuana products; or (c) possessing, transporting, purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away marijuana accessories to persons 21 years of age or older without compensation whatsoever, to the extent that such activities are authorized by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 et seq.

3.     Subsection A of this Section 11.4.100.010 shall not prohibit the personal use or possession by a qualified patient or person with a duly issued identification card of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 11625.5 and Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(h), as such sections may be amended from time to time, or as otherwise defined by state law.

4.     Subsection A of this Section 11.4.100.010 shall not prohibit any primary caregiver from delivering, administering or transporting medical marijuana to less than 3 qualified patients or holders of an identification card for a verified medical purpose as defined under subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as such section may be amended from time to time or as otherwise allowed by state law.

D.    This section shall be read and interpreted in conjunction with Section 5.70.025 of Chapter 5.70 of Title 5 of this code. It is the intent of the city council to prohibit all marijuana uses in the city to the fullest extent permitted by law except as authorized by this section, and for the State of California not to issue any state licenses for such uses to operate in the city. (Ord. 1664)

 

11.4.100.015 Public Nuisance.
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and may be abated by the city. (Ord. 1664)

 

11.4.100.020 Civil Penalties.
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by Chapter 1.15, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party. No provision of Chapter 1.15 shall authorize a criminal prosecution or arrest prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq., or Section 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Municipal Code Chapter 1.15 and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. (Ord. 1664)

Part V LAND USE AND ZONING DECISIONS
Chapter 11.5.05 REVIEW AUTHORITY
11.5.05.005 City Council.
The city council shall:

A.     Adopt, reject or modify amendments to the general plan.

B.     Adopt, reject or modify specific plans, planned development plans and amendments to specific plans, planned development plans, the official zoning map, and the zoning code.

C.    Approve, reject, modify or amend development agreements.

D.    Consider appeals of conditional use permits, variances and any other permits that can be appealed pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.

E.     Decide appeals on environmental determinations by the director or the planning commission. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.05.010 Planning Commission.
The commission shall:

A.     Recommend to the city council amendments to the general plan.

B.     Recommend to the city council specific plans, planned development plans and amendments to specific plans, planned development plans, the official zoning map, or the zoning code.

C.    Recommend development agreements and amendments thereto.

D.    Approve, conditionally approve, modify, or disapprove conditional use permits, variances, and requests for reasonable accommodation.

E.     Revoke conditional use permits, variances, or other zoning permits.

F.     Decide appeals on director decisions as listed in Table 11.5.05.025: Review Authority.

G.    Make environmental determinations on any commission approvals that are subject to environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act.

H.    Determine incentives for eligible developers proposing affordable housing.

 

I.      Make other decisions delegated by the city council. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.05.015 Director of Development Services.
The director of development services shall:

A.     Issue written regulations for the administration of this zoning code.

B.     Determine if applications are complete and may be accepted for processing.

C.    Review projects for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”). The director shall:

1.     Determine whether applications are exempt under CEQA.

2.     Propose project revisions to mitigate environmental impacts.

3.     Determine whether an environmental impact report is required.

D.    Approve administrative modifications to the discretionary permits and other types of approvals listed in Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations.

E.     Grant the minor modifications listed in Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations, Section 11.5.25.020: Minor Modifications.

F.     Determine whether applications would require a zoning change or amendment to the general plan.

G.    Determine zoning conformance pursuant to Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations, Section 11.5.25.010: Zoning Conformance Review Procedures.

H.    Interpret the zoning code upon request.

I.      Verify zoning regulations, the scope and viability of previously issued permits and other matters related to the applicability of city regulations on an application.

J.     Make any other determinations listed in Table 11.5.05.025: Review Authority.

K.     Forward commission requests to initiate general plan amendments, specific plans, specific plan amendments to the city council for concurrence.

The director may refer any request to the commission for a decision. Additional fees shall not be charged to the applicant in the event of a director’s referral. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.05.020 City Building Official.
The city building official shall enforce regulations pertaining to the construction and alteration of structures pursuant to the California Building Code. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.05.025 Review Authority.
Table 11.5.05.025: Review Authority, identifies the city official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application, land use permit, and other entitlements required by this zoning code.

 

Table 11.5.05.025

REVIEW AUTHORITY

 

 

Review Authority and Role1

TYPE OF PERMIT OR DECISION

PROCEDURE IS IN:

DIRECTOR

PLANNING COMMISSION

CITY COUNCIL

Land Use Permits and Other Development Entitlements:

 

Adult Business Zoning Clearance

Chapter 11.4.50

Decision

 

Appeal

Conditional Use Permit

Chapter 11.5.20

 

Decision

Appeal

Development Agreement

Chapter 11.5.15

 

Recommend

Decision

Development Permits

Chapter 11.5.25

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Director Determination

Chapter 11.5.25

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Minor Use Permit

Chapter 11.5.20

 

Decision

Appeal

Special Event Permit

Article 7, Chapter 7.50

Decision

 

Appeal

Specific Plan

Chapter 11.5.15

 

Recommend

Decision

Temporary Use Permit

Chapter 11.5.25

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Parcel Maps, Tentative and Final Tract Maps

Article 10

 

Recommend

Decision

Variance

Chapter 11.5.20

 

Decision

Appeal

Minor Modifications

Chapter 11.5.25

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Reasonable Accommodations

Chapter 11.5.30

 

Decision

Appeal

Zoning Conformance Review

Chapter 11.5.25

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

General Plan Amendments

Chapter 11.5.15

 

Recommend

Decision

Incidental Business Activities

Chapter 11.4.05

Zoning clearance approval

 

 

Zoning Code Administration and Amendments:

 

Interpretations

Chapter 11.5.25

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Zoning Map Amendments

Chapter 11.5.15

 

Recommend

Decision

Zoning Text Amendments

Chapter 11.5.15

 

Recommend

Decision

1      “Recommend” means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body;

       “Decision” means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter;

       “Appeal” means that the review authority may take action upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body.

 

(Ord. 1659; Ord. 1598)

 

 

Chapter 11.5.10 GENERAL PROCEDURES
11.5.10.005 Applicability.
This chapter establishes general procedures for processing applications. Specific procedures set forth in other portions of this title control if there is any conflict or inconsistency. No city action, inaction, or recommendation on any matter subject to this title shall be invalid by reason of any error, irregularity, informality or omission as to any matter pertaining to applications, notices, findings, records, hearings, reports, recommendations, appeals or any procedural matter. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.010 Application Forms and Fees.
A.     Applicants. The following persons may file applications:

1.     The owner of the subject property.

2.     An agent representing the owner, duly authorized to do so in writing by the owner, including a person with a duly executed written contract or exclusive option to purchase the subject property or a lessee in possession of the subject property.

3.     A lessee of the subject property applying for a zoning certificate may file without the consent of the owner, provided the lessee provides notice of the application to the owner of the property.

B.     Application Forms and Supporting Materials.

1.     The director may prepare and issue application forms and lists that specify the information that will be required from applicants for projects subject to the provisions of this zoning code.

2.     The director may require the submission of supporting materials as part of the application, including but not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, renderings, models, material samples, and other items necessary to describe existing conditions and the proposed project. The director may require sufficient information to permit the city to determine the level of environmental review that shall be required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. Unless otherwise specified, all renderings shall depict the proposed structure, landscaping, other improvements, and surrounding land uses as they would appear one year after project completion.

3.     All material submitted becomes the property of the city, may be distributed to the public, and shall be made available for public inspection upon request.

4.     Upon request, any person may examine an application and materials submitted in support of or in opposition to an application during normal business hours. Unless barred by law, copies of such materials shall be made available at the reasonable cost established pursuant to Municipal Code Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.10.055: Fees for Applications and Appeals.

C.    Payment, Waiver and Refund of Application Fees.

1.     Pursuant to Municipal Code Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.10.055: Fees for Applications and Appeals, the council has established reasonable fees for the processing of permits. The applicant shall submit all required fees concurrently with the application. No application will be processed or deemed complete without payment of all required fees, unless the city waives or defers required fees.

2.     No fee shall be required when the applicant is the city or another governmental organization, or if it is waived under any other provision of this code.

3.     If an application is withdrawn prior to a decision, the applicant may be eligible for a refund of a portion of the fee. The amount of the refund shall be determined by the director based on the level of staff review conducted prior to the withdrawal. No refund shall be made for any application that has been denied. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.015 Optional Pre-Application Review.
An applicant may apply for pre-application review to obtain information on relevant general or specific plan policies, zoning regulations, and procedures for large or complex projects, and projects that are potentially controversial.

A.     The applicant shall submit the fee established pursuant to Municipal Code Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.10.055: Fees for Applications and Appeals and any materials requested by the director.

B.     Submission of materials for pre-application review shall not be considered an application for a development project under the terms of the Permit Streamlining Act (PSA) or California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and shall not trigger any obligation on the part of the city to act on any project within a specified period of time.

C.    An applicant may request, or the director may recommend, preliminary review by the planning commission. Any recommendations that result from such review shall be considered advisory only and shall not be binding on either the applicant or the city.

D.    Following pre-application review, staff shall provide the applicant with a written summary of the procedures and requirements applicable to the potential project. (Ord. 1598)

11.5.10.020 Review of Applications.
A.     The director shall determine whether an application is complete within 30 days of the date the application is filed with all required fees.

B.     If an application is incomplete, the director shall provide written notification to the applicant listing the applications for permit(s), forms, information and any additional fees that are necessary to complete the application. If the applicant fails to correct the specified deficiencies within 30 days of notification, the director shall deem the application withdrawn and will return it to the applicant.

C.    The director shall document the date the application is deemed complete, schedule any required public hearing, and notify the applicant of the date and time of the hearing.

D.    The director may, upon written request and for good cause, grant extensions of any time limit imposed by this zoning code. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.025 Public Notification.
A.     Mailed Notices, Minor Use Permit Matters. At least 10 days before taking action on a minor use permit that can be issued without a public hearing, the city shall provide notice by first class mail to:

1.     All property owners of record and building occupants within a 300-foot radius of the proposed project;

2.     All neighborhood and community organizations that have previously requested notice of projects in the area where the site is located in writing; and

3.     Any person or group who has provided a written request for notice regarding the application.

B.     Mailed Notices, Public Hearing Matters. At least 10 days before the date of the public hearing, the city shall provide notice by first class mail to:

1.     All property owners of record and building occupants within a 500-foot radius of the proposed project;

2.     All neighborhood and community organizations that have previously requested notice of projects in the area where the site is located in writing; and

3.     Any person or group who has provided a written request for notice regarding the application.

C.    Additional Hearing Notice. In addition to providing mailed notice pursuant to subsection B of this section, the city shall provide notice within 10 days of the hearing by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation.

D.    Alternate Method for Large Mailings. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered is greater than 1,000, instead of mailed notice required in subsection B, the city may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

 

E.     Contents of Notice. The notice shall include the following information:

1.     A general description of the proposed project or action and the property included in the application;

2.     The date, time, location, and purpose of the public hearing;

3.     The names of the applicant and the owner of the property that is the subject of the application;

4.     A general description of the environmental review conducted and any proposed environmental determination concerning the application;

5.     The location and times at which the complete application and project file, including the environmental documentation, may be viewed by the public;

6.     A statement that any interested person or authorized agent may appear and be heard; and

7.     A statement describing how to submit written comments. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.030 Discretionary Actions by the Planning Commission or City Council.
A.     Public Hearings.

1.     Rights of All Persons. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 2 below, any person may appear at a public hearing and submit oral or written evidence, either individually or as a representative of a person or an organization. Each person testifying shall state his or her name, may state an address and, if appearing on behalf of a person or organization, state the name of the person or organization being represented.

2.     Time Limits. The chair of the hearing may establish time limits for individual testimony and may require that individuals with shared positions select one or more spokespersons to present testimony on behalf of those individuals. Due process may require relaxation of such limits.

B.     Decision. The decision-maker shall take action within 30 days of the conclusion of the public hearing.

C.    Notice of Decision. The city shall notify the applicant of the decision. Such notice may be in the form of a planning commission or city council resolution, a city ordinance or other written document. The city clerk shall mail such notice to the applicant at the mailing address stated in the application and to any other person or entity who has filed a written request of such notification with the city. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.035 Acceptance of Conditions.
Land use entitlements shall not become effective for any purpose until the applicant signs and returns a notarized city “acceptance of conditions” form. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.040 Limitation on Resubmittal of Applications.
A denial precludes the filing of an identical application within one year of the date of denial, unless the denial was without prejudice. (Ord. 1598)

11.5.10.045 Scope of Approvals—Compliance with Conditions.
A.     Any approval permits only those uses and activities specifically proposed in the application. Unless otherwise specified therein, the approval of a use shall terminate all rights and approvals for previous uses no longer occupying the same site or location.

B.     Unless otherwise specified or required by the city, the applicant must develop, maintain and operate the project in substantial compliance with the site plan, floor plans, building elevations and/or any additional information or representations, indicating the proposed structure or manner of operation, submitted during the processing of the application. Any approval may be subject to a condition that the permittee ensures compliance with the submitted plans and conditions imposed thereon and acknowledges that inconsistency with the application, submitted plans and conditions invalidates the entitlement.

C.    Any land use entitlement is subject to, and shall comply with, all applicable city ordinances, resolutions or regulations, laws and regulations of other governmental agencies and conditions imposed thereon.

D.    Approvals may be subject to periodic review to determine compliance with the permit and conditions. If a condition specifies that activities or uses allowed under a discretionary permit are subject to periodic reporting, monitoring, or assessments, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder, the property owner or successor property owners to comply with such conditions. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.050 Effective Date for Appealable Decisions.
A.     Appealable Decisions. No building permit or business license shall be issued for any project where a permit is subject to appeal until the 11th day following the date of the action on the permit.

B.     Ordinances. No building permit or business license shall be issued for any project where an ordinance is required until the effective date of the ordinance. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.055 Expiration and Extension.
A.     Automatic Lapse. The entitlements conferred by any permit granted pursuant to this zoning code expire if not exercised or extended within one year of issuance.

1.     Exercise of Discretionary Permits. A discretionary permit is deemed exercised on the date the permitted use has commenced.

2.     Exercise of Building Permit. A permit for the construction of a structure is deemed exercised on the date construction has lawfully commenced pursuant to a valid city building permit.

B.     Extension. The director may approve a single one-year extension of any land use entitlement upon receipt of a written application with the required fee prior to expiration of the permit. The planning commission may approve any other extensions.

C.    Lapse by Written Notice. The director may declare that any permit has lapsed by providing 15 days written notice to the permit holder. The permit holder may seek reinstatement of the permit by filing a request with the planning commission within 10 days of the date of the notice. The commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the request. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.060 Revocation of Permits.
A.     Procedure and Notification. The city may revoke any permit if the use or operation violates any of the permit’s terms or conditions or any law or ordinance. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing. The city shall provide written notice to the permit holder at least 10 days before the public hearing that includes:

1.     The specific land use entitlement permits being considered for revocation.

2.     The address and assessor’s parcel number of the affected property.

3.     The reason or reasons for the proposed revocation.

4.     The time and place of the revocation hearing.

B.     Public Notification. The city shall provide the same public notice of the hearing that is required for the permit that is proposed for revocation.

C.    Conduct of Public Hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as for the permit that is proposed for revocation.

D.    Required Findings. The planning commission may revoke or modify the permit if it makes any of the following findings:

1.     The permit has lapsed as provided for in Section 11.5.10.055: Expiration and Extension.

2.     The permit holder has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of approval.

3.     The use, building, or structure has been substantially changed in character or substantially expanded beyond the entitlement.

4.     The use has created criminal or anti-social behavior, including but not limited to the congregation of minors, violence, public drunkenness, vandalism, solicitation, or litter.

5.     The property has been vacant or the use permitted by the permit has not been in continuous operation for at least one year prior to the date of the notice. The permit holder shall have the burden of establishing its good faith effort to occupy the property and reestablish the use. The planning commission may require the permit holder to produce documentation to substantiate that intent.

E.     Notice of Action. In the event the planning commission revokes, modifies or imposes additional conditions on a permit, the commission shall adopt a resolution containing its determinations and findings. The city shall mail a copy of the resolution to the permit holder and to any person requesting notice of the action and provide the city council with a copy of the resolution prior to its next regular meeting.

F.     Appeals. Any person may appeal the planning commission’s action pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions, in which case the city council shall be the hearing officer as that term is used in Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.10.065 Performance Guarantees.
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval or by action of the director to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance and proper completion of any approved work, and/or compliance with conditions of approval.

A.     Form and Amount of Security. The required security shall be in a form approved by the director and city attorney. The amount of security shall be as determined by the director to be necessary to ensure proper completion of the work and/or compliance with conditions of approval.

B.     Security for Maintenance. In addition to any improvement security required to guarantee proper completion of work, the director may require security for maintenance of the work, in an amount determined by the director to be sufficient to ensure the proper maintenance and functioning of improvements.

C.    Duration of Security. Required improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all work has been accepted by the director, or until any warranty period required by the director has elapsed. Maintenance security shall remain in effect for one year after the date of final inspection.

D.    Release or Forfeit of Security.

1.     Upon satisfactory completion of work and the approval of a final inspection, or after the end of the required time for maintenance security, the improvement and/or maintenance deposits or bonds shall be released.

2.     Upon failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms or conditions of any applicable permit, or failure of the completed improvements to function properly, the city may do the required work or cause it to be done, and collect from the permittee or surety all the costs incurred by the city, including all costs and expenses associated with the work, all administrative and inspection costs and actual attorneys fees incurred in connection therewith.

3.     Any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the funding source after deduction of all costs, expenses, and fees mentioned in paragraph 2 above. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.5.15 LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS
11.5.15.005 General Plan, Specific Plans, Planned Development Plans, Zone Changes and Development Agreements.
A.     Ordinance or Resolution Required. The city council shall adopt specific plans, development agreements, planned development plans and amendments to the official zoning map, zoning code, specific plans, development agreements and planned development plans by ordinance. The city council shall adopt the general plan, and amendments thereto by resolution.

B.     Initiation. The city council may initiate the legislative actions governed by this chapter. The planning commission, city manager or the director may initiate zoning text amendments, subject to city council concurrence. A person who has a legal or equitable interest in real property may apply for legislative actions to facilitate development of that property. The applicant shall submit proof of legal or equitable interest and of the authority of any agent to act on behalf of the applicant.

C.    Annual Review and Schedule for General Plan Amendments. The planning commission shall establish a schedule for considering general plan amendments in compliance with the requirements of state law. At least one public hearing per year shall be scheduled to review the general plan and the schedule. (Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.15.010 Specific Procedure for Processing Applications.
Unless otherwise indicated, the following procedure applies to applications filed by a property owner for a specific plan, development agreement, planned development plans, and amendments to the general plan, any specific plan, zoning map, and zoning code.

A.     Application. The owner shall submit an application for each action governed by this chapter in accordance with Section 11.5.10.010: Application Forms and Fees.

B.     Coordination of Multiple Applications. The director may require that any applications affecting the same property be processed concurrently. An application for legislative action is not a development project within the meaning of the Permit Streamlining Act (PSA) and thus such applications shall not be subject to the time limits specified therein for processing development project applications. Any PSA time periods applicable to applications for development projects processed concurrently with applications for legislative action do not commence until the effective date of the legislative action.

C.    Initial Review. The director shall review each application to determine whether it is complete in accordance with Section 11.5.10.020: Review of Applications. If the application is complete, the director shall determine whether an initial study, negative declaration, environmental impact report, or other environmental documentation is required in compliance with applicable state and local requirements.

D.    Preliminary Planning Commission or Council Review of General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans or Specific Plan Amendments. The director may recommend preliminary review by the planning commission or the city council of any general plan amendments, specific plans, or specific plan amendments.

1.     Within 45 days after determining an application for a plan amendment or adoption is complete, the director shall prepare a written report for the reviewing body and place the preliminary review on the agenda at the earliest practicable date. The director shall analyze whether the proposed change:

a.     Is compatible with the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan policies, zoning regulations, and design guidelines;

b.     May have a significant impact on the environment; and

c.     Necessitates the need for amendments to the zoning code.

2.     Any resulting recommendations shall be considered advisory only and shall not be binding on either the applicant or the city. If the reviewing body directs staff to continue processing the proposed amendment or adoption, the direction shall not signify support for the proposed amendment or adoption. The reviewing body may identify any additional materials or documentation that it deems necessary to take action on the application. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.15.015 Public Notice.
At least 10 days before the date of any public hearing, the city shall provide notice in compliance with the requirements of Section 11.5.10.025: Public Notification. In addition, the city shall comply with the following requirements:

A.     Coordination with General Plan Amendment Schedule. General plan amendments shall be scheduled in accordance with the city’s annual general plan amendment schedule.

B.     Coordination of Notices. The public hearing notice shall identify each proposed action to be considered at the public hearing.

C.    Notice to Affected Service Providers. At least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing, notice shall be sent to the Los Alamitos Unified School District and any other agency expected to provide essential facilities or services to the property that is the subject of the proposed action.

D.    Notice of Intent to Approve Development Agreement. The city shall publish a notice of intent to consider adoption of a development agreement pursuant to Government Code Sections 65864 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.15.020 Public Hearing and Action.
A.     Planning Commission Hearing and Action.

1.     The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed legislative action in conformance with Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures. If an applicant has also applied for quasi-judicial action such as a subdivision, conditional use permit or variance, the commission shall consider those applications at the same hearing.

2.     Within 30 days after concluding the hearing, the commission shall adopt a resolution recommending to the council its recommended action.

a.     For city council initiated actions, failure of the commission to adopt a resolution shall be deemed to be a recommendation of approval.

b.     For commission initiated actions, adoption of a resolution recommending disapproval or failure of the commission to adopt a resolution terminates the processing of the action.

c.     For applications filed by property owners, adoption of a resolution recommending disapproval becomes final unless an appeal is filed with the city clerk within 10 days of the commission’s adoption of the resolution.

B.     City Council Hearing and Action.

1.     The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed legislative action in conformance with Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures.

2.     After the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may:

a.     Adopt an ordinance adopting a specific plan, planned development plan, zone text amendment, zone change or development agreement.

b.     Adopt a resolution approving the general plan or amendments thereto. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.15.025 Required Findings.
In general, no findings are required for legislative acts. Notwithstanding this general rule, the council shall make any environmental findings required pursuant to Chapter 11.5.35: Environmental Review, and determine whether the proposed action is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. Further, state law requires special findings for certain zoning decisions related to, for example, affordable housing. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.15.030 General Plan and Amendments Available to the Public.
Within one working day following the council action, the city clerk shall make the amendment available for public inspection. Within 2 working days following receipt of a request accompanied by payment of a reasonable cost for copying, the clerk shall provide copies of the documents to any person making such a request. (Ord. 1598)

11.5.15.035 Additional Requirements for Development Agreements.
A.     Development agreements provide a greater degree of certainty by granting assurance that an applicant may proceed with development in accordance with policies, rules, and regulations in effect at the time of approval subject to conditions to promote the orderly planning of public improvements and services, allocate costs to achieve maximum utilization of public and private resources in the development process, and ensure that appropriate measures to enhance and protect the environment are achieved. A development agreement constitutes a contract, negotiated and voluntarily executed by the city and applicant that may contain any conditions, terms or provisions agreed upon by the parties.

B.     The owner may request that the city treat an application for a development project as a development agreement application.

C.    In addition to the processing fees set forth in Section 11.5.10.010: Application Forms and Fees, an owner shall deposit money with the city to pay all fees, costs, expenses and charges for: the filing and processing of the application; the administration of approved development agreements, including annual reviews; and any consultant fees and legal fees and costs incurred by the city in connection with the processing of applications and annual reviews.

D.    The city council shall not approve a proposed development agreement unless it finds that its provisions are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. This requirement may be satisfied by a finding that the provisions of a proposed development agreement are consistent with proposed general plan or specific plan provisions which are to be adopted concurrently with the approval of the proposed development agreement. A finding of consistency may be made if, considering the general plan and/or specific plan as a whole and balancing competing provisions as appropriate, the city determines that the proposed development agreement does not conflict with the provisions of the general plan and/or specific plan.

E.     Contents. A development agreement:

1.     Shall specify its duration; the permitted uses of the subject property; the general location and density or intensity of uses; the general location, maximum height and size of proposed buildings; and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. It shall contain provisions concerning its transferability to successors in interest.

2.     May include requirements for construction and maintenance of onsite and off-site improvements or payment of fees in lieu of such dedications or improvements.

3.     May include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions.

4.     May include, without limitation, conditions and restrictions imposed by the city including any conditions and restrictions in order to eliminate or mitigate adverse environmental impacts of the project.

5.     May provide that the project be constructed in specified phases, that construction shall commence within a specified time, and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.

6.     If the development agreement requires applicant financing of necessary public facilities, it may include terms relating to subsequent reimbursement over time for such financing.

7.     Shall contain an indemnity clause requiring the applicant to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless against all claims arising out of or in any way related to the application, the agreement and the project including all legal fees and costs incurred by the city by counsel of the city’s choice.

8.     May include provisions to guarantee performance of obligations stated in the agreement.

F.     The procedures for enforcement, amendment, modification, cancellation or termination of a development agreement specified in this section and in California Government Code Section 65865.4 or any successor statute, are non-exclusive. A development agreement may be enforced, amended, modified, canceled or terminated by any manner otherwise provided by law or by the provisions of the development agreement.

G.    Within 10 days after the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the city manager shall execute the development agreement on behalf of the city, and the city clerk shall record the development agreement with the county recorder.

H.    If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement, or if the city terminates or modifies the development agreement for failure of the applicant to fully comply with its provisions, the city clerk shall record notice of such action with the county recorder.

I.      Annual Review, Amendment or Cancellation. The director shall review each approved development agreement at least once a year at which time the applicant shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the development agreement.

1.     Initiation of Annual Review. The applicant shall initiate the required annual review by submitting a written request at least 60 days prior to the review date specified in the development agreement. The applicant shall also provide evidence as determined necessary by the director to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the development agreement. The applicant shall bear the burden of proving by substantial evidence that it has complied with the provisions of the development agreement.

2.     Finding of Compliance. If the director, based on substantial evidence, finds the applicant has complied with the provisions of the development agreement, the director shall issue a finding of compliance, that may be recorded with the county recorder after conclusion of the review.

3.     Determination of Noncompliance. If the director determines the applicant has not complied with the provisions of the development agreement, the director may issue a noncompliance report and record it with the county recorder after it becomes final. The report shall specify all matters of noncompliance, required measures and a reasonable deadline for compliance. Alternatively, the director may refer the development agreement to the city council to determine compliance.

4.     Appeal of Determination. Within 10 days after issuance of a finding of compliance or a determination of noncompliance, any person may appeal the action pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review, in which case the city council shall be the hearing officer as that term is used in Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review. The appellant shall pay fees and charges for the filing and processing of the appeal in amounts established by city council resolution.

5.     Decision is Final. The city’s decision is final on the day:

a.     The appeal period expires without appeal;

b.     The city council takes action on any appeal.

J.     Termination or Modification After Finding of Noncompliance. If applicant does not comply with any required measures within the deadline, the director may refer the development agreement to the city council for termination or modification. The city council shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures; such hearing may be combined with any hearing or appeal regarding the development agreement. After the public hearing, the city council may: terminate the development agreement; modify the finding of noncompliance; impose additional compliance measures; or rescind the finding of noncompliance and issue a finding of compliance.

K.     Termination or Modification by Mutual Consent. The parties may terminate or modify a development agreement by mutual consent. A development agreement may also specify procedures for director approval of amendments requested by the applicant.

L.     Rights of the Parties After Termination. In the event that a development agreement is terminated, all rights of the applicant, property owner, or successors in interest under the development agreement shall terminate. If a development agreement is terminated following a finding of noncompliance, the city may, in its sole discretion, keep any benefit, including reservations or dedications of land, and payments of fees, received by the city.

M.    Effect of Development Agreement.

1.     City Rules Apply. Unless otherwise specified in the development agreement, the city’s ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the property, density and design, and improvement standards and specifications applicable to development of the property shall be those city ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and official policies in force on the effective date of the development agreement. The applicant shall not be exempt from otherwise applicable city ordinances or regulations pertaining to persons contracting with the city.

2.     New Rules may be Applied. A development agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and policies which do not conflict with those ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and policies applicable to the property as set forth in the development agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent discretionary land use entitlement or authorization for the project on the basis of such existing or new ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies. Unless otherwise specified in the development agreement, a development agreement shall not exempt the applicant from obtaining future required discretionary land use entitlements.

3.     Rules Affecting Development Agreement. In the event that any regulation or law of the State of California or the United States, enacted or interpreted after a development agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, then the development agreement may be modified or suspended in the manner and pursuant to the procedures specified in the development agreement, as may be necessary to comply with such regulation or law. (Ord. 1598)

11.5.15.040 Additional Requirements for Adopting Specific Plans.
A.     Minimum Area. The minimum area for an area proposed for a specific plan shall be 2.5 acres.

B.     Development Standards and Regulations. All property, uses and development within a specific plan’s area shall conform to the development standards and regulations and any provisions of that specific plan. Whenever the city adopts a specific plan relating to the development of a designated area of the city, as that term is used in Section 65450 et seq. of the Government Code of the State of California, as may be amended, the provisions and specifications of such an adopted specific plan shall supersede any conflicting provisions of this title without regard as to whether the provisions and specifications of such specific plan are more or less stringent than the provisions of this title.

C.    Special Factors in Determining Specific Plan Standards. Prior to approving a specific plan or an amendment to a specific plan, particular care must be exercised in the establishment of building height development standards for each specific plan under the provisions of Section 11.3.25.010A. Factors to be carefully weighed shall include, but not be limited to, the planning district in which the specific plan is to be located, the former zoning of the specific plan site, height of existing buildings immediately surrounding the specific plan site and the effect of the building height on the areas surrounding the specific plan site. No building within the SPR Zone shall exceed a height of 39 feet, except for nonhabitable architectural features of any proposed buildings, in that portion of the city known as the coastal zone as defined by the California Coastal Act, or north of the San Diego Freeway, except such portions thereof which are zoned LM, Light Manufacturing, on October 14, 1985. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any validly existing specific plan approved by the city prior to October 14, 1985. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.15.045 Regulations for Planned Development Plans.
Regulations for planned development plans are contained in Chapter 11.3.10: Planned Development Overlay District (-PD). (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.5.20 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
11.5.20.005 Minor Use Permits, Conditional Use Permits and Variances.
A.     Minor Use Permits. The planning commission may issue minor use permits for certain uses identified in Parts II and III: Base District and Overlay District Regulations and Part IV: Regulations Applying in Some or All Districts, that are generally non-controversial but still require special consideration to ensure that they can be designed, located, and operated in a manner that will be compatible with surrounding uses and not interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties.

B.     Conditional Use Permits. The planning commission may issue conditional use permits for certain uses identified in Parts II and III: Base District and Overlay District Regulations and Part IV: Regulations Applying in Some or All Districts, that require special consideration to ensure that they can be designed, located, and operated in a manner that will be compatible with surrounding uses and not interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties in the vicinity.

C.    Variances. The planning commission may issue variances to adjust dimensional and performance standards, subject to the following:

1.     Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone district in which such property is situated; and

2.     A variance shall not be granted which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone district regulations governing the parcel of property. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.20.010 Review Authority.
The following tables set forth use types that are permitted by right, permitted by right with specified limitations, or require administrative or conditional use permit approvals:

     Table 11.2.05.010: Use Regulations—Residential Districts;

     Table 11.2.10.010: Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts;

     Table 11.2.15.010: Use Regulations—Light Manufacturing and Oil Extraction Districts;

     Table 11.2.20.010: Use Regulations—Public and Semi-Public Facilities Districts; and

     Table 11.2.25.015: Use Regulations—Open Space and Parks Districts.

In addition, Table 11.5.20.010: Review Authority lists the types of land use entitlements that require either a minor use permit or a conditional use permit. The planning commission shall consider variance applications.

Table 11.5.20.010

REVIEW AUTHORITY

 

 

Use Permit Required

Land Use Entitlement or Activity

Requirement Is in Section:

Minor Use Permit

Conditional Use Permit

Chapter 11.2.05 - Residential Districts

Private School

Table 11.2.05.010, Note L-1

 

X

Exterior stairway - flood zone areas

Table 11.2.05.015, Note L-2

X

 

Surfside - non-habitable architectural features

Section 11.2.05.015.A.6.b

X

 

Surfside - zero side yard

Section 11.2.05.015.A.7.c

 

X

Surfside - nonconforming building expansion

Section 11.2.05.015.A.7.g

 

X

Maximum height of downslope skirt walls

Section 11.2.05.015.H

X

 

Greater porch width

Section 11.2.05.015.K.3

X

 

Exception to allowable curb cuts and driveways - RLD-9 District

Section 11.2.05.015.L

 

X

Garage for more than 3 vehicles

Section 11.2.05.015.N.1

 

X

Detached garage on front ½ of lot

Section 11.2.05.015.N.1

X

 

Exception to maximum garage width

Section 11.2.05.015.N.2

X

 

Exception to allowable parking locations - multi-unit residential

Section 11.2.05.015.N.7

 

X

2-story cabana or manufactured home in mobile home park

Section 11.2.05.015.S.2

X

 

Chapter 11.2.10 - Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts

Business Services uses on Main Street - ground floor

Table 11.2.10.010, Note L2

 

X

Laboratory uses on Main Street - ground floor

Table 11.2.10.010, Note L2

 

X

Offices, Business and Professional uses on Main Street - ground floor

Table 11.2.10.010, Note L2

 

X

Offices, Medical and Dental uses on Main Street - ground floor

Table 11.2.10.010, Note L2

 

X

Personal Improvement Services uses on Main Street - ground floor

Table 11.2.10.010, Note L2

 

X

Coffee House/Dessert Shop - more than 1,000 square feet and 10 seats or more - MSSP

Table 11.2.10.010, Note L6

X

 

Public open space location exceptions

Section 11.2.10.015.E.1

X

 

Parking location exceptions - LC/RMD, PO, and MSSP zones

Section 11.2.10.015.F.2

X

 

Exceptions to locations of truck docks, loading, and service areas

Section 11.2.10.015.H

X

 

Buildings oriented with primary façade and entrance not to a public street

Section 11.2.10.015.I.1.a

X

 

Pedestrian access to buildings

Section 11.2.10.015.N

X

 

Chapter 11.2.20 - Public and Semi-Public Facilities Districts

Public parking facilities - not in conjunction with a public or semi-public facility

Table 11.2.20.010; Note L-1

 

X

Public parking facilities - not in conjunction with a golf course facility

Table 11.2.20.010; Note L-2

 

X

Chapter 11.2.25 - Open Space, Parks and Recreation Districts

Agricultural Nurseries

Table 11.2.25.015; Note L-1

 

X

Chapter 11.3.05 - Residential Conservation Overlay Zone

Bed and breakfast facility

Section 11.3.05.010.B

 

X

Parking on separate parcel

Section 11.3.05.015.B.16.c

 

X

Roof-mounted mechanical equipment

Section 11.3.05.025

 

X

Chapter 11.3.15 - Commercial/Park Overlay Zone

Project development plan approval

Section 11.3.15.005

 

X

Chapter 11.4.05 - Standards for Specific Uses

Incidental Business Activity

Section 11.4.05.010.D.4

X

X

Alcohol Beverage Establishment

Section 11.4.05.015.A

 

X

Alcohol Beverage Establishment - nonconforming use

Section 11.4.05.015.E

 

X

Assisted Living Facilities

Section 11.4.05.025.B

 

X

Automated Teller Machines

Section 11.4.05.030.A

X

 

Automobile Service Station

Section 11.4.05.035.A

 

X

Tow Service

Section 11.4.05.035.B.23

 

X

Sale of beer and wine

Section 11.4.05.035.B.24

 

X

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

 

 

 

Tow Services

Section 11.4.05.040.E

 

X

Child Day Care Facilities

 

 

 

Large Family Day Care Homes and Child Day Care Centers

Section 11.4.05.045.A

 

X

Large Family Day Care Homes and Child Day Care Centers - Exterior Structural Alteration to existing facility

Section 11.4.05.045.B.2

X

 

Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities

Section 11.4.05.050.A

 

X

Extended Hour Business

Section 11.4.05.055.A

 

X

Home Occupations

Section 11.4.05.060.D

X

 

Kiosks

Section 11.4.05.065.A

X

 

Liquor Stores

Section 11.4.05.070.A

 

X

Meeting Facilities, Private Schools and Similar Institutional Uses

Section 11.4.05.080.A

 

X

News and Flower Stands

Section 11.4.05.085.A

X

 

Outdoor Displays and Sales - Temporary

Section 11.4.05.090.A

X

 

Outdoor Displays and Sales - Accessory

Section 11.4.05.090.B

X

 

Outdoor Displays and Sales - Permanent

Section 11.4.05.090.C.1

 

X

Outdoor Dining Area - no more than 12 seats

Section 11.4.05.090.D

X

 

Outdoor Dining Area - more than 12 seats

Section 11.4.05.090.D.1

 

X

Outdoor Dining or Seating Area - Sound and Music

Section 11.4.05.090.D.6

X

X

Outdoor Dining Area - Outdoor Cooking

Section 11.4.05.090.D.10

 

X

Recycling Collection Point

Section 11.4.05.095.B

 

X

Recycling Processing Facility

Section 11.4.05.095.C

 

X

Residential Accessory Uses - detached accessory structures between 225 and 350 square feet in total area

Section 11.4.05.100.D.4

X

 

Residential Accessory Uses - Garage larger than 600 square feet

Section 11.4.05.100.H

 

X

Residential Accessory Uses - more than 1 guest room or pool house

Section 11.4.05.100.I.1

 

X

Residential Accessory Uses - 2nd Story guest room or pool house

Section 11.4.05.100.I.3

 

X

Residential Accessory Uses - Minor accessory structure greater than 6 feet high in required setback

Section 11.4.05.100.K.2

X

 

Residential Accessory Uses - Tennis and other recreation courts

Section 11.4.05.100.L.1

X

 

Residential Care Facility - delivery hours between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m.

Section 11.4.05.105.E

 

X

Restaurant - Alcohol Sales

Section 11.4.05.120.A

 

X

Senior Citizen Apartments - Independent Living Facilities

Section 11.4.05.125.A

 

X

Accessory Nonresidential Facilities

Section 11.4.05.125.H

 

X

Temporary Structures, Trailers, and Modular Units

Section 11.4.05.130.A.1

X

 

Vacation Rentals

Section 11.4.05.135.A.1

 

X

Chapter 11.4.10 - General Site Standards

Mechanical Equipment Screening - Exceptions

Section 11.4.10.015.B

X

 

Height of Light Standards

Section 11.4.10.020.A.6

X

 

Recreational court lighting modifications

Section 11.4.10.020.A.7.i

X

 

Modifications to lighting standards

Section 11.4.10.020.A.8.d

X

 

Increase in Allowable Outdoor Noise Levels for Residential Areas

Section 11.4.10.020.B.2.a

X

 

Swimming Pool Setbacks in Nonresidential Zone

Section 11.4.10.030.B

X

 

Public and Semi-Public Swimming Pool

Section 11.4.10.030.E

 

X

Minor Addition - Improvements required in conjunction with street dedication

Section 11.4.10.040.C

 

X

Deviation - Improvements required in conjunction with street dedication

Section 11.4.10.040.D

 

X

Chapter 11.4.15 - Fences, Hedges and Walls

Modification to fence height standards

Section 11.4.15.010.C

X

 

Retaining wall between 30 and 48 inches in height

Section 11.4.15.015.A.2

X

 

Retaining wall greater than 48 inches in height

Section 11.4.15.015.A.3

 

X

Retaining wall greater than 30 inches in height - RLD-9 District, Ocean Avenue area

Section 11.4.15.015.B.2

X

 

Walkway and driveway architectural features

Section 11.4.15.025.B

X

 

Sport facility and golf course fencing

Section 11.4.15.025.D

X

 

Security fences

Section 11.4.15.030.A

X

 

Modification to restrictions on fence materials

Section 11.4.15.035

X

 

Chapter 11.4.20 - Off-Street Parking and Loading

Garage Parking Reduction - 6 bedroom home or larger

Table 11.4.20.015.A.1

X

 

Parking Reductions - Shared Parking Program

Section 11.4.20.020.A

 

X

Parking Reductions - Other Parking Reduction

Section 11.4.20.020.B

 

X

Off-site parking within 300 feet

Section 11.4.20.025.B.2

 

X

Modification to direction of vehicle ingress/egress

Section 11.4.20.025.H.1

X

 

Exception to location of loading areas

Section 11.4.20.035.C.3

X

 

Parking Structure

Section 11.4.20.040.A

 

X

Conversion of Parking Structure to Fee Structure

Section 11.4.20.040.C

 

X

Chapter 11.4.25 - Sign Regulations

Marquee signs above roof line

Section 11.4.25.025.D.5.b

X

 

Marquee signs with changing lights

Section 11.4.25.025.D.5.c

X

 

Flags larger than 12 square feet

Section 11.4.25.025.D.9.b

X

 

Main Street - outlining of buildings

Section 11.4.25.025.D.10.j

X

 

Main Street - up to 3 tenant spaces

Section 11.4.25.025.D.10.k.i

 

X

Main Street - 4 or more tenant spaces - Planned Sign Program

Section 11.4.25.025.D.10.k.ii

 

X

Subdivision identification sign

Section 11.4.25.030.A.1

X

 

Approved commercial use sign in residential area

Section 11.4.25.030.A.3

X

X

Planned Sign Program

Section 11.4.25.045.E.1

 

X

Exception to size, dimensions, height and number of signs

Section 11.4.25.045.F

 

X

Designation of historic sign

Section 11.4.25.070.B.1

 

X

Chapter 11.4.30 - Landscaping and Buffer Yards

Exceptions to Buffer Yards

Section 11.4.30.040.B.4

 

X

Chapter 11.4.40 - Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Specified structural repairs - all structures

Section 11.4.40.010.D

X

 

Residential structures - specified minor improvements

Section 11.4.40.015.B

X

 

Single-family residences - specified enlargements and expansions

Section 11.4.40.020.A

 

X

Commercial centers over 20 acres - less than 7% landscaping

Section 11.4.40.030.B.2

 

X

Replacement with a more conforming use

Section 11.4.40.035.A

 

X

Nonconforming use expansion in a conforming structure

Section 11.4.40.035.B

 

X

Nonconforming use expansion in a nonconforming structure

Section 11.4.40.035.C

 

X

Expansion within structure that does not conform to California Building Code

Section 11.4.40.035.D

 

X

Conform a nonconforming use upon ordinance requirement

Section 11.4.40.040

 

X

Reestablishment of abandoned nonconforming use

Section 11.4.40.045.B

 

X

Residential reconstruction after damage - more than 50% subject to specified standards

Section 11.4.40.050.B.2

X

 

Nonresidential reconstruction after damage - more than 50% subject to specified standards

Section 11.4.40.050.C

X

 

Exceptions for nonconforming historic buildings

Section 11.4.40.055.A

 

X

Chapter 11.4.60 - Hazardous Waste Facilities

Off-site hazardous waste facility

Section 11.4.60.020

 

X

Chapter 11.4.65 - Tattoo Establishments

Tattoo establishment

Section 11.4.65.005

 

X

Chapter 11.4.70 - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Wireless Telecommunications Facilities - New ground mounted tower or monopole - All other property

Section 11.4.70.030.B

 

X

Chapter 11.4.75 - Common Interest Developments

Common Interest Development

Section 11.4.75.005

 

X

Chapter 11.4.80 - Condominium Conversions

Condominium Conversion

Section 11.4.80.010

 

X

Condominium Conversion - Reconstruction after damage

Section 11.4.80.030.A.4.f

X

 

Chapter 11.5.25 - Director Determinations; Section 11.5.25.015 - Temporary Uses;

Section 11.5.25.020 - Minor Modifications

Temporary Uses - Potential Detrimental Impacts

Section 11.5.25.015.A

X

 

Minor Modifications from Dimensional Requirements - Not Exceeding 5% of Standard

Section 11.5.25.020.A.1

X

 

Modifications to Approved Plans - Not Exceeding 5% of Specified Approved Plan component

Section 11.5.25.020.A.2

X

 

Chapter 11.5.30 - Reasonable Accommodations

Reasonable Accommodations

Section 11.5.30.020

 

X

(Ord. 1598)

11.5.20.015 Review Procedure.
A.     Application Forms and Fees. Applicants for minor use permits, conditional use permits, and variances shall file an application with the director in accordance with the application procedures in Section 11.5.10.010: Application Forms and Fees.

B.     Notice. The city shall provide notice for minor use permits, conditional use permits, and variances in accordance with Section 11.5.10.025: Public Notification.

C.    Decisions on Minor Use Permits. The planning commission shall conduct a hearing for any application for a minor use permit. After the hearing is closed, the commission shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving or denying the application.

D.    Decisions on Conditional Use Permits and Variances. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing for any application for a conditional use permit or variance. After the hearing is closed, the commission shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving or denying the application. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.20.020 Required Findings.
A.     Findings for Approval of Use Permit. A use permit shall only be granted if the reviewing body finds, based upon evidence presented at the hearing, the proposal as submitted, or as modified, conforms to all of the following criteria as well as to any other special findings required for approval of use permits in specific zoning districts:

1.     The proposal is consistent with the general plan and with any other applicable plan adopted by the city council;

2.     The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zoning district with use permit approval and complies with all other applicable provisions of the municipal code;

3.     The site is physically adequate for the type, density and intensity of use being proposed, including provision of services, and the absence of physical constraints;

4.     The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use will be compatible with and will not adversely affect uses and properties in the surrounding neighborhood; and

5.     The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed use at the location proposed will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed use.

B.     Findings for Approval of Variance. A variance shall only be granted if the planning commission finds, based upon evidence presented at the hearing:

1.     The variance conforms in all significant respects with the general plan and with any ordinances adopted by the city council;

2.     Because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning code deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning district classification;

3.     The variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone district in which such property is situated;

4.     Authorization of the variance substantially meets the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which the property is located and will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of persons living or working in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.20.025 Conditions of Approval.
A.     Conditions. In approving a use permit or variance, the reviewing body may impose any reasonable conditions to:

1.     Ensure that the proposal conforms in all significant respects with the Seal Beach General Plan and with any other applicable plans or policies adopted by the city council;

2.     Achieve the general purposes of this zoning code or the specific purpose of the zoning district in which the project is located;

3.     Achieve the findings required by this chapter;

4.     Mitigate any potentially significant impacts identified as a result of review conducted in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act; and

5.     Ensure compliance with all requirements of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board. Discharges shall also comply with Chapter 9.20: Storm Water Management Program, Chapter 9.25: Fats, Oil and Grease Management and Discharge Control, Chapter 9.30: Sewerage, Chapter 9.35: Water, and Chapter 9.50: Grading of the Municipal Code.

B.     Types of Conditions. The reviewing body may impose reasonable conditions including but not limited to:

1.     Requiring special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls;

2.     Locating and orienting entrances and roll-up doors, and screening;

3.     Specifying building design elements;

4.     Requiring installation and maintenance of landscape and erosion control measures;

5.     Regulating vehicular ingress and egress and traffic circulation;

6.     Requiring street improvements and dedication of right-of-way for street widening or street extensions;

7.     Regulating signs;

8.     Regulating parking;

9.     Preserving trees;

10.   Regulating lighting;

11.   Regulating hours or other characteristics of operation;

12.   Establishing development schedules or time limits for performance or completion;

13.   Requiring public utilities and easements;

14.   Requiring periodic review by the director or the planning commission;

15.   Requiring final plans to ensure compliance with conditions of approval; and

16.   Imposing other conditions deemed necessary. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.20.030 Appeals—Expiration and Extensions.
A.     Appeals.

1.     Any person may appeal the director’s action pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review, in which case the planning commission shall be the hearing officer as that term is used in Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review.

2.     Any person may appeal the planning commission’s action pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review, in which case the city council shall be the hearing officer as that term is used in Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review.

B.     Expiration, Extension, and Modifications. The regulations concerning expiration, extension, and modifications are found in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.5.25 DIRECTOR DETERMINATIONS
11.5.25.005 Applicability.
This chapter establishes procedures for certain actions that can be approved by the director. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.25.010 Zoning Conformance Review Procedures.
A.     Application. Prior to obtaining any business license, permit or other approval, the applicant shall request the director to determine whether the proposed development, use, structure, or change in use complies with all provisions of the zoning code, any applicable land use entitlement, and all conditions thereto.

B.     Application Forms and Fees. The applicant shall submit the application and pay processing fees in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 11.5.10.010: Application Forms and Fees. The director may request the applicant submit plans and related materials necessary to show that the proposed development, use, structure or change complies with the zoning code, findings required by Section 11.5.20.020: Required Findings, and the requirements and conditions of any applicable land use entitlement. Required development plans shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate clearly and with dimensioning the following information:

1.     Lot dimensions;

2.     Location, size, height, proposed use for each structure;

3.     Yards and space between structures;

4.     Location, height and materials of walls and fences;

5.     Location, number of spaces and/or dimension of off-street parking area, internal circulation pattern;

6.     Pedestrian and vehicular access, points of ingress and egress;

7.     Location and general nature of lighting;

8.     Street dedications and improvements;

9.     Availability of utilities; and

10.   Such other data as may be required by the director.

C.    Applicability. The director shall determine whether the zoning code allows the proposed development, use or structure by right. No zoning conformance approval shall be required for continuations of previously approved or permitted uses and structures, uses and structures which are not subject to any building or zoning code regulations, or other uses or structures subject to other land use entitlement review.

D.    Required Findings by Director. Prior to such determination, the director shall find:

1.     The proposed use and structure conform with the provisions of this title;

2.     The proposed use and structure are compatible with uses and structures in the immediate neighborhood;

3.     The plans provide protection to adjacent structures from noise, vibration and other undesirable environmental factors;

4.     Proposed lighting is directed inward and downward to reflect light away from adjoining properties;

5.     The following are designed to avoid traffic congestion, protect pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare and eliminate any adverse effect on surrounding property:

a.     Structures and improvements;

b.     Vehicular ingress and egress and eternal circulation;

c.     Setbacks;

d.     Height of buildings;

e.     Walls; and

f.      Landscaping.

E.     Issuance of Zoning Conformance. The director shall serve the applicant with a written determination within 30 days of a complete submittal. The director shall issue a zoning conformance upon determining that the proposed business license, permit or approval is allowed as a matter of right by the zoning code, and conforms to all the applicable development and use standards therein. An approved zoning conformance may include attachments of other written or graphic information, including but not limited to, statements, numeric data, site plans, floor plans and building elevations and sections, as a record of the proposal’s conformity with the applicable regulations of this zoning code. Other forms of approval may be in the form of a stamp, city staff signature, or other official notation on approved plans, a letter to the applicant, or other certification, at the discretion of the director. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.25.015 Temporary Uses.
A.     Minor Use Permit Required in Certain Circumstances. Prior to the commencement of any temporary use, the director may require a minor use permit application if the director finds that the temporary use may have detrimental impacts, such as noise or traffic impacts, that should be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     No Minor Use Permit Required. Minor use permits shall not be required for the following types of temporary uses:

1.     Retail uses on the same property as an established commercial use holding a valid city business license where such retail activity is not in conflict with any applicable zoning requirements or permit.

2.     Real estate sales from a manufactured or mobile unit office for the temporary marketing, sales, or rental of property.

3.     Garage sales of personal property conducted by a resident of the premises where such sales operate for a period of less than 2 per calendar year per site, and a maximum of 2 days each.

4.     Seasonal sales of pumpkins and Christmas trees for a period not longer than 45 days in a commercial district on a site where such sales have been permitted previously. Requirements for this type of special event are set forth in Title 7: Public Peace, Morals, and Welfare, Chapter 7.50: Special Events.

5.     Temporary uses otherwise regulated by this code.

C.    Director Decision. The director may approve or conditionally approve an application for temporary uses if the proposed temporary use will not:

1.     Adversely affect adjacent properties, their owners and occupants, or the surrounding neighborhood.

2.     Constitute a nuisance.

3.     Be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort, or welfare of persons residing or working in the area or to the general welfare of the city.

4.     Interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or circulation in the area surrounding the proposed use, or create a demand for additional parking that cannot be safely and efficiently accommodated by existing parking areas.

D.    Application. An application for a temporary use shall be submitted at least 45 days before the use is intended to begin. The application shall be on a form issued by the director and shall include the written consent of the owner of the property on which the use is proposed.

E.     Conditions of Approval. The director may impose any reasonable conditions, including but not limited to: regulating vehicular ingress and egress and traffic circulation; regulating lighting; regulating hours and/or other characteristics of operation; requiring submission of final plans to ensure compliance with conditions of approval; and other necessary conditions.

F.     Minimum Conditions. In approving a temporary use, the director shall at a minimum impose the following conditions if applicable:

1.     Any construction or other work shall conform to all applicable zoning code and California Building Code provisions.

2.     Fire protection and access for fire vehicles shall be provided as specified by the Orange County Fire Authority.

3.     Any food service activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Orange County Health Department.

4.     The applicant shall restore the site to its condition prior to the temporary use and remove all trash, debris, signs, sign supports, and temporary structures and electrical service to the satisfaction of the director and building official within 3 days following the date specified for termination of the temporary use. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.25.020 Minor Modifications.
A.     Minor Modifications May Be Granted. Minor modifications from the strict application of the dimensional requirements of the zoning code and minor changes in the use or structure for which a permit has been issued, may be approved as provided by this section. Only the following types of modifications shall be approved:

1.     Dimensional Requirements. Modifications of up to 5% of the dimensional requirements of the zoning code, including but not limited to:

a.     Front, side, and rear yard setbacks;

b.     The height of any fence or wall permitted in Chapter 11.4.15: Fences, Hedges and Walls;

c.     The width of any buffer yard required in Chapter 11.4.30: Landscaping and Buffer Yards.

2.     Modifications to Approved Plans. Modifications to approved plans to increase by not more than 5%, either the floor/lot coverage, or the number of customer seats, may be granted if:

a.     The modified plans substantially conform to the findings made and conditions imposed in connection with any previous city approval; and

b.     There will be no substantial increase in the number of employees, beds, rooms or entrances; and

c.     There will be no substantial change associated with establishing a new product line, service, function or activity so as to change or intensify the use as defined in Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications or as defined in the city’s adopted California Building Code; and

d.     The plans otherwise comply with all other applicable development standards of the zoning code.

3.     Maximum Building Height. Minor modifications shall not be granted to exceed a maximum building height.

B.     Application. An application for a minor modification shall be filed with the director in accordance with the application procedures set forth in Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures. The application shall state in writing the nature of the minor modification requested and explain why the findings necessary to grant the minor modification are satisfied. The applicant shall also submit plans delineating the requested minor modification. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the master fee schedule.

C.    Simultaneous Processing. If a request for a minor modification is being submitted in conjunction with an application for another approval, permit, or entitlement under this zoning code, it shall be heard and acted upon at the same time and in the same manner as that other application.

D.    Commission Determinations. The planning commission may approve minor modifications by minor use permit, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

E.     Referral of Applications to Planning Commission. The director may refer any request for a minor modification to the planning commission for a determination of whether to grant the application.

F.     Findings. No minor modification shall be approved unless all of the following findings can be made based on substantial evidence in the record:

1.     The minor modification is necessary due to the physical characteristics of the property and the proposed use or structure or other circumstances, including, but not limited to, topography, noise exposure, irregular property boundaries, or other unusual circumstance.

2.     There are no reasonable alternatives to the requested minor modification, including siting at another location, that would provide similar benefits to the applicant with less potential detriment to surrounding owners and occupants or to the general public.

3.     The granting of the requested minor modification would not be detrimental to the health or safety of the public or the occupants of the property or result in a change in land use or density that would be inconsistent with the requirements of this zoning code.

4.     The granting of the minor modification will substantially meet or advance the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which the subject property is located.

5.     The granting of the minor modification will not intensify any potentially detrimental effects of the project.

G.    Conditions of Approval. In approving a minor modification from the requirements of this zoning code, the director or the planning commission may impose conditions pursuant to Section 11.5.20.025: Conditions of Approval.

H.    Notification of Director Decisions. The director shall provide written notification to the city council and planning commission within 3 days of approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving a request for a minor modification. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.25.025 Appeals.
A.     Director Actions. Any person may appeal the director’s action pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review, in which case the planning commission shall be the hearing officer as that term is used in Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review.

B.     Commission Actions. Any person may appeal the planning commission’s action pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review, in which case the city council shall be the hearing officer as that term is used in Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.5.30 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS
11.5.30.005 Purpose.
In accordance with federal and state fair housing laws, it is the purpose of this chapter to allow for reasonable accommodations in the city’s zoning and land use regulations, policies, and practices when needed to provide an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.30.010 Review Authority.
The planning commission is designated to approve, conditionally approve, or deny all applications for a reasonable accommodation. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval, then an applicant may request that the planning commission hear the request for a reasonable accommodation at the same time as the other discretionary permit or approval. If the applicant does not request a simultaneous hearing, then the request for a reasonable accommodation shall not be heard until after a final administrative decision has been made regarding the other discretionary permit or approval. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.30.015 Application for a Reasonable Accommodation.
A.     Applicant. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with a disability. A reasonable accommodation may be approved only for the benefit of one or more individuals with a disability.

B.     Application. An application for a reasonable accommodation from a zoning regulation, policy, or practice shall be made on a form specified by the director. No fee shall be required for a request for reasonable accommodation, but if the project requires another discretionary permit, then the prescribed fee shall be paid for all other discretionary permits.

C.    Other Discretionary Permits. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval, then the applicant may file the request for reasonable accommodation together with the application for the other discretionary permit or approval. The processing procedures of the discretionary permit shall govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation and the discretionary permit.

D.    Required Submittals. In addition to materials required under other applicable provisions of this code, an application for reasonable accommodation shall include the following:

1.     Documentation that the applicant is: (a) an individual with a disability; (b) applying on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability; or (c) a developer or provider of housing for one or more individuals with a disability;

2.     The specific exception or modification to the zoning code provision, policy, or practices requested by the applicant;

3.     Documentation that the specific exception or modification requested by the applicant is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the residence;

4.     Any other information that the director reasonably concludes is necessary to determine whether the findings required by Section 11.5.30.020.B: Required Findings can be made, so long as any request for information regarding the disability of the individuals benefited complies with fair housing law protections and the privacy rights of the individuals affected. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.30.020 Decision.
A.     Planning Commission to Decide. The planning commission shall issue a written determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation, and the modification or revocation thereof in compliance with subsection B of this section. The reasonable accommodation request shall be heard with, and subject to, the notice, review, approval, and appeal procedures prescribed for a conditional use permit in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

B.     Required Findings. The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval:

1.     The requested accommodation is requested by or on the behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected under the fair housing laws.

2.     The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.

3.     The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city as “undue financial or administrative burden” is defined in fair housing laws and interpretive case law.

4.     The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city’s zoning program, as “fundamental alteration” is defined in fair housing laws and interpretive case law.

5.     The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others.

C.    Alternative Reasonable Accommodations. In making these findings, the decision-maker may approve alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant.

D.    Consideration Factors. The city may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling:

1.     Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the quality of life of one or more individuals with a disability;

2.     Whether the individual or individuals with a disability will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent the accommodation;

3.     In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make facilities of a similar nature or operation economically viable in light of the particularities of the relevant market and market participants; and

4.     In the case of a residential care facility, whether the existing supply of facilities of a similar nature and operation in the community is sufficient to provide individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to live in a residential setting.

E.     Consideration Factors—Fundamental Alteration to Zoning Program. The city may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city’s zoning program:

1.     Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the character of the neighborhood;

2.     Whether the requested accommodation would result in a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking;

3.     Whether the requested accommodation would substantially undermine any express purpose of either the city’s general plan or an applicable specific plan; and

4.     In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between facilities that are similar in nature or operation.

F.     Coastal Zone Properties. For housing located in the coastal zone, a request for reasonable accommodation under this section may be approved by the city if it is consistent with the requisite findings set forth in Section 11.5.30.020.B: Required Findings, with Chapter 3 of the California Coastal Act of 1976, and with the Interpretative Guidelines for Coastal Planning and Permits as established by the California Coastal Commission dated February 11, 1977, and any subsequent amendments, and the city’s adopted Local Coastal Program.

G.    Rules While Decision is Pending. While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect.

H.    Effective Date. No reasonable accommodation shall become effective until the decision to grant such accommodation shall have become final by reason of the expiration of time to make an appeal. In the event an appeal is filed, the reasonable accommodation shall not become effective unless and until a decision is made by the city council on such appeal, pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.5.20.030: Appeals—Expiration and Extensions. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.30.025 Expiration, Time Extension, Violation, Discontinuance, and Revocation.
A.     Expiration. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall expire within 24 months from the effective date of approval or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval unless:

1.     A building permit has been issued and construction has commenced;

2.     A certificate of occupancy has been issued;

3.     The use is established; or

4.     A time extension has been granted.

In cases where a coastal permit is required, the time period shall not begin until the effective date of approval of the coastal permit.

B.     Time Extension. The planning commission may approve a single one-year time extension for a reasonable accommodation for good cause. An application for a time extension shall be made in writing to the director no less than 30 days or more than 90 days prior to the expiration date.

C.    Time Extension Notice. Notice of the planning commission’s decision on a time extension shall be provided as specified in Section 11.5.10.025.A: Mailed Notices, Minor Use Permit Matters. All written decisions shall give notice of the right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth in Section 11.5.30.025 of this chapter.

D.    Appeal of Determination. A time extension for a reasonable accommodation shall be final unless appealed within 10 calendar days of the date of the adoption of the written determination of the approving body. An appeal shall be made in writing and shall be noticed and heard pursuant to the procedures established in Section 11.5.10.025.A: Mailed Notices, Minor Use Permit Matters.

E.     Violation of Terms. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this code may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such reasonable accommodation are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith.

F.     Discontinuance. A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for 180 consecutive days. If the persons initially occupying a residence vacate, the reasonable accommodation shall remain in effect only if the director determines that: (1) the modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with the code, and (2) the accommodation is necessary to give another disabled individual an equal opportunity to enjoy the dwelling. The director may request the applicant or his or her successor in interest to the property to provide documentation that subsequent occupants are persons with disabilities. Failure to provide such documentation within 10 days of the date of a request by the city shall constitute grounds for discontinuance by the city of a previously approved reasonable accommodation.

G.    Revocation. Any revocation shall be noticed and heard pursuant to the procedures established in Section 11.5.10.060: Revocation of Permits. (Ord. 1598)

11.5.30.030 Amendments.
A request for changes in conditions of approval of a reasonable accommodation, or a change to plans that would affect a condition of approval shall be treated as a new application. The director may waive the requirement for a new application if the changes are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or addition to the plan or the conditions of approval, and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. (Ord. 1598)

 

 

 

Chapter 11.5.35 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
11.5.35.005 Purpose and Applicability.
A.     Purpose. This chapter establishes procedures the city will use for conducting environmental review to meet requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and other relevant and applicable federal, state, and local environmental laws and regulations for projects subject to the provisions of this zoning code. These provisions are intended to insure that responsible decision-makers and the public are informed about the potentially significant environmental effects of proposed activities and that environmental review is integrated with the discretionary review provisions to promote incorporation of environmental considerations into the design, planning, and review of projects.

B.     Applicability. The procedures shall apply to all projects sponsored or assisted by the city and all private projects requiring any discretionary approvals from the city including private projects involving funding or any other form of participation by a federal agency, if the federal agency requires the city to conduct environmental review in compliance with NEPA. In the event of a conflict between these environmental review regulations and applicable federal or state regulations or guidelines, the applicable federal or state regulations shall prevail. These provisions are not intended to supersede CEQA Guidelines. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.35.010 Review Procedures.
A.     Preliminary Review. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the director shall determine if the application is complete in accordance with Section 11.5.10.020: Review of Applications. The director shall identify potential environmental issues and determine whether a project is subject to environmental review. The director may require the applicant to submit additional information. The director may designate a person to serve as environmental review coordinator for projects undertaken by the city that are not subject to this zoning code. An application subject to environmental review pursuant to CEQA shall not be considered complete until all studies that may be required are submitted. If the director determines that an application is not subject to environmental review under CEQA, the director shall proceed to process the application in accordance with this zoning code.

B.     Review for Exemption. The director shall determine if the project is exempt from environmental review pursuant to CEQA and state and city CEQA Guidelines within 30 days after the application is deemed complete.

1.     If the director has determined that a project is exempt, the director shall post a notice. The notice shall include a citation to the state guidelines section or statute under which it is found to be exempt.

2.     Following approval of a project that is exempt from CEQA review, the director or the applicant may file a notice of exemption with the county clerk as provided for in CEQA and applicable CEQA guidelines. The applicant for a private project shall be responsible for any filing fees.

3.     A determination of exemption by any decision-making authority other than the city council may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20.005: Administrative Review.

C.    Environmental Review Application. If the proposed project is not exempt from CEQA review, the applicant shall submit an application for environmental review accompanied by a fee specified in the master fee schedule. The director may require the submission of additional information and supporting documentation with the application. After receiving an environmental review application, the director or environmental review coordinator shall determine whether to require preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR). In order to make this determination, the director or environmental review coordinator shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, an initial study.

D.    Initial Study. The initial study shall consider all phases of project planning, implementation, and operation and may rely upon expert opinion supported by facts, including documentation submitted by the applicant, technical studies, or other substantial evidence to document its findings regarding the project’s potential impacts. An initial study is not required to include the same level of detail as an EIR.

1.     If the director determines, after preliminary review, that the project, due to its design, size, nature, or location, will clearly have a significant impact on the environment and requires preparation of an EIR, an initial study is not required but may be prepared to assist identification of environmental issues.

2.     An initial study shall include:

a.     A brief description of the project including its specific location;

b.     A brief description of the environmental setting;

c.     A checklist, matrix, or other listing of the project’s environmental effects with discussion and documentation to support the entries;

d.     Discussion of ways to mitigate any potential significant effects;

e.     Information on the project’s consistency with existing zoning, plans, or other applicable regulations; and

f.      List of resources cited and consulted.

3.     Following completion of the initial study, the director or environmental review coordinator shall notify the applicant in writing of changes to the project that staff has deemed necessary to reduce or avoid the significant effects identified in the initial study. Within 30 days following the date of the letter, the applicant shall provide written notification to the director or environmental review coordinator indicating that the proposed modifications are acceptable or shall propose alternative measures that will achieve the same result. If the applicant does not agree to revise the project a mitigated negative declaration or an environmental impact report shall be prepared, as determined by the director or environmental review coordinator.

E.     Determination of Environmental Significance. Based on the initial study, the director or environmental review coordinator shall make one of the following findings:

1.     There is no substantial evidence that the project will have a significant impact on the environment, and a negative declaration will be prepared;

2.     The project has been modified to avoid potential environmental impacts or to mitigate such impacts to a level of insignificance and a mitigated negative declaration will be prepared; or

3.     The proposed project will have, or may have, significant impact(s) on the environment and an environmental impact report will be required.

F.     Public Notice of Environmental Determination. If the director or environmental review coordinator has determined that the proposed project will not have a significant effect on the environment, he or she shall prepare a negative declaration for public review in conformance with the requirements of CEQA and applicable state and city environmental review guidelines. If the applicant has agreed to incorporate mitigation measures in order to reduce environmental impacts to a point of insignificance, the director or environmental review coordinator shall prepare a mitigated negative declaration for public review. The director or environmental review coordinator shall provide public notice of the proposed environmental determination at the same time and in the same manner required for the underlying permit in accordance with Chapter 5.10: General Procedures.

The Environmental Quality Control Board shall conduct a public meeting during the public review period to receive public comments and to provide comments on the draft negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration and shall forward all comments to the approving authority for consideration as part of any subsequent public hearings on the draft negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration and accompanying discretionary land use entitlement applications.

G.    Preparation of Negative Declaration. The city or its consultant will prepare the draft negative declaration or draft mitigated negative declaration in conformance with the requirements of CEQA and applicable guidelines. The applicant shall execute a reimbursement agreement requiring that applicant pay all costs associated with preparing the negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration, including administrative costs and the fees and expenses of attorneys and consultants.

H.    Public Notice of Environmental Determination. The director or environmental review coordinator shall provide public notice of the proposed environmental determination for a period of at least 30 days.

I.      Preparation of a Draft EIR. If it is determined that an environmental impact report (EIR) is required, the director or environmental review coordinator shall prepare, distribute, and post a notice of intent to prepare an EIR in the same manner required for the underlying permit unless otherwise specified in applicable state or federal requirements. The notice shall inform interested parties that an EIR is being prepared and seek guidance as to which significant environmental issues and mitigation measures should be explored. Any person who believes that a negative declaration, rather than an EIR, should be prepared for the proposed project may appeal to the city council within 10 days after the notice has been posted. The city council’s decision on the appeal shall be final. The city will prepare the draft EIR with its own staff or by contract with a consultant in conformance with the requirements of CEQA and applicable guidelines. The applicant shall execute a reimbursement agreement requiring that applicant pay all costs associated with preparing the EIR, including administrative costs and the fees and expenses of attorneys and consultants.

J.     Public Review of Draft EIR. Following completion of a draft EIR, the director or environmental review coordinator shall prepare and post a notice of completion initiating a minimum 30-day public review period or 45 days if the project is subject to review by a state agency. The director or environmental review coordinator shall mail a notice of the availability of a draft EIR to those requesting such notice in writing, to local and regional agencies, and interested federal agencies. The city shall make copies of the draft EIR available for public review at the department of development services and the office of the city clerk during regular office hours and at each public library within the city. The city may impose a charge for copies of the draft EIR in accordance with the adopted master fee schedule.

The Environmental Quality Control Board shall conduct a public meeting during the public review period to receive public comments and to provide board comments on the draft EIR and shall forward all comments to the approving authority for consideration as part of any subsequent public hearings on the draft EIR and accompanying discretionary land use entitlement applications.

K.     Final EIR. After the public review period has expired, the city or its consultant will prepare a final EIR for certification by the highest decision-making body responsible for action on the project. The final EIR will consist of the draft EIR, all of the comments received, a list of persons, organizations and public agencies commenting on the draft EIR, and a response from the city on significant environmental issues raised in the draft EIR and comments. Prior to any city official or body responsible for taking action on a project for which an initial study or EIR has been prepared considers such matter, the matter shall be scheduled for consideration and recommendation by the Environmental Quality Control Board as to the adequacy of the subject environmental review document in accordance with the provisions of CEQA and state CEQA guidelines.

L.     Responsibility for Action on Environmental Document. Any city official or body responsible for taking action on a project for which an initial study or EIR has been prepared shall use the environmental assessment to make its decision on the development proposal. If the project is accepted, the decision-making body shall impose conditions to mitigate any adverse environmental impacts. The highest decision-making entity responsible for action on an application for a development permit shall approve the negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration or certify the final EIR prior to or at the time the project is considered for approval. The decision-making entity may decline to approve or certify the environmental document and request further review or analysis if, in its independent judgment, approval of the negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration or certification of the final EIR would not comply with the requirements of applicable state and local environmental review requirements. Approval of a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration or certification of a final EIR shall be deemed to be a finding that the document has been prepared in compliance with CEQA and state CEQA guidelines. The decision-making entity shall also certify that the environmental document reflects the independent judgment of the body. Certification of a final EIR does not imply that the city endorses the proposed project or that the city will approve the necessary permit applications.

M.    Timing of Environmental Review. When a development project is subject to environmental review, all decision-making officials and entities shall take action on all applications for the project that have been submitted and deemed complete in compliance with the following time limits unless state or federal law mandate a shorter deadline. Notwithstanding these deadlines, the applicant may request in writing and the city may approve a single extension for a period not to exceed 90 days unless state law authorizes a longer extension. These deadlines do not apply to any action that has been appealed to the city council in accordance with Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review.

1.     Within 60 days of the date the city has determined the project exempt from environmental review;

2.     Within 60 days of the date the negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration has been completed and adopted for project approval;

3.     Within 180 days from the date the decision-making entity certifies the final EIR. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.35.015 Mitigation Monitoring Program.
A.     Program Contents. The city shall approve a mitigation monitoring and reporting program for all projects that it approves with a mitigated negative declaration or following certification of a final EIR. The purpose of the mitigation monitoring program is to ensure that the project applicant complies with all of the provisions or changes identified as mitigation measures during implementation of the project. The mitigation monitoring and reporting program shall consist of the following:

1.     Mitigation Implementation Plan. A plan, prepared by the director or a contracted consultant, for city approval, which outlines in detail the manner in which mitigation measures will be implemented during preconstruction, construction and post-construction phases of the project;

2.     Compliance Schedule. A schedule, prepared by the director or a contracted consultant, for city approval, indicating the phase of the project (preconstruction, construction or post-construction) in which mitigation measures will be implemented;

3.     Compliance Reports. Reports submitted by the applicant or a contracted consultant to the city, specifying how and when each mitigation measure was implemented; and

4.     Verification Report(s). Report(s) made by the city or a contracted consultant, pursuant to an inspection of the project to determine if the applicant has properly and timely implemented mitigation measures identified in the environmental document for the project as set forth in the mitigation implementation plan and compliance schedule.

B.     Submittal and Approval. The director, or a contracted consultant, shall prepare and submit a draft mitigation implementation plan in a format specified by the city, which shall be included in the public review draft environmental review document. The director shall review the mitigation implementation plan and compliance schedule for consistency with the approved environmental document and shall identify the city official or agency that will be responsible for ensuring that the mitigation measure is implemented. The applicant shall pay fees to the city in an amount not exceeding the reasonable cost for monitoring compliance with the mitigation plan.

C.    Enforcement. Failure to comply with the conditions and requirements of an approved mitigation monitoring and reporting program shall be considered a violation of the conditions of approval of a project. Such violations shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with the provisions of this code.

D.    Modification of Mitigation Program Not Permitted Following Adoption. Unless specifically authorized or required by the conditions of project approval, neither CEQA nor this zoning code authorize the city to modify or add mitigation measures if the monitoring program shows that the mitigation measures have not achieved the desired result. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.5.35.020 Appeals.
Notwithstanding other provision of this zoning code, any person may appeal the following environmental determinations to city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk in accordance with Title 1: General Provisions, Section 1.20.005: Administrative Review within 10 days of the date of action or notice of determination unless said action or notice of determination was taken by the city council.

A.     Determination that a project is or is not subject to environmental review.

B.     Determination that a project is exempt from environmental review.

C.    Approval of a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration.

D.    Certification of a final environmental impact report. (Ord. 1598)

Part VI TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 11.6.05 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
11.6.05.005 Applicability of Chapter.
This section provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this zoning code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this chapter conflict with definitions in other provisions of the municipal code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this zoning code. If a word is not defined in this chapter, or in other provisions of the zoning code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct. (Ord. 1598)

 

11.6.05.010 Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases.
As used in this zoning code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

 

“A” - Definitions

Abutting or Adjoining: having a common border, boundary or lot line, or separated only by a private street, alley or easement.

Access: the place, or way through which pedestrians and/or vehicles shall have a safe, adequate and usable ingress or egress to a property or use as required by this zoning code.

Access, Lateral: public access along the coast.

Access, Vertical: public access from the nearest public roadway to the shoreline.

Accessory Business Uses and Activities: See Section 11.4.05.010: Accessory Business Uses and Activities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Accessory Dwelling Unit: an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for 1 or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking (including a kitchen as defined herein), and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes efficiency units, as defined in Section 17958.1 of Health and Safety Code, and manufactured homes, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. See Section 11.4.05.115: Residential Uses—Accessory Dwelling Units in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Accessory Residential Structure: a building or other structure on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling that does not alter the single-family residential character of the dwelling or the site. Allowable accessory residential structures include:

     Enclosures such as arbors and gazebos;

     Structures such as workshops, studios, home offices;

     Detached garages and other storage buildings; and

     Private residential recreational facilities such as swimming pools and sport courts.

See also Section 11.4.05.100: Residential Accessory Uses, Structures, and Vehicle Parking in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Accessory Living Units: See Section 11.4.05.115: Residential Uses, Second Dwelling Units in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Accessory Structure (or Building): a building, part of a building, or structure that is detached from the principal structure or building on a site, and with a use that is incidental to the principal building. Examples include, but are not limited to, detached garages, detached decks, storage buildings, woodsheds, workshops and gazebos.

Accessory Use: a use that is customarily associated with, and is incidental and subordinate to, the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal use. See Chapter 11.4.85: Use Classifications and Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses for additional regulations.

Acre, Gross: a measure of total land area of any lot including future streets, parks and other land dedications.

Acre, Net: a measure of total land area of any lot not including future streets, parks and other land dedications.

Figure 11.6.05.010.A.1: Gross and Net Acre Areas



Active Fault: a fault that has had surface displacement within the Holocene epoch (approximately the last 11,000 years) that constitutes a potential hazard to structures located across it.

Adjacent: near or close to; sometimes contiguous; neighboring.

Adult Business: definitions of terms related to adult businesses are in Chapter 11.4.50: Adult Businesses.

Adult Day Care Center: commercial or non-profit facilities designed and approved to accommodate 7 or more adults for care and supervision, not including overnight lodging. These may be operated in conjunction with a public facility, school or religious facility, or as an independent land use.

Affordable Housing: housing units which are affordable to families with very low, low or moderate incomes.

Affordable Housing Incentives: regulatory concessions as specified in Government Code Section 65915(l) or any successor statute, to include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus. See Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus.

Affordable Housing Terms: see also Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus.

     Area Median Income Levels: income levels regularly updated and published by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, and found in Title 25, Section 6932 of the California Code of Regulations. Area median income levels are also available at www.hcd.ca.gov.

     Lower Income Households: households with incomes that do not exceed 80% of area median income (AMI), adjusted for family size and revised annually by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, and as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code or any successor statute. This includes “very low income households” and “extremely low income households,” as defined in Sections 50105 and 50106, respectively of the Health and Safety Code or any successor statutes.

     Moderate Income Households: households with incomes ranging from 80% to 120% of area median income (AMI), adjusted for family size and revised annually by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, and as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code or any successor statute.

     Very Low Income Households: households with incomes that do not exceed 50% of area median income (AMI), adjusted for family size and revised annually by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, and as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code or any successor statute.

Affordable Unit within a Residential Care Facility for the Elderly: a unit within a residential care facility for the elderly that is affordable to households with very low or low income as defined for Orange County by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development based on the Orange County median income levels.

Aggrieved Party (or Person): any person who alleges that their property will be injured by a decision of the director, Planning Commission, or other decision-making body involved in the enforcement of this zoning code.

Agent: a person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contact with city employees, committees, commissions, and the council, regarding matters regulated by this zoning code.

Alcoholic Beverage Sales: the retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. See Section 11.4.05.015: Alcoholic Beverage Establishments, Section 11.4.05.035: Automobile Service Stations, Section 11.4.05.070: Liquor Stores, and Section 11.4.05.120: Restaurant—Alcohol Sales, in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Alley: a public or private roadway that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage, and is not intended for general traffic circulation.

Allowed Use: a use of land identified by Part II: Base District Regulations, as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with land use permit and, where applicable, building permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this zoning code.

Alteration: any change, addition or modification that changes the exterior architectural appearance or materials of a structure or object. Alteration includes changes in exterior surfaces, changes in materials, additions, remodels, demolitions, and relocation of buildings or structures, but excludes ordinary maintenance and repairs. See: Structural Alteration.

Ambient Music: prerecorded, broadcast or satellite music played at the premises or building.

Ambulance Service: base/dispatch facilities where ambulance vehicles and crews stand by for emergency calls.

Amendment: a change in the wording, content or substance of the ordinance codified in this title or a change in the zone boundaries upon the zoning map, which is part of this title.

Antenna: any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception, or both, of electromagnetic radiation waves.

     Amateur Radio Antenna: any antenna used to receive or transmit radio signals on the amateur radio bandwidth, as designated by federal regulation.

     Satellite Antenna: any antenna used to receive or transmit radio or television signals from orbiting communication satellites.

Apartment: a room or suite of 2 or more rooms in a multiple dwelling occupied or suitable for occupancy as a dwelling unit for 1 family, but not including hotels or motels.

Apartment, Bachelor: one or more rooms with bath, without cooking facilities, in a multiple dwelling. A bachelor apartment constitutes a dwelling unit within the meaning of this chapter.

Apartment House: a building or a portion of a building designed for occupancy by 3 or more families living independently of each other and containing 3 or more dwelling units.

Applicant: any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or an entity or combination of entities which seeks city permits and approvals.

Approval: includes both approval and approval with conditions.

Arbor: a framework capable of supporting climbing plants, providing an archway under which a person may walk.

Area, Lot: See: Lot Area.

Articulation: horizontal and/or vertical variations in the plane of a building wall.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.A.2: Articulation



 

Assisted Living Facility: See: Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly. See Section 11.4.05.025: Assisted Living Facilities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

At One Location: all adjacent land owned or controlled by the applicant, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road or other public or private right-of-way, or separated only by other land of the applicant.

Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit: a new or existing second unit that occupies part of the floor area of the primary residence or, is attached to the primary residence by 1 or more common walls.

Attached Building or Structure: a building or structure that shares a common wall with another structure.

Attic: the area located between the uppermost plate and the roof or ridge of a structure.

Automobile Service Station: a retail business engaged primarily in selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide services which are incidental to fuel services. These secondary services may include vehicle engine maintenance and repair and towing service vehicles. Beverage, candy and food machines may be permitted at an automotive service station (See: Convenience Market). See Section 11.4.05.035: Automobile Service Stations in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Automobile Trailer: means a vehicle without motor power designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property.

Auto Parts Sales: stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation (See: Auto Repair and Maintenance). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under Auto Repair and Maintenance or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts.

Auto Repair and Maintenance: the repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories.

 

     Major Repair Work: repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles. These establishments provide towing, collision repair, other body work, and painting services.

     Service and Maintenance: minor facilities specialize in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., car washes, detailing services, muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, tire and battery sales and installation, etc.).

Does not include automobile parking (see Parking Facilities/Vehicle Storage), repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see Auto Sales and Rental, and Mobile Home, Boat, or RV Sales, or Automobile Service Station, which are separately defined).

Auto Sales and Rental: retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see Auto Parts Sales); bicycle and moped sales (see General Retail); mobile home sales (see Mobile Home, RV and Boat Sales); tire recapping establishments (see Auto Repair and Maintenance); or Automobile Service Stations, which are separately defined.

Automated Teller Machine: computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations. See Section 11.4.05.030: Automated Teller Machine (ATMs) in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Awning: an architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is typically constructed of fabric, metal or other comparable materials on a supporting framework which projects from and is supported by the exterior wall of a building.

Awning or Canopy Sign: see: Sign Types, Awning or Canopy Sign.

 

“B” - Definitions

Banks and Financial Services: financial institutions including:

     Banks and trust companies

     Credit agencies

     Holding (but not primarily operating) companies

     Lending and thrift institutions

     Securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers

     Security and commodity exchanges

     Vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies

     Other investment companies

See: Automated Teller Machine. Does not include check cashing stores, which are instead defined under Personal Services - Restricted.

Banner: see Sign Types - Banner Sign.

Bar: a business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May include entertainment (e.g., live music and/or dancing, comedy, etc.). May also include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery, and other beverage tasting facilities. Does not include adult entertainment businesses.

Base Density: the number of dwelling units permitted on a particular parcel of land, in conformance with the general plan and this zoning code.

Basement: an underground room or excavated space having 5 feet or more of interior height, finished or unfinished where the finished floor level directly above the space is not more than one foot above the top of curb as measured from the public right-of-way. A basement does not constitute a story.

Figure 11.6.05.010.B.1: Basement



 

Base Zoning District: the zoning district applied to a site by the zoning map, to which an overlay zoning district may also be applied.

Bay Window: for the purpose of Section 11.2.05.015.I, a bay window is a window or series of windows forming a bay within a room and projecting outward from a wall. The outward projection of a bay window must return back into the wall from which it projects between the floor and ceiling plates of the wall. The interior space within the bay window shall not be an extension of the interior finished floor and may only consist of a shelf, ledge, or other similar feature above the floor.

Bed and Breakfast Facility: the conversion of any residential dwelling or group of dwellings on the same parcel constructed prior to 1925, or a residential structure that has been reconstructed to replicate a previously existing residential structure that was constructed prior to 1925 on the same lot, providing no more than 6 short-term guestrooms or suites for any separate bed and breakfast structure and the service of breakfast meals and incidental food and beverage included in the daily room rate, and a minimum of one common room available for guest interaction.

Bedroom: any room located within a dwelling unit that is used primarily for sleeping purposes by its residents and that contains at least 70 square feet of floor area and contains a closet. Rooms designated as a “den,” “library,” “study,” “loft” or other extra room that satisfies this definition and is not a kitchen, living room, or bath will be considered a bedroom.

Best Management Practices: activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices include: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures; and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.

Block: all property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets or between a street and a railroad right-of-way, waterway, alley, terminus or dead-end street or city boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street which it intercepts.

Blockface: all property between 2 intersections that fronts upon a street or abuts a public right-of-way.

Figure 11.6.05.010.B.2: Blockface



 

Board and Care Home: see Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly.

Boarding House: see Rooming and Boarding House.

Building: any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, designed for the shelter or housing of any person, animal or property.

Building Envelope: the volume of space within which a building or structure is permitted to be built on a lot, defined by minimum setbacks, maximum height limits, and required daylight planes.

Building Height: the vertical distance measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the building site covered by the building to the highest point of the roof peak. See: Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement.

Building, Main: the principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted; there may be more than one main building on a lot or building site.

Building Material Stores: retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all those stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in Warehouses, Wholesaling and Distribution. Hardware stores are listed in the definition of General Retail, even if they sell some building materials.

Building-Mounted Telecommunications Facility: a facility constructed in 2 general forms, roof mounted, in which an antenna is placed on or above the roof, and façade-mounted, in which an antenna is mounted on the side of a building. Building-mounted facilities can be located on or inside various structures such as building roof or eave trim, church steeples, or other innovative locations.

Building Official: the City of Seal Beach building official; charged with the administration and enforcement of city regulations pertaining to buildings and structures.

Building Permit: see the City of Seal Beach Municipal Code, Chapter 9.60: Building Code.

Building Site: a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building and accessory buildings, or by a dwelling group and its accessory building, together with such open spaces as are required by the terms of this zoning code and having its principal frontage on a street, road or highway.

Bulk: a term used to designate the overall size and mutual relationship of buildings and other structures, as to size, height, coverage, shape, location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center of streets, to other walls of the same building, and to other buildings or structures; and to all open spaces relating to the building or structure.

Business or Commerce: the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management or maintenance of buildings, offices or recreational enterprises.

Business Support Services: an establishment within a building that is oriented toward providing services to other businesses, although it may also serve the general public. Examples of these services include:

     Blueprinting

     Complete-related services (rental, repair)

     Copying printing services

     Film processing and photofinishing (retail)

     Mailing and mail box services

     Outdoor advertising services

     Protective services (other than office related)

     Security systems services

     Soils and other materials testing laboratories

 

“C” - Definitions

California Building Code: the California Building Code, as currently adopted by the city, including all local amendments.

California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC): the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of alcoholic beverage sales in the state.

California Environmental Quality Act: State law, pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. or any successor statute, which requires public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action before a decision.

California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC): the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the state.

Candela: a measure of light intensity. A candela is equal to 1/60 of the luminous intensity per square centimeter of a blackbody radiating at the temperature of solidification of platinum (2.046 degrees Kelvin).

Canopy: a roofed shelter projecting over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window, or similar area that may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles, or braces extending from the ground. See: Sign Types, Awning or Canopy Sign.

Car Wash: permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes are fund-raising activities, typically conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day. See Section 11.5.25.015: Temporary Uses.

Carport: an accessory building with a minimum dimension of 9 by 18 feet, permanently open on at least 2 sides and maintained for the storage of automobiles or other motor vehicles.

Categorical Exclusion Area: a geographic area of the City of Seal Beach, within the coastal zone, where coastal development permits are not required as delineated on California Coastal Commission Coastal Zone Maps 143 - Los Alamitos and 144 - Seal Beach, on file with the Department of Development Services.

Catering: a business that prepares food for serving on the premises of a client.

CEQA: see California Environmental Quality Act.

Cellar: that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly below grade.

Channel Letter: see Sign, Channel Letter.

Channel Logo: see Sign, Channel Logo.

Child Day Care Facilities: facilities that provide non-medical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services. See Section 11.4.05.045: Child Day Care Facilities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

     Child Day Care Center: a commercial or non-profit child day care facility designed and approved to accommodate 15 or more children. Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or religious facility, or as an independent land use.

     Family Day Care Home: as provided by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care home or a small family day care home.

     Large Family Day Care Home: as provided by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a family day care home that provides family day care for 7 to 14 children, inclusive, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home.

     Small Family Day Care Home: as provided by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a family day care home that provides family day care for 8 or fewer children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home.

Church: an establishment, the principal purpose of which is religious worship, including churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, etc., and for which the principal structure contains the primary place of worship, and including accessory uses in the main structure or in separate buildings, including Sunday school rooms, assembly rooms, kitchen, library room and a one-family dwelling unit, but excluding day care nurseries and facilities for residence of or training of religious orders. See: Religious Facilities.

City: the City of Seal Beach, California.

City Council: the City of Seal Beach City Council, referred to in this zoning code as the “council.”

City Engineer: the City of Seal Beach City Engineer.

City Limits: the legal boundaries of the City of Seal Beach, California.

Clubs, Lodges, and Fraternal Organizations: permanent, headquarters type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for:

     Business associations

     Civic, social and fraternal organizations

     Labor unions and similar organizations

     Political organizations

     Professional membership organizations

     Other membership organizations

Coastal Development Permit: a discretionary entitlement which is required of development in specified areas of the coastal zone to ensure that such development is consistent with the City of Seal Beach Local Coastal Program.

Coastal Zone: land and water areas of the City of Seal Beach, as described in Public Resources Code Section 30170 and amendments thereto, and as delineated on California Coastal Commission Coastal Zone Maps 143 - Los Alamitos and 144 - Seal Beach, on file with the department of development services.

Coffee Roasting and Packaging - Retail: retail stores selling coffee in roasted bean and ground form, with the roasting of raw beans occurring on the premises.

Commercial District or Zone: any of the commercial zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Commercial Land Use: land and/or a structure used for the purpose of commerce. These uses include retail trade, offices, services, and other similar uses.

Commission: the planning commission of the City of Seal Beach, California. Also referred to as the “planning commission.”

Common Interest Development: a development that is created whenever a separate interest coupled with an interest in the common area or membership in the association is, or has been, conveyed. It includes a condominium, community apartment project, planned development, or stock cooperative, in compliance with Civil Code Section 1351. See Chapter 11.4.75: Common Interest Developments.

Community Centers: multi-purpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for activities including meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc.

Community Garden: a site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, flowers, which is shared and maintained by nearby residents.

Conditional Use Permit: a discretionary zoning approval of the planning commission, the procedures for which are established by Chapter 11.5.20, Development Permits.

Condominium: as defined by California Civil Code Section 1315, a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. See also Chapter 11.4.80: Condominium Conversions.

Conforming Building:

     In the residential “R” zones, a conforming building is one which fully meets the requirements of the State Housing Act and the California Building Code as they pertain to residential buildings and which building fully conforms to the requirements of this chapter with respect to the district and zone in which it is located; and

     In the commercial “C” and manufacturing “M” zones, a conforming building is one which fully conforms to the structural design, building materials and their assembly as prescribed for commercial or industrial buildings by the California Building Code and which building fully conforms to the requirements of this chapter with respect to the district and zone in which it is located.

Construction Cost: the total cost required to construct, rebuild, repair, remodel or make an addition to an existing building, including all permanent work and permanent equipment, excluding landscaping.

Convalescent Hospital: see Skilled Nursing Facility.

Convenience Market: any accessory use to automobile service station for any retail sales of food, beverages and small convenience items primarily for off-premises consumption and typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation and a relatively small building. Arcade machines are prohibited in a convenience market. See Section 11.4.05.035: Automobile Service Stations in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Court: any portion of the interior of a lot or building site which is wholly or partially surrounded by buildings and which is not a required yard or open space.

Courtyard: an extent of open ground enclosed by walls and adjacent residential building.

Covenant: a formal binding agreement for the performance of some action.

Covered Patio: a roofed structure located between a dwelling and a side or rear property line that shelters an outdoor area. These structures are either attached to or detached from a primary dwelling on the site.

Coverage, Lot: see Lot Coverage.

Cutoff Light: a fixture with elements such as shields, reflectors, or reflector panels which direct and cutoff the light at a cutoff angle that is not more than 90 degrees. Typically this type of fixture conceals the light source, thus reducing glare and spillover of light.

Figure 11.6.05.010.C.1: Light Fixtures—No Cutoff and 90 Degree Cutoff



 

“D” - Definitions

Daylight Plane: an inclined plane, beginning at a stated height above grade at a property line or setback line and extending into the site at a stated upward angle to the horizontal, and which limits the height or horizontal extent of structures.

Figure 11.6.05.010.D.1: Daylight Plane and Building Envelope



 

Deck: an open, unroofed porch or platform, either freestanding or attached to a building that is supported above grade.

Demolition: the removal of any structure, the outside wall or walls of any building; or the removal or stripping of the exterior lathing or siding; and/or the removal of the exterior siding of the existing structure in conjunction with any proposed addition or enlargement.

Density: the number of housing units per acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses.

Density Bonus: a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density provided in Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus.

Department: the Seal Beach Department of Development Services, referred to in this zoning code as the department.

Department Store: a retail store carrying a wide range of merchandise, typically including clothing, household goods, appliances, etc. See Warehouse Retail.

Detached: any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure.

Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit: a new or existing structure that is located on the property such that the unit does not share any walls with the primary residence and the distance between nearest point of any portion of the unit and the primary residence is 6 feet or more.

Developer: any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or an entity or combination of entities that seeks city permits and approvals for development.

Development: any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, the construction or relocation of buildings or other structures on a lot, mining, dredging, filling, grading, landscaping, paving, excavation, parking, fences, pools, signs or temporary uses.

Development Agreement: a contract between the city and an applicant for a project, in compliance with Chapter 11.5.15: Legislative Actions of this zoning code and Government Code Sections 65864, et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations, and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to city policies, rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the city may be assured that the applicant will provide infrastructure and/or pay fees required by a new project.

Director: the director of community development of the City of Seal Beach, or the designee thereof.

Disabled: persons affected by a long-duration physical impairment such that their mobility has been reduced for an indeterminate length of time and whose ability to live independently could be improved by suitable housing conditions.

District: a portion of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title.

District I: a portion of the city lying on the southwesterly side (ocean side) of Pacific Coast Highway between the northwesterly side of the United States Naval Weapons Station and the San Gabriel River, excepting that area which lies northerly of Marina Dive and Fifth Street to the San Gabriel River.

District II: a portion of the city consists of those lands on the southwesterly side (ocean side) of Pacific Coast Highway not in District I.

District VI: a portion of the city consisting of all lands as described in Annexation No. 66-1 (Rossmoor area).

Domestic Animals: see Household Pets.

Dormer: a window set vertically in a structure projecting through a sloping roof.

Drive-In Restaurant: see Restaurant, Drive-In. See Section 11.4.05.050: Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Driveway: an area of pavement or other surfacing that provides vehicle access from a public right-of-way to a parking area or garage.

Drive-Through: a retail or service facility (for example, restaurant, pharmacy, bank, dry cleaning pick-up store, etc.) where products or services are provided to motorists who remain in their vehicles. See Section 11.4.05.050: Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Duplex: a residential structure under single ownership containing 2 dwellings.

Dwelling, Dwelling Unit, or Housing Unit: a room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis.

Dwelling - One-Bedroom Unit: means a separate living space that contains a living room, one bedroom, and full kitchen and bathroom facilities.

Dwelling - Two-Bedroom Unit: a separate living space that contains a living room, 2 bedrooms, and full kitchen and bathroom facilities.

 

“E” - Definitions

Easement: a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

Eave Line: the lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall. For a non-flat roof that does not overhang the wall, the eave line shall be the highest point of the walls.

Educational Institution: elementary school, middle school, high school, college or university or other school giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Education Code of the state.

Efficiency Unit: a separate living space with a minimum floor area of 150 square feet which contains partial kitchen or bathroom facilities.

EIR: an environmental impact report as required under the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 et. seq. or any successor statute.

Electronics, Equipment, and Appliance Manufacturing: establishments engaged in manufacturing machinery, apparatus, and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:

     Appliances such as stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines;

     Aviation instruments;

     Computers, computer components, and peripherals;

     Electrical transmission and distribution equipment;

     Electronic components and accessories, and semiconductors, integrated circuits, related devices;

     Electronic instruments, components and equipment such as calculators and computers;

     Electrical welding apparatus;

     Lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting;

     Industrial apparatus;

     Industrial controls;

     Instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, associated sensors and accessories;

     Miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies such as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electro-medical and electrotherapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines;

     Motors and generators;

     Optical instruments and lenses;

     Photographic equipment and supplies;

     Pre recorded magnetic tape;

     Radio and television receiving equipment such as television and radio sets, phonograph records;

     Surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment, and supplies;

     Surveying and drafting instruments;

     Telephone and telegraph apparatus;

     Transformers, switch gear and switchboards; and

     Watches and clocks.

Emergency: a sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential public services.

Emergency Shelter: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that limits occupancy by homeless persons to 6 months or less and that does not deny emergency shelter due to a person’s inability to pay.

Entertainment: an event or series of events or activities, or a business or use, occurring as incidental of another event, activity, business, or use, to which the public is invited to watch, listen or participate (excluding dancing) or is conducted for the purpose of holding the attention of, gaining the attention of or diverting or amusing guests or patrons, including, but not limited to, live music, singing, (including, but not limited to, karaoke), recorded music played by a disc jockey (DJ), ambient music, amplified music or unamplified music, or other performance, whether or not said activities are accompanied by music or rhythm, which is occurring, conducted or taking place inside or outside a building and attended by members of the public.

Entertainment Café: those premises on which or in connection with which, there is entertainment consisting of instrumental entertainment by more than one musician, singing, floor show, vaudeville, cabaret or similar entertainment, or on which, or in connection with which, there is dancing by the patrons, guests or customers of the cafe, or both such entertainment and dancing.

Environment: the physical conditions which exist within the area which will be affected by a proposed project including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise, and objects of historical or aesthetic significance. The area involved shall be the area in which significant effects would occur either directly or indirectly as a result of the project. The “environment” includes both natural and man-made conditions.

Environmental Documents: initial studies, negative declarations, draft and final EIRs, documents prepared as substitutes for EIRs and negative declarations under the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 et. seq. or any successor statute. See Chapter 11.5.35: Environmental Review.

Environmental Impact Report: see EIR.

Environmentally Sensitive Habitat: a type of sensitive resource area where plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and development. This term includes, but is not limited to, wetlands, riparian vegetation, and terrestrial habitats, as mapped in the general plan or an adopted specific plan.

Equipment Sales and Rental: retail and service establishments which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for sale and/or rental. Construction equipment rental is separately defined.

Erected: the construction of any building or structure or the structural alteration of a building or structure, the result of which would be to change the exterior walls or roof or to increase the square foot floor area of the interior of the building or structure.

Existing Grade: see Grade-Related Terms, Natural Grade and Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement.

Extended Hour Business: any business that is open to the public between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. See Section 11.4.05.055: Extended Hour Businesses in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

 

“F” - Definitions

Family: one or more persons living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. Members of a “family” need not be related by blood but are distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house.

Fast Food: a restaurant that serves prepared food to customers from an ordering counter for on- or off-premise consumption.

Fault Trace: the line formed by the intersection of a fault and the earth’s surface that is the representation of a fault as depicted on a map, including maps of earthquake fault zones.

Feasible: capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

Fee Parking: the parking and storage of vehicles on a fee basis, but does not include off-street parking provided gratis to customers, such as is required elsewhere in this title.

Fence: any structural device forming a physical barrier or boundary by means of hedge, wood, mesh, metal, chain, brick, stake, plastic or other similar materials.

 

Financial Guarantee: cash deposits, payments, surety bonds, or other irrevocable agreements that individually or collectively guarantee the construction of structural measures.

Finial: a small crowning ornament or detail, such as a decorative knob, pinnacle, or fleur-de-lis.

First Public Roadway: the nearest through public access route (open to vehicular traffic) paralleling the ocean shoreline, which forms a continuous linkage from the northernmost to southernmost limits of the City of Seal Beach shoreline. The first public roadway is designated on California Coastal Commission Coastal Zone Maps 143 - Los Alamitos and 144 - Seal Beach, on file with the Department of Development Services.

Flag: see Sign Types - Flag.

 

 

Flag Lot: see Lot Types - Flag Lot.

Floor: a surface that is horizontal or nearly so, located within the interior of a structure which is suitable for walking or standing upon.

Floor Area, Gross: the area in square feet of all floors within a building, measured from the outside surfaces of the exterior walls.

Floor Area, Net: the floor area within the walls of a building used for service to the public or tenants, but not including garages or other covered parking, or areas for storage, mechanical equipment, restrooms, and major pedestrian movement, such as enclosed malls, stairways, or major hallways, as defined by the California Building Code.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR): the ratio of floor area to total lot area. FAR restrictions are used to limit the maximum floor area allowed on a site (including all structures on the site). The maximum floor area of all structures (measured from exterior wall to exterior wall) permitted on a site (excluding garages or other covered parking in a residential zone) shall be determined by multiplying the floor area ratio (FAR) by the total net area of the site (FAR x net site area = maximum allowable floor area).

Figure 11.6.05.010.F.1: Floor Area Ratio



 

Food and Beverage Products Manufacturing: manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for human consumption, and certain related products. Includes:

     Bakeries;

     Bottling plants;

     Breweries;

     Candy, sugar and confectionery products manufacturing;

     Catering services separate from stores or restaurants;

     Coffee roasting;

     Dairy products manufacturing;

     Fats and oil product manufacturing;

     Fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing;

     Grain mill products and by products;

     Meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, byproduct processing;

     Soft drink production; and

     Miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products.

May include tasting and accessory retail sales of food and beverages produced on site. A tasting facility separate from the manufacturing facility is included under the definition of “Bar” if alcoholic beverages are tasted, and under “Restaurant” if beverages are non-alcoholic.

Does not include: bakeries which sell all products on-site, which are included in the definition of “General Retail;” or beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant (see “Bars”).

Footprint, Building: floor area of a structure at the ground level, including areas under higher levels, but excluding decks, open stair landings, balconies and other unroofed structures less than 6 feet tall.

Freestanding Sign: see Sign Types, Freestanding Sign.

Frontage, Street or Frontage, Building: the side of a lot or building site facing a street.

Furniture, Furnishings and Appliance Stores: stores engaged primarily in selling the following products and related services, including incidental repair services:

     Computer and computer equipment

     Draperies

     Floor coverings

     Furniture

     Glass and chinaware

     Home appliances

     Home furnishings

     Home sound systems

     Interior decorating materials and services

     Large musical instruments

     Lawn furniture

     Movable spas and hot tub

     Office furniture

     Other household electrical and gas appliances

     Outdoor furniture

     Refrigerators

     Stoves

     Televisions

“G” - Definitions

Gable Roof: see Roof Types.

Gambrel Roof: see Roof Types.

Garage or Carport: parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size and use of the parking space complies with the provisions of Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading.

     A garage is a roofed structure with a door, enclosed on at least 3 sides, which may be either attached to, or detached from a primary structure on the site and to be used for the parking of vehicles.

     A carport is a roofed structure enclosed on no more than 2 sides that may be either attached to, or detached from a primary structure on the site and to be used for the parking of vehicles.

Garage, Public: a building other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipment of automobiles or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.

Garage Sale: any sale held for the purpose of selling, trading or otherwise disposing of household furnishings, personal goods or other tangible properties of a resident of the premises on which the sale is conducted in a residential zone.

Gas Station: see Automobile Service Station.

General Plan: the City of Seal Beach General Plan, including all its elements and all amendments to the general plan, as adopted by the city council under the provisions of Government Code Section 65300 et seq., and referred to in this zoning code as the general plan.

General Retail: stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. Examples of these stores and lines of merchandise include:

     Antique stores

     Art galleries, retail

     Art supplies, including framing services

     Artisan shops

     Auto parts (not including installation services)

     Bakery (all production in support of on-site sales)

     Bicycles and mopeds

     Books, magazines, and newspapers

     Cameras and photographic supplies

     Clothing, shoes, and accessories

     Collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps, etc.)

     Department stores

     Drug stores and pharmacies

     Dry goods

     Fabrics and sewing supplies

     Florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only - outdoor sales are “Plant Nurseries”)

     Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment

     Gift and souvenir shops

     Hardware

     Hobby materials

     Jewelry

     Luggage and leather goods

     Musical instruments, parts, and accessories

     Orthopedic supplies

     Pet stores

     Religious goods

     Small wares

     Specialty shops

     Sporting goods and equipment

     Stationery

     Toys and games

     Variety stores

Grade: the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground at the center of all walls of a building.

Grade-Related Terms: see also Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement.

     Average Grade: a horizontal line approximating the ground elevation through each building on a site used for calculating the exterior volume of buildings. Average grade is calculated separately for each building.

     Natural Grade: the grade of a building site prior to grading, filling, or other site alterations for a project. Natural grade may also be referred to as existing grade.

     Finished Grade: the final grade of a building site as shown on the survey at the time of issuance of a building permit or in the case of a subdivision, the approved grade shown on the as-built grading plan of the subdivision.

     Grading: excavating, filling, leveling or smoothing or combination thereof, but not including temporary stock piles of a duration of 30 days or less.

     Street Grade: the top of the curb or the top of the edge of the pavement or traveled way where no curb exists.

Greenhouse: a transparent or translucent glazed structure devoted to the protection and growth of plants.

Grocery Store: a retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store.

Gross Floor Area: see Floor Area, Gross.

Group Home: a dwelling unit licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local health/welfare agency which provides 24-hour non-medical care of unrelated persons who are in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family-like environment. Includes: children’s homes; orphanages; rehabilitation centers; self help group homes. Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of Medical Services - Extended Care.

 

“H” - Definitions

Handcraft Industries: small-scale establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products.

Hazardous Waste: any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. (Health and Safety Code Section 25117).

Hazardous Waste Facility: see Chapter 11.4.60: Hazardous Waste Facilities.

Health and Fitness Facilities: fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic clubs including any of the following: sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other sports activities. Does not include adult entertainment businesses.

Hedge: shrubs and/or trees planted to create a physical and/or visual barrier.

Height: see Building Height.

Hip Roof: see Roof Types.

Hollywood Driveway: two paved wheel tracks each between 2.5 and 3.5 feet wide, separated by a planted strip at least 3 feet wide.

Home Improvement Sales and Services: retail sales, rental, and related services of hardware, plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning, building supplies, lumber, tools and equipment, plants and garden products, rocks and soils, patio furniture, swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, lighting fixtures, kitchen and bathroom fixtures and cabinets, paint, carpeting, floor coverings, or wallpaper. This use classification does not include hardware stores with less than 10,000 square feet of area or plant nurseries.

Home Occupation: any occupation conducted by a resident, entirely within a dwelling, where the use is accessory to the residential use of the structure, and does not change the residential character of the neighborhood. See Section 11.4.05.060: Home Occupations in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Hotel or Motel: facilities with guest rooms or suites, provided with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less than 30 days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway, and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic/fitness facilities, and accessory retail uses.

Household: one or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption, sharing a dwelling unit in a living arrangement usually characterized by sharing living expenses, such as rent or mortgage payments, food costs and utilities, as well as maintaining a single lease or rental agreement for all members of the household and other similar characteristics indicative of a single household.

Household Pets: see Section 11.4.05.020: Animal Keeping in Chapter 4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Housing Costs: the monthly mortgage principal and interest, property taxes, homeowners insurance, and condominium fees, where applicable, for ownership units; and the monthly rent for rental units.

HUD: the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor.

 

“I” - Definitions

Illegal Building or Use: any use of land or building that does not have the currently required permits and was originally constructed and/or established without permits required for the use at the time it was brought into existence.

Impervious Surface: any paved, hardened or structural surface which does not allow for complete on-site infiltration of precipitation. Such surfaces include, but are not limited to, buildings, concrete or asphalt driveways, streets, concrete or asphalt parking lots, swimming pools, and tennis courts.

Income Eligibility: for the purposes of Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus, the gross annual household income considering household size and number of dependents, income of all wage earners, elderly or disabled household members and all other sources of household income.

Indoor Amusement and Entertainment Facilities: establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including: bowling alleys; coin-operated amusement arcades; dance halls, clubs and ballrooms; electronic game arcades; ice skating and roller skating; pool and billiard rooms as primary uses.

This use does not include adult entertainment businesses. Four or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment, or premises where 50% or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade as described above, 3 or fewer machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site.

Industrial District or Zone: any of the industrial zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Industrial Park: a development in which all buildings are constructed under one architectural style, the properties developed under a master plan, and roadways, landscaping, parking and signing are designed to present a harmonious visual and functional image.

In-lieu Fees: a cash payment required as a substitute for a dedication and/or improvement of land by an owner or developer of property.

Institution: an establishment maintained and operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for the purpose of providing charitable, social, educational or similar services to the public, groups or individuals.

Intensification of Use: the impacts a particular use or the use in combination with other uses has on its surroundings or on its demand for services and natural resources. Measures of intensity include but are not limited to requirements for water, gas, electricity, or public services; number of automobile trips generated by a use; parking demand required by Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use; number of employees on a site; hours of operation; the amount of noise, light or glare generated; the number of persons attracted to the site, or, in eating establishments, the number of seats.

 

“J” - Definitions

No specialized terms beginning with the letter “J” are used at this time.

 

“K” - Definitions

Kennel: a place where 5 or more adult dogs or cats or any combination thereof are kept whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or cat is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of 4 months.

Key Lot: see Lot Types - Key Lot.

Kiosk: a small light structure with one or more open sides used typically as a newsstand or for other small item retail sales. See Section 11.4.05.065: Kiosks in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Kitchen: a room or portion thereof containing permanent facilities designed and used for food preparation, cooking, eating and dish washing. A kitchen shall include all of the following: a sink with hot and cold running water; a range or stove-top and an oven; at a minimum, an apartment-sized refrigerator; and built-in dish and utensil storage spaces. In addition to the aforementioned improvements, a kitchen may also include any of the following: microwave, convection oven, hot plate or automatic dish washer.

 

“L” - Definitions

Landscaping: Landscaping shall consist of living plant material including, but not limited to, grass, turf, groundcover, flowers, vines, gardens, trees, shrubs, other similar plant materials and synthetic turf as approved by the director of development services; decorative outdoor elements including pools, ponds, fountains, water features, decorated surfaces of rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material; and other design features commonly used in landscaping, but not including walkways, driveways, patios, and other similar features that use concrete or asphalt. Plants on rooftops, porches, or in boxes attached to buildings shall not be considered landscaping.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.1: Landscaping: Perimeter/Interior



Large Family Day Care Home: see Child Day Care Facilities.

Lateral Access: an area of land providing public access along the shoreline paralleling the water’s edge. Lateral access ways are to be used for public pass and re-pass, passive recreational use or as otherwise designated in the Seal Beach Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan.

Libraries, Museums, Galleries: public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums, arboretums, art galleries and exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, and planetariums, with no retail sales activities other than an accessory gift/book shop and accessory food sales. Does not include retail art galleries where artworks on display may be purchased by patrons, which are instead included under the definition of “General Retail.”

Light Trespass: light projected onto a property from a light source located on a different property.

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.2: Light Trespass



 

Liquor Store: a retail establishment primarily engaged in selling beer, wine, and other alcoholic beverages, which may specialize in a particular type of alcoholic beverage (e.g., wine shops). See Section 11.4.05.070: Liquor Stores in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Living Room: the principal room in a dwelling unit designed for general living purposes rather than for sleeping.

Loading Space: see Off-street Loading.

Local Coastal Program (LCP): the Land Use Plan (LUP) and implementing ordinances prepared by Seal Beach pursuant to the California Coastal Act of 1976, Public Resources Code Section 30000 et seq.

Log: means an established trademark or symbol identifying a product or use.

 

Lot: a recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances, including this zoning code.

Lot Area: the net area of a lot expressed in terms of acres or square feet, exclusive of any public or private street easements.

Lot Coverage: the ratio of the footprint of all principal and accessory structures on a lot to the lot area.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.3: Lot Coverage



 

Lot Depth and Lot Width:

     Lot Depth: the average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the 2 side lot lines if there is no rear line. See Figure 11.6.05.010.L.4: Lot Lines and Lot Features. See also Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement.

     Lot Width: the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. See Figure 11.6.05.010.L.4: Lot Lines and Lot Features. See also Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement.

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.4: Lot Lines and Lot Features



 

Lot Frontage: the portion of a lot that fronts on or adjoins a street.

Lot Line: a line separating the frontage from a street; the side from a street or adjoining property; the rear from an alley or street or adjoining property.

Lot Line Types: see Figure 11.6.05.010.L.4: Lot Lines and Lot Features, above.

     Front Lot Line: on an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line adjacent to the street with the shortest frontage regardless of which street is used for vehicle or pedestrian access. If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the director. On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.

     Interior Lot Line: a lot line not adjacent to a street.

     Rear Lot Line: the lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, will be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of establishing setbacks and measuring rear yard depth.

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.5: Irregular Lots: Determining Rear Lot Line



 

     Side Lot Line: any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

     Street Side Lot Line: on a corner lot, the property line with the longest street frontage. If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the street side lot line shall be determined by the director.

     Zero Lot Line: the location of a building on a lot in a manner that one or more building edges rest directly on a lot line.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.6: Zero Lot Line Units



Lot of Record: a lot that is designated upon a map showing the lot, block and tract as indicated on a final map, as such map is filed in the county recorder’s office, or as a lot shown on a recorded record of survey map.

Lot Types: see Figure 11.6.05.010.L.7: Lot Types.

     Corner Lot: a lot with 2 or more adjacent sides that face a street or public right-of-way.

     Cul-de-sac Lot: a lot located on the curving portion of a cul-de-sac street.

     Flag Lot: a lot that does not meet minimum lot width requirements, where access to the public roadway is limited to a narrow private right-of-way.

     Interior Lot: a lot with only one front lot line, not located on a street corner and lacking a side lot line adjacent to a street.

     Irregular Lot: a nonrectangular parcel or lot with its lot width less than one-fourth its depth.

     Key Lot: the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot and not separated therefrom by an alley.

     Regular Lot: a rectangular or nearly rectangular shaped parcel with lot width not less than one-fourth its depth.

     Reverse Corner Lot: a corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

     Substandard Lot: a lot which does not meet the minimum requirements for lot size, lot width, and/or lot depth.

     Through Lot: a lot which has 2 or more lot frontages which do not intersect to form a corner lot.

     Zero Lot: a lot which has a building on a lot in a manner that one or more building edges rest directly on a lot line. See Figure 11.6.05.010.L.6: Zero Lot Line Units.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.L.7: Lot Types



 

“M” - Definitions

Maintenance and Non-Structural Repair: the repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, roof or plumbing that restores the character, scope, size or design of a structure to its previously existing, authorized and undamaged condition, and does not enlarge or extend the structure or include changes to any structural member.

Mansard Roof: see Roof Types.

Manufactured Home: a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. “Manufactured home” shall also include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements if the manufacturer of the structure complies with the statutory certification requirements for manufactured homes and the standards set forth for manufactured homes in the Health and Safety Code. A manufactured home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of “Single-Family Dwellings.” See also Section 11.4.05.075: Manufactured Housing in Chapter 4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Map Act: see Subdivision Map Act.

Massage Establishment: any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, or carries on, or so permits, the commercial practice of massage. Also see Chapter 5.45: Massage and Massage Establishments.

Master Fee Schedule: the schedule of all general and special fees and charges, established by resolution of the city council pursuant to Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.10: Implementation of the Seal Beach Municipal Code.

Mechanical Equipment: machinery, condensers, coolers and other similar equipment used in conjunction with swimming pools, air conditioning systems and heating systems, but specifically excludes antennae, flues, chimneys, vents and hoods.

Medical Services - Clinic: a facility other than a hospital where medical, dental, mental health, surgical and other personal health care services are provided on an outpatient basis, and that accommodates multiple licensed primary medical practitioners (i.e., doctors) and specialties, or 4 or more primary practitioners in a single specialty. Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are instead included under “Offices.”

Medical Services - Extended Care: residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a primary use with in patient beds, such as: board and care homes; convalescent and rest homes; extended care facilities; skilled nursing facilities. Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are included under “Residential Care Home.”

Medical Services - Hospital: hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, and accessory retail uses (see the separate definition of “Accessory Business Uses and Activities”).

Medical Services - Office: a facility other than a hospital where medical, dental, mental health, surgical and other personal health care services are provided on an outpatient basis, and that accommodates no more than 3 licensed primary practitioners (for example, chiropractors, medical doctors, etc.). See: Medical Services - Laboratories: medical and dental laboratories.

Microbrewery: a facility where beer brewed on the premises is sold for on-site consumption. See: Bar.

Military District or Zone: the military zoning district established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Minor Use Permit: a discretionary zoning approval of the planning commission, the procedures for which are established by Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

Mixed-Use Project: a project that combines both commercial (retail and/or office) and residential uses, where the residential component is typically located above the commercial.

Mobile Home, Boat, or RV Sales: retail establishments selling both mobile home dwelling units, and/or various vehicles and watercraft for recreational uses. Includes the sales of boats, campers and camper shells, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, and travel trailers.

Mobile Home Park, Trailer Park, Trailer Court, or Public Camp: any area or tract of land used or designated to accommodate 2 or more automobile trailers and/or recreational vehicles including trailer camp as defined by law.

Monitoring: inspection activities conducted by the city or private consultant, to ascertain whether mitigation measures identified in the environmental document for the project have been implemented or complied with by the applicant in development of the project.

Monopole: a facility that consists of a single pole structure erected on the ground to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances.

Monument Sign: see Sign Types - Monument Sign.

Multifamily Dwellings: a building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for 3 or more families living independently of each other. Includes: triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with 3 or 4 dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure) and apartments (5 or more units under one ownership in a single building); townhouse development (3 or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit); and senior citizen multifamily housing; see Common Interest Development.

Multi-Tenant: a building or site that is occupied by 2 or more different land uses or businesses.

 

“N” - Definitions

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permits: general, group, and individual storm water discharge permits that regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations in compliance with the Clean Water Act. These permits include general construction activity permits, general industrial activity permits, and similar permits adopted by the Santa Ana Region of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, and the State Water Resources Control Board.

Negative Declaration: a statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

Negative Space: see Sign, Negative Space.

Nonconforming Building or Structure: an existing building or structure that was lawfully designed, erected, or structurally altered prior to the adoption of this code but which, under this zoning code does not conform with the currently applicable zoning requirements prescribed for the district in which it is located. See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots.

Nonconforming Parcel: a parcel that was legally created prior to the adoption of this zoning code and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., access, area or width requirements, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots.

Nonconforming Sign: see Sign Types, Nonconforming Sign.

Nonconforming Use: a use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) or land that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption of this zoning code and which does not conform to current Code provisions governing allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located. See Chapter 11.4.40: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots.

Nursing Home: see Skilled Nursing Facility.

 

“O” - Definitions

Occupancy: all or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant.

Occupancy, Change In: a discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution therefor of a use of a different kind or class.

Office: this zoning code distinguishes between the following types of offices. These do not include medical offices (see Medical Services - Clinic, and Medical Services - Office.)

     Accessory: office facilities that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use.

     Business/Service: establishments providing direct services to consumers or clients, typically with higher client volumes than experienced by the other types of offices listed. Examples of these uses include:

o      Employment agencies

o      Insurance agent offices

o      Real estate office

o      Social service organizations

o      Travel agencies

o      Utility company offices, etc.

This use does not include “Banks and Financial Services,” which are separately defined.

     Government: administrative, clerical, or public contact and/or service offices of a local, state, or federal government agency or service facilities. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing distribution centers.

     Processing: office-type facilities characterized by high employee densities, and occupied by businesses engaged in information processing, and other computer-dependent and/or telecommunications-based activities. Examples of these uses include:

o      Airline, lodging chain, and rental car company reservation centers

o      Computer software and hardware design and development

o      Consumer credit reporting

o      Data processing services

o      Health management organization (HMO) offices where no medical services are provided

o      Insurance claim processing

o      Mail order and electronic commerce transaction processing

o      Telemarketing

     Professional: office-type facilities occupied by businesses that provide professional services and/or engaged in the production of intellectual property. Examples of these uses include:

o      Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services

o      Advertising agencies

o      Attorneys

o      Commercial art and design services

o      Construction/contractors (office facilities only)

o      Counseling services

o      Court reporting services

o      Detective agencies and similar services

o      Design services including architecture, engineering, landscape architecture, urban planning

o      Education, scientific, and research organizations

o      Financial management and investment counseling

o      Literary and talent agencies

o      Management and public relations services

o      Media postproduction services

o      News services

o      Photographers and photography studios

o      Psychologists

o      Secretarial, stenographic, word processing, and temporary clerical employee services

o      Security and commodity brokers

o      Writers and artists offices

     Temporary: a mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary offices may include:

o      Construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard;

o      A temporary on-site real estate office for a development project; or

o      A temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.

     Temporary Real Estate: the temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales office for the units on the same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use.

Office-Supporting Retail: a retail store that carries one or more types of merchandise that will typically be of frequent interest to and/or needed by the various businesses listed under the definition of “Office,” and/or the employees of those businesses. Examples of these types of merchandise include:

     Books

     Computer equipment

     Flowers

     Newspapers and magazines

     Office supplies, stationery

     Photographic supplies and cameras

Off-site: an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, but is not located on the same site as the primary use.

Off-Street Loading: a site or portion of a site, including loading berths, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas, devoted to the loading or unloading of people or materials from motor vehicles, trucks or trailers. See Section 11.4.20.035: Required Off-Street Loading in Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading.

Old Town: that area of the city lying on the southwesterly side (ocean side) of Pacific Coast Highway between the northwesterly side of the United States Naval Weapons Station and the San Gabriel River.

On-site: an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, that is located on the same site as the primary use.

Open Space: any outdoor area not located within a required front setback which is to be used exclusively for leisure and recreational purposes, and which meets the requirements of the zoning district to qualify as open space. Open space may not be occupied by structures other than uncovered accessory structures such as swimming pools.

Open Space and Parks District or Zone: any of the open space and parks zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Open Space Types: See Figure 11.6.05.010.O.1: Open Space Types.

     Common Open Space: land not individually owned or dedicated for public use which is designed and intended for the common use.

     Private Open Space: an open area outside a building adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.O.1: Open Space Types



 

Outdoor Display and Retail Activities: permanent outdoor sales and rental establishments including lumber and other material sales yards, newsstands, merchandise display, dining and seating areas, outdoor facilities for the sale or rental of other vehicles/equipment, and other uses where the business is not conducted entirely within a structure. See Section 11.4.05.090: Outdoor Dining, Display and Sales Standards in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Outdoor Recreation Facilities: facilities for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation, including: amphitheaters; amusement and theme parks; batting cages; go-cart tracks; golf driving ranges; health and athletic club outdoor facilities; miniature golf courses; skateboard parks; stadiums and coliseums; swim and tennis clubs; tennis courts; water slides; zoos.

May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, video game arcades, etc. Does not include “Parks and Playgrounds,” which are separately defined.

Outdoor Retail Sales, Temporary: temporary outdoor retail operations including: Christmas trees, pumpkins or the sale of other seasonal items; farmers’ markets; semi-annual sales of art/handcrafted items in conjunction with community festivals or art shows; sidewalk or parking lot sales longer than one weekend; retail sales from individual vehicles in temporary locations outside the public right-of-way. See Section 11.4.05.090: Outdoor Dining, Display and Sales Standards in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Outdoor Storage: storage of materials, including items for sale, lease, processing, and repair, in an area outside an enclosed building. See Section 11.4.05.090: Outdoor Dining, Display and Sales Standards in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Overlay District or Zone: any of the overlay zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

 

 

“P” - Definitions

Parapet Wall: an extension of the structural walls, screening from view on all sides of a building the roof-top equipment or other unaesthetic features, not extending in height above that required for the purpose of screening. See Figure 11.6.05.010.P.1: Parapet Wall.

Figure 11.6.05.010.P.1

Parapet Wall



 

Parcel: see Lot.

Parcel Map: the subdivision map described by the Subdivision Map Act, Article 3, Chapter 2, which is required to complete a subdivision of 4 or fewer lots. See Article 10: Subdivisions.

Park District or Zone: any of the park zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Parking Facilities/Vehicle Storage: includes both day use and long-term public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a primary use. (All primary uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street parking required by the zoning code.) Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing.

Parking Lot: an off-street, surfaced, open area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. See: Public Garage or Storage Garage.

Parking Space: a permanently surfaced clear area for the parking of a vehicle excluding driveways or access drives. See Chapter 11.4.20: Off-Street Parking and Loading.

Parking Structure: a structure or a portion thereof composed of one or more levels or floors used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. See: Parking Lot and Public Garage or Storage Garage.

Parks and Playgrounds: public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic fields for noncommercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis courts. If privately-owned, the same facilities are included under the definition of “Private Residential Recreation Facilities.” See: Outdoor Recreation Facilities.

Patio Cover: see Covered Patio.

Patio Enclosure: a one-story structure 12 feet in height that may be located on a ground floor or above. Two or more walls of the structure must contain openings equal to at least 50% of the area between the floor plate and the ceiling plate within the RHD-PD zone, and 65% of the area between the floor plate and the ceiling plate within all other residential areas. Openings shall be permitted to be covered with (1) insect screening, (2) approved translucent or transparent plastic not more than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness, (3) glass conforming to the provisions of Section R308 of the California Residential Code, provided the glass is single-pane only, or (4) any combination of the foregoing. Patio enclosures must be attached to a dwelling unit and shall be used only for recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as a habitable room, as defined in the California Residential Code. A patio enclosure shall not be mechanically heated or cooled, nor shall it contain any plumbing or plumbing fixtures.

Permit: any use permit, temporary use permit, variance, building permit, license, certificate, approval, or other entitlement for development and/or use of property as required by any public agency.

     Ministerial Permit: a permit granted ministerially by the director, involving only the use of fixed standards or objective measures and requiring no public hearing.

     Discretionary Permit: a permit granted following an exercise of discretion by the director, planning commission, city council, or other hearing body.

Permitted Health Care Resident: a person hired to provide live-in, long-term, or terminal health care to a senior citizen, a qualifying resident, or a family member of a qualifying resident providing such care. For the purposes of this definition, the care provided by a permitted health care resident must be substantial in nature and must provide either assistance with necessary daily activities or medical treatment, or both.

Permitted Use: any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.

Person: a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, company or other legal entity.

Personal Services: establishments providing non-medical services to individuals as a primary use. Examples of these uses include:

     Barber and beauty shops

     Clothing rental

     Dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment

     Home electronics and small appliance repair

     Laundromats (self-service laundries)

     Personal fitness training

     Pet grooming with no boarding

     Shoe repair shops

     Tailors

     Tanning salons

These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.

Personal Services - Restricted: personal services that may tend to have a blighting and/or deteriorating effect upon surrounding areas and which may need to be dispersed to minimize their adverse impacts. Examples of these uses include: check cashing stores; fortune tellers; palm and card readers; psychics; spas and hot tubs for hourly rental; tattoo and body piercing services.

Physically Handicapped: see Disabled.

Planning Commission: see Commission.

Plant Nurseries and Garden Supply Stores: includes stores selling plants, nursery stock, and lawn and garden supplies. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under General Retail Stores. Home greenhouses are included under Residential Accessory Use or Structure.

Plumbing and Heating Shop: a business engaged in selling plumbing and/or heating equipment and supplies, primarily to contractors on a wholesale basis, but may also include retail sales to the general public.

Pole Sign: see Sign Types - Pole Sign.

Pollute: anything that causes or contributes to pollution, which may include paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete fines); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

Porch: an open or covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building. See Figure 11.6.05.010.P.2: Porch.

Figure 11.6.05.010.P.2: Porch



P.O.S.T: acronym for “peace officer standards and training.”

Pre-existing: in existence prior to the effective date of this zoning code.

Premises: a lot or parcel of real property or any portion thereof which is used separately from other portions thereof, or any building located thereon, or any portion of such building which has a separate street address. “Premises” also includes business complexes.

Preserve: to keep alive, safe from injury or destruction.

Primary Structure: a structure that accommodates the primary use of the site.

Primary Use: the main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site during most of the hours when activities occur.

Printing and Publishing: establishments engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. “Quick printing” services are included in the definition of “Business Support Services.”

Private Residential Recreation Facility: a privately-owned, noncommercial outdoor recreation facility provided for a residential subdivision project or neighborhood residents, including swimming pools, swim and tennis clubs, park and sport court facilities. Does not include golf courses and country clubs, or private sport courts accessory to single-family dwellings.

Private Sport Court: tennis, squash, handball, and or other outdoor court facilities on the site of, and accessory to, a single-family dwelling.

Project: any proposal for a new or changed use or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this title. This term also refers to any action that qualifies as a “project” as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act.

Property Line: see Lot Line Types.

Public Camp: see Mobile Home Park.

Public and Semi-Public District or Zone: any of the public or semi-public zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Public Garage or Storage Garage: any building or portion of a building used primarily or in part for the storage, servicing or repair of 2 or more vehicles not used by tenants of the building or buildings on the premises.

Public Safety Facilities: facilities operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

Public Vantage Point: any publicly accessible location on dedicated or publicly owned property, including but not limited to roadways, parks, and cultural or recreational facilities, which affords a significant view of the ocean, a coastal lagoon, a canyon or hillside area, or any other open space area identified in the general plan.

 

“Q” - Definitions

Qualifying Residents: persons 62 years of age or older, or 55 years of age or older in a residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens that has at least 35 dwelling units, and persons meeting the definition of “qualifying resident” or “qualified permanent resident” as defined in Section 51.3 of the Civil Code or any successor statute. See Chapter 11.4.55: Affordable Housing Bonus.

 

“R” - Definitions

Reclassification or Zone Change: a change in zone boundaries or change in zone designations upon the zoning map, which map is part of this title.

Recreational Vehicle (RV): as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18010: a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

     Contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

     Contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

     Is built on a single chassis; and

     Is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

Recyclable Material: reusable domestic containers and other materials intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstruction for the purpose of using the altered form. Does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable materials shall consist of those acknowledged by the State of California’s Department of Conservation.

Recycling Facility: includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials. A “certified” recycling or processing facility is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residentially, commercially or industrially designated site used solely for the recycling of material generated on the site. See Section 11.4.05.095: Recycling Facilities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

     Small Collection Facility: a center where the public may donate, redeem or sell recyclable materials, which may include the following, where allowed by the applicable zoning district:

o      Reverse vending machines;

o      Small collection facilities which occupy an area of 350 square feet or less and may include a mobile unit;

     Medium Collection Facility: includes the following, occupying less than 600 square feet:

o      Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines; and

o      One or more kiosk units.

     Large Collection Facility: large collection facilities which occupy an area of 600 square feet or more and/or include permanent structures.

     Mobile Recycling Unit: an automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other containers.

     Reverse Vending Machine: an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value, as determined by state law. These vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers. A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.

Religious Facilities: facilities operated by religious organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, etc.; and accessory uses on the same site, including living quarters for ministers and staff, child day care facilities and religious schools where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself. May also include emergency shelters, and fund-raising sales, bazaars, dinners, parties, or other outdoor events on the same site. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, including full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related operations (for example, a recreational camp) are classified according to their respective activities.

Reporting: the submitting of reports to the city by the applicant or private consultant demonstrating implementation of compliance with mitigation measures identified in the environmental document or conditions of approval.

Research and Development (R&D): facilities for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and computer and telecommunications components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related products from parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities, and where no more than 30% of the total floor area is office. Includes pharmaceutical, chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include soils and other materials testing laboratories (see Business Support Services), or medical laboratories (see Medical Services - Clinic).

Residential Accessory Use or Structure: any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to a residence, and does not change the character of the residential use. See Section 11.4.05.100: Residential Accessory Uses and Structures in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

This definition includes the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property:

     Barbecue islands

     Detached fireplaces

     Garages

     Gazebos

     Greenhouses (non-commercial)

     Patio covers

     Spas, hot tubs, and saunas

     Storage sheds

     Studios

     Swimming pools

     Tennis and other on-site courts

     Workshops

Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use.

Does not include: second units, which are separately defined; guest houses, which are included under the definition of second units (also see Section 11.4.05.115: Residential Uses - Second Dwelling Units in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Use); or home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts (see Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities).

Residential Care Facility for the Elderly (RCFE): a housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by the residents, or the residents’ guardians, conservators or other responsible persons; where 75% of the residents are at least 62 years of age, or, if younger, have needs compatible with other residents; and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided, as agreed to at the time of admission or as determined necessary at subsequent times of reappraisal (definition from Government Code Title 22, Division 6, Chapter 6, Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly). RCFE projects may include basic services and community space. See Section 11.4.05.105: Residential Care Facilities in Chapter 4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

RCFE projects include assisted living facilities (board and care homes), independent living centers/senior apartments, and life care facilities as defined below.

     Assisted Living Facility: a residential building or buildings that also provide housing, personal and health care, as permitted by the Department of Social Services, designed to respond to the daily, individual needs of the residents. Assisted living facilities may include kitchenettes (small refrigerator, sink and/or microwave oven) within individual rooms. Assisted living facilities are required to be licensed by the California Department of Social Services, and do not include skilled nursing services.

     Independent Living Center/Senior Apartment: independent living centers and senior apartments and are multifamily residential projects reserved for senior citizens, where common facilities may be provided (for example, recreation areas), but where each dwelling unit has individual living, sleeping, bathing, and kitchen facilities.

     Life Care Facility: sometimes called “continuing care retirement communities,” or “senior continuum of care complex,” these facilities provide a wide range of care and supervision, and also provide health care (skilled nursing) so that residents can receive medical care without leaving the facility. Residents can expect to remain, even if they become physically incapacitated later in life. Life care facilities require multiple licensing from the State Department of Social Services, the State Department of Health Services, and the State Department of Insurance.

Residential Care Home: a dwelling unit licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local health/welfare agency which provides 24-hour non-medical care of unrelated persons who are handicapped and in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family-like environment.

Residential District or Zone: any of the residential zoning districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts.

Residential Project: a housing development at one location including all units for which permits have been applied for or approved, intended and designed for permanent occupancy, including but not limited to single-family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartments, multiple-dwelling structures, or group of dwellings, condominium development, townhouse development, cooperative, or land division.

Restaurant: a retail food service establishment in which food is prepared and served to customers, on a plate, by waiters or waitresses, for consumption on the premises within the building. This definition includes “coffee shops.”

Restaurant, Drive-In: a retail food service establishment in which all, or a portion of, the food service is to customers remaining in their automobiles, while on the premises, or in which drive-in or walk-up customers may park on or walk on to the premises. This definition includes “drive-through” restaurants. See Section 11.4.05.050: Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Restaurant, Semi-Enclosed: a retail food service establishment in which food is prepared and served to customers on a plate, by waiters or waitresses, for consumption on the premises, mainly within the building.

Restaurant, Walk-Up/Take-Out: a retail food service establishment in which all of the food service is to customers for consumption off the premises. No on-site facilities for consumption of food may be provided. No drive-through or drive-up facilities may be provided.

Retaining Wall: a wall or similar structural device used at a grade change to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials.

Review Authority: the individual or official city body (the director of development services, planning commission, or city council) identified by this zoning code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions.

Roof: the top edge of the roof or the top of a parapet whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.

Roof Line: the highest point of a building with a flat roof.

Roof Sign: see Sign Types - Roof Sign.

Roof Types:

     Gable Roof: a pitched roof having a gable at each end.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.R.1: Gable Roof



 

     Gambrel Roof: a roof with 2 different pitches on each of 2 sides.

     Hip Roof: a roof with 4 sloping sides.

Figure 11.6.05.010.R.2: Hip Roof



     Mansard Roof: a roof with 2 slopes on each of its sides.

Rooming and Boarding House: a dwelling or part of a dwelling where lodging is furnished for compensation to more than 3 persons living independently from each other. Meals may also be included.

 

“S” - Definitions

Schools: public or private academic educational institution, including:

     Boarding schools

     Community colleges, colleges, and universities

     Elementary, middle, and junior high schools

     High school/secondary school

     Military academy

See Section 11.4.05.080: Meeting Facilities, Private Schools, and Similar Institutional Uses in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Also includes schools providing specialized education/training. Examples include the following:

     Art school

     Ballet and other dance school

     Business, secretarial, and vocational schools

     Computer and electronics schools

     Drama school

     Driver education school

     Establishments providing courses by mail

     Language school

     Martial arts school

     Music school

     Professional school (law, medicine, etc.)

     Seminaries/religious ministry training facility

Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see “Child Day Care Facilities”). See also the definition of “Studios - Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, Photography, etc.” for smaller-scale facilities offering specialized instruction.

Screening, Wall: fences or dense hedges for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structures or hedges or protecting against noise, traffic, heat, glare and dust.

Second Dwelling Unit: an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling. A second dwelling unit also includes efficiency units and manufactured homes, as those terms are defined. A second dwelling unit is not an “accessory structure or building.” See Section 11.4.05.115: Residential Uses - Second Dwelling Units in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Senior Citizen: a person 65 years of age or older.

Senior Continuum of Care Complex: see life care facility as defined in Residential Care Facility for the elderly.

Service Station: see Automobile Service Station.

Setback Line: a line parallel to a corresponding lot line or building site boundary. The intervening space between a setback line and the corresponding lot line or building site boundary defines a required yard area where limits on site improvements may be established based on specific zone standards. See also “Yard.” See also Chapter 11.1.15: Rules of Measurement.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.1: Setbacks



 

Shopping Center: primarily retail commercial sites with 3 or more separate businesses sharing common pedestrian and parking areas. See: Multi-Tenant.

Sign: a medium, device or structure used for visual communication or attraction, including any display, illustration, insignia, model, statue or symbol used to identify a place or to advertise or promote the interest of any person; together with the framework, background material, and structure and component parts. Painted signs and super graphics are signs.

Sign Area: the entire area within a single continuous perimeter of not more than 8 straight lines that enclose the extreme limits of all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not included in sign area provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for addresses or required tags. See Section 11.4.25.040: General Provisions for All Sign Types, of Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

Sign, Channel Letter: three-dimensional, individually cut letters or figures, illuminated or non-illuminated, attached to a structure.

Sign, Channel Logo: three-dimensional, individually cut trademark or symbol identifying a product or use, illuminated or non-illuminated, attached to a structure.

Sign Copy: any graphic, word, numeral, symbol, insignia, text, sample, model, device or combination thereof which is primarily intended to advertise, identify, or notify.

Sign Copy Area: the sign area occupied by sign copy. It is computed by measuring the area enclosed by straight lines drawn to enclose the extremities of the letters or numbers contained within said sign area. See Section 11.4.25.040: General Provisions for All Sign Types, of Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

Sign Copy, Changeable: sign copy that can be changed manually, such as on a menu board or theater marquee.

Sign, Direct Illumination: a sign illuminated primarily by light whose source is located in the interior of the sign so that the rays of the light source are transmitted through a translucent material.

Sign Face: the surface or surfaces used for the display of a sign message as seen from any one direction.

Sign Height: the height of a sign. See Section 11.4.20.040: General Provisions for All Sign Types, of Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

Sign, Indirect Illumination: a sign illuminated primarily by light directed toward or across it by backlighting from a source not within it. Sources of illumination for such signs may be in the form of gooseneck lamps, spotlights, or luminous tubing.

Sign, Negative Space: the open space surrounding the sign copy area of a sign area.

Sign Types: See Chapter 11.4.25: Sign Regulations.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.2: Sign Types



     A-Frame Sign: a sign with 2 slanted faces that form a shape similar to the letter “A” when unfolded, will stand up without help when placed on the ground, but is typically collapsible and can be readily moved.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.3: A-Frame Sign



 

     Abandoned Sign: a sign that no longer advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity on the premises where the sign is displayed.

     Awning or Canopy Sign: a sign that is applied directly to, or integrated into the face of an awning or canopy. See: Awning, and Canopy.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.4: Awning or Canopy Sign

Error! Objects cannot be created from editing field codes.

     Banner Sign: a temporary sign composed of fabric or similar non-rigid material that is supported or anchored on 2 or more edges or all 4 corners, or on fewer edges or corners but with weights installed that reduce the reaction of the sign to wind.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.5: Banner Sign



 

     Commercial Sign: any sign that directly or indirectly names, advertises, identifies, or directs attention to a business, product, good, service, or activity offered by a Commercial Land Use.

     Construction Sign (Development Sign): a temporary on-site sign which identifies a residential or commercial project while it is under construction and includes information such as the project name, architect, landscape architect, engineer, planner, contractor, or other person or firm participating in the development, construction or financing of the project site on which the sign is located.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.6: Construction Sign



 

     Directional Sign: a sign limited to directional messages such as entrance/exit or instructions to direct on-site traffic circulation.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.7: Directional Sign



 

     Directory Sign: a sign for listing the tenants and their suite numbers of a multiple tenant structure or center.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.8: Wall-Mounted Directory Sign



 

     Double-Faced Sign: a sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of 2 identical and/or opposite parallel planes.

     Flag: a sign made of fabric or similar non-rigid material supported or anchored (typically to a pole, cable, or rope), along only one edge or supported or anchored at only 2 corners. If any dimension of a flag is more than 3 times as long as any other dimension, it is classified as a banner regardless of how it is anchored or supported.

     Freestanding Sign: any sign that is permanently erected or standing on the ground and supported from the ground by 1 or more poles, columns, uprights, braces, or anchors. This includes “monument sign” and “pole sign.”

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.9: Freestanding Sign

Error! Objects cannot be created from editing field codes.

     Grand Opening Sign: a temporary sign for the introduction, promotion, or announcement of a new business, store, shopping center or office, or for the re-opening of a business that has been closed to the public.

     Illegal Sign: a sign that includes any of the following:

o      A sign not permitted in this zoning code;

o      A sign erected without complying with all regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use;

o      A sign that was legally erected, but whose use has ceased, the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, or the sign is not being used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of not less than 90 days;

o      A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result of the adoption of an ordinance, the amortization period for the display provided by the ordinance rendering the display conforming has expired, and conformance has not been accomplished;

o      A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming and then was damaged to the extent of 50% or more of its current replacement value;

o      A sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe;

o      A sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the city; or

o      A sign that pertains to a specific event, and 5 days have elapsed since the occurrence of the event.

     Marquee Sign: a sign incorporated into or attached to a marquee or permanent canopy and traditionally associated with theaters and schools that utilize removable and replaceable channel letters and figures.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.10: Marquee Sign



 

     Monument Sign: a freestanding sign erected to rest on the ground or to rest on a monument base designed as an architectural unit. The width of the top of a monument sign is no more than 125% of the width of the base.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.11: Monument Sign



 

     Multi-Tenant Sign: an identification sign for a commercial site with multiple tenants, displaying the names of each tenant or several tenants on the site.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.12: Multi-Tenant Sign



 

     Neon Sign: an illuminated sign effected by a colorless, odorless light source consisting of a neon or gas tube that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes.

     Noncommercial Sign: a sign that does not, either directly or indirectly, name, advertise, or direct attention to a business, product, good, service, or activity offered by a commercial land use.

     Nonconforming Sign: an advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this zoning code, but does not now completely comply with current regulations.

     On-Premises Sign: any sign that identifies or directs attention to an occupancy, business, product, service, or activity conducted, sold, produced, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.

     Off-Premises Sign: any sign that identifies, advertises, or contains a message related to an occupancy, business, service, or product that is conducted, sold, produced, or offered on a premises other than where the sign is located; or which identifies by brand name a service or product which, although sold on the premises, does not constitute the principal item for sale on the premises.

     Off-Site Directional Sign: a sign identifying a publicly owned facility, emergency facility, or a temporary subdivision sign, but excluding real estate signs.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.13: Off-Site Directional Sign



 

     Political or Social Issue Sign: a sign that addresses:

o      The passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot in any national, state, or local election;

o      The election or defeat of any candidate for any public office in any national, state, or local election; or

o      An international, national, state, or local political or social issue.

     Pole Sign: a sign mounted on freestanding poles, columns, or other supports. See: Free-Standing Sign.

     Portable Sign: a sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.14: Portable Sign



 

     Projecting Sign: a sign affixed to the face of a building and projecting more than 12 inches either perpendicularly or at an angle from the surface and usually has 2 message surfaces.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.15: Projecting Sign

Error! Objects cannot be created from editing field codes.

     Real Estate Sign: a sign indicating that a property or any portion thereof is available for inspection, sale, lease, rent, or directing people to a property, but not including temporary subdivision signs.

     Restaurant Menu and Similar Display Box Signs: a sign used to inform the public of the list of entrees, dishes, and foods available in a restaurant or other items available in stores that utilize such display box signs.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.16: Restaurant Menu and Similar Display Box Sign



 

     Roof Sign: any sign erected, constructed or maintained upon or over the roof of a building. Roof signs are not permitted.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.17: Roof Sign

Error! Objects cannot be created from editing field codes.

     Temporary Sign: a sign that is not designed, constructed, or intended for permanent display on the property.

     Vehicle Sign: a sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.

     Wall Sign: any sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in a plane parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the wall and projecting less than 12 inches from the wall.

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.18: Wall Sign

Error! Objects cannot be created from editing field codes.

     Window Sign: any sign either hung within 2 feet of a window or attached to a display within 2 feet of a window.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.S.19: Window Sign



 

Single-Family Dwelling: a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one household. Also includes factory-built housing units, constructed in compliance with the California Building Code, and manufactured housing on permanent foundations. See also “Manufactured Home.”

Single Room Occupancy (SRO): a residential facility that provides living and sleeping facilities and a toilet and sink for 1 or 2 persons per unit. Shower, kitchen, and laundry facilities may be shared by one or more SROs.

Site: a lot, parcel, leasehold, or other physical location that is in a single ownership or under unified control for the purposes of development or other use. See also “Building Site.”

Site Coverage: see Lot Coverage.

Skilled Nursing Facility: also known as convalescent hospitals or nursing homes, these are facilities licensed by the California State Department of Health Services. These facilities house one or more individuals in a single room with bathroom facilities and provide intensive medical and nursing care, including 24-hour availability of licensed nursing personnel. Residents are often convalescing from serious illness or surgery and require continuous observation and medical supervision, or will reside in the facility as a long-term resident. Does not include “Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly.”

Small Family Day Care Homes: see Child Day Care Facilities.

Smoke Shop: an establishment that primarily engages in the wholesale or retail sale of electronic smoking devices, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or any combination thereof or exchange of electronic smoking devices, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia, or any of these.

Social Service Organization: a public or quasi-public establishment providing social and/or rehabilitation services, serving persons with social or personal problems requiring special services, the handicapped, and the otherwise disadvantaged. Examples of this land use include: counseling centers, welfare offices, job counseling and training centers, or vocational rehabilitation agencies. Includes organizations soliciting funds to be used directly for these and related services, and establishments engaged in community improvement and neighborhood development. Does not include “Child Day Care Facilities,” “Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly,” or “Residential Care Home,” which are separately defined.

Solar Energy: energy for heating and lighting of structures produced by the sun.

Sports Court: an outdoor facility for participant sports, including tennis and handball courts.

State Freeway: any section of a state highway which has been declared to be a freeway by resolution of the California Highway Commission pursuant to the Streets and Highways Code.

Stock Cooperative: a corporation formed for the primary purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, any real property where the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of such real property and where the right of occupancy is only transferable by the transfer of shares of stock in the corporation.

Storage - Accessory: the indoor storage of materials accessory and incidental to a primary use is not considered a land use separate from the primary use.

Storage - Outdoor: the storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or primary use.

Storm Water Runoff: any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rainstorms. See also definition of “National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permits” for additional clarification regarding discharges subject to regulation.

Story: space in a building between the upper surface of any floor and either the upper surface of the next floor above, or in the case of the topmost floor, the ceiling or roof above. An underground room or excavated useable space not qualifying as a basement shall be considered a story.

Street: a public or private thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to adjoining property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except an alley as defined in this section, see “Alley.”

Street Line: the boundary line between a street and the abutting property. See Lot Line Types, “Front Lot Line” and “Street Side Lot Line.”

Street, Side: a street which is adjacent to a corner lot or a reversed corner lot and which extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot. See Lot Line Types, “Front Lot Line” and “Street Side Lot Line.”

Structure: anything constructed in the ground or anything erected which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having location on or in the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences less than 3 feet in height. This definition excludes paved areas.

Structural Alteration: any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters that enlarges or extends a structure or changes in the exterior dimensions of the building.

Structural Repairs: any repairs to a building that do not enlarge or extend the structure, including modification or repair of bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

Studio Dwelling Unit: a dwelling unit in which 1 room serves as both a living room and a bedroom.

Studios - Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, Photography, etc.: small scale facilities, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than one instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of “Schools - Specialized education and training.” These include facilities for: individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment. Also includes production studios for individual musicians, painters, sculptors, photographers, and other artists. Does not include adult businesses.

Subdivision: the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized Orange County assessment roll as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes the following, as defined in Civil Code Section 1315: a condominium project; a community apartment project; or the conversion of 5 or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative. See also Title 10: Subdivisions.

Subdivision Map Act or Map Act: Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions. See also Title 10: Subdivisions.

Supportive Housing: housing occupied by a specified target population that has no limit on length of stay, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, maximizing his or her ability to live, and—when possible—work in the community. Supportive housing is a residential use subject to the same regulations and procedures that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

Swimming Pool: any body of water more than 24 inches deep and/or over 250 square feet in area either confined naturally or artificially and used for a swimming pool. See also Section 11.4.10.030: Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs in Chapter 11.4.10: General Site Standards.

 

“T” - Definitions

Tandem: in connection with off-street parking, “tandem parking” or “tandem configuration” means that 2 or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.

Tattoo Establishment: any premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. See Chapter 11.4.65: Tattoo Establishments.

Telecommunications Facility: public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network, and wireless communications, including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas, and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections. Terms and phrases are defined in Chapter 11.4.70: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

Temporary Building: any temporary building, trailer, coach, mobile home or modular structure of temporary nature. This shall not include those used as residences within a state authorized trailer park or mobile home park or modular units constructed on a permanent foundation in residential districts as permanent dwellings.

Temporary Sign: see Sign Types - Temporary Sign.

Temporary Use: a use of land that is designed, operated and occupies a site for a limited period of time, typically less than 60 days.

Tenant: a person who rents, leases, or subleases real property from another through a written or oral agreement.

Tentative Map: a map filed with the city in compliance with Title 10 of the municipal code: Subdivisions as part of a request for the approval of a subdivision of real property, showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. See also Title 10: Subdivisions; Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing.

Theaters and Auditoriums: indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including:

     Civic theaters, and facilities for “live” theater and concerts;

     Exhibition and convention halls;

     Motion picture theaters;

     Public and semi public auditoriums; and

     Similar public assembly uses.

Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events. See also Section 11.4.05.080: “Meeting Facilities, Private Schools, and Similar Institutional Uses” in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Tire Display: a tire or group of tires placed outside the building in the customer service area of an automobile service station.

Trailer Court: see Mobile Home Park.

Trailer Park: see Mobile Home Park.

Trash Enclosure: a wall or fence, 6 feet in height, surrounding the trash bin and accessible by a gate of sufficient width to allow the bin to be removed and which is constructed in a manner and of materials that blend architecturally and aesthetically with the main structure.

Transitional Housing: housing operated under program requirements that terminates assistance to residents and recirculates the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no later than 6 months from the initial occupancy date of the recipient. Transitional housing is a residential use subject to the same regulations and procedures that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

Twenty-Four Hour Foster Care Home: a dwelling occupied by a family who, for compensation or otherwise, accepts and cares for children as full-time residents as a part of the family, and which children are assigned by authorized public authorities, providing the number of such foster children shall not exceed 3 at any one time.

 

 

“U” - Definitions

Use: the purpose for which land or premises of structure thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

Use Permit: a discretionary zoning approval of the city, the procedures for which are established by Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

Utility Facilities: fixed-base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091:

     Corporation and maintenance yards;

     Electrical substations and switching stations;

     Natural gas regulating and distribution facilities;

     Public water system wells, treatment plants and storage;

     Telephone switching facilities;

     Wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields.

These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in “Offices”), or equipment and material storage yards.

Utility Infrastructure: pipelines for water, natural gas, and sewage collection and disposal; and facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or service centers (see “Offices”), or distribution substations (see “Utility Facilities”).

 

“V” - Definitions

Variance: a discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the development standards of this zoning code for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone in compliance with Chapter 11.5.20: Development Permits.

Vehicle Storage: a facility for the storage of operative cars and other fleet vehicles, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles. Includes facilities for the storage and/or servicing of fleet vehicles. Does not include commercial parking lots.

Vertical Access: an area of land providing a connection between the first public roadway or use area nearest the sea and the publicly owned tidelands or established lateral accessway. A vertical accessway may be used for public pass and repass, passive recreational use or as otherwise designated in the Seal Beach Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan.

Veterinary Clinics, Animal Hospitals, Kennels: office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Kennels and boarding operations are commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or maintaining of 5 or more dogs 4 months of age or older, or 5 or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.

Vesting Tentative Map: a map that is filed and processed in the same manner as a tentative map except as otherwise provided by Title 10: Subdivisions, Chapter 10.20: Tentative Map Filing and Processing, Section 10.20.045: Vesting Tentative Maps or the Map Act. A vesting tentative map shall have the words “Vesting Tentative Map” printed conspicuously on its face at the time it is filed with the department.

Visible: capable of being seen (whether or not legible) by a person.

 

“W” - Definitions

Wading Pool: any body of water either natural or artificially confined less than 24 inches deep and 250 square feet in area, which is located permanently on the building site.

Walkway: pedestrian access from the public right-of-way to a structure or use.

Warehouse Retail: a retail store emphasizing the packaging and sale of products in large quantities or volumes, where products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may be required to pay membership fees. See also Section 11.4.05.140: Warehouse Retail and Large-Scale Commercial Projects in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Warehouses, Wholesaling and Distribution: these facilities include:

     Warehouses: facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage facilities. Does not include warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution (see “Wholesaling and Distribution”); or vehicle and freight terminals.

     Wholesaling and Distribution: establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as: agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants; assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products; merchant wholesalers; stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment.

See also Section 11.4.05.140: Warehouse Retail and Large-Scale Commercial Projects in Chapter 11.4.05: Standards for Specific Uses.

Wetland: land which is transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or where the land is covered by shallow water. In addition, all wetlands must have one or more of the following characteristics:

     At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes.

     The substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil.

     The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year.

Areas classifiable as wetlands include, but are not limited to, lagoons, marshes, estuaries, mudflats, vernal pools, streams and rivers and associated riparian habitat areas.

Wetland Buffer: lands which provide a buffer area of an appropriate size to protect the environmental and functional habitat values of the wetland.

Wine Cellar: a facility for the storage of wine.

 

“X” - Definitions

No specialized terms beginning with the letter “X” are defined at this time.

 

“Y” - Definitions

Yard: any open space on the same lot with a structure, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted by this zoning code.

Yard Types: see Figure 11.6.05.010.L.4: Lot Lines and Lot Features. See also Figure 11.6.05.010.Y.1: Yards: Irregular Lots.

     Exterior or Street Side Yard: a side yard adjacent to a street on a corner lot.

     Front Yard: a yard extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and measured from the front line of the lot to the required minimum front setback, as required by this zoning code.

     Interior Side Yard: a side yard adjacent to another lot.

     Rear Yard: a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and required minimum rear setback, as required by this zoning code.

     Side Yard: a yard extending along each side lot lines of the lot and measured between the side line of the lot and the minimum side setback, as required by this zoning code, bounded by the required front and rear yards.

 

Figure 11.6.05.010.Y.1: Yards: Irregular Lots



 

“Z” - Definitions

Zoning Approval: authority granted by the city to use a specific site for a particular purpose, including use permits, variances, zoning clearances, as established by Part V: Land Use and Zoning Decisions.

Zoning District: any of the base residential, commercial, public, or overlay districts established by Section 11.1.05.025: Designation of Base and Overlay Districts, within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.).

Zoning Code: the Seal Beach Zoning Code, Title 11 of the Seal Beach Municipal Code, referred to herein as “zoning code.”

Zoning Conformance Review: a ministerial zoning approval issued by the department prior to issuance of any building permit and/or business license to ensure that the proposed use and/or construction complies with all of the provisions of this zoning code. See Chapter 11.5.25: Director Determinations. (Ord. 1673; Ord. 1659; Ord. 1646; Ord. 1638; Ord. 1630; Ord. 1627; Ord. 1611; Ord. 1598)

 

Appendix A Blanket Setback Variances.
Blanket Setback Variances

Ordinance Number 509

Adopted August 13, 1957

 

 

TRACT 2590

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES AND RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE

15

629 South Shore

15 Feet

28

620 South Shore

15 Feet

46

629 Taper

15 Feet

51

609 Taper

15 Feet

55

604 Taper

15 Feet

59

620 Taper

15 Feet

63

636 Taper

15 Feet

78

629 Sand Piper

15 Feet

85

601 Sand Piper

15 Feet

88

608 Sand Piper

15 Feet

91

620 Sand Piper

15 Feet

94

632 Sand Piper

15 Feet

134

625 Beach Comber

15 Feet

139

605 Beach Comber

15 Feet

144

612 Beach Comber

15 Feet

149

632 Beach Comber

15 Feet

162

641 Sea Breeze

15 Feet

166

625 Sea Breeze

15 Feet

169

613 Sea Breeze

15 Feet

172

601 Sea Breeze

15 Feet

175

608 Sea Breeze

15 Feet

181

632 Sea Breeze

15 Feet

195

637 Island View

15 Feet

199

621 Island View

15 Feet

203

605 Island View

15 Feet

207

608 Island View

15 Feet

212

628 Island View

15 Feet

239

701 Bay Side

15 Feet

244

633 Bay Side

15 Feet

247

621 Bay Side

15 Feet

251

605 Bay Side

15 Feet

Resolution Number 110

Adopted February 2, 1967

 

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES - 15 FEET IF 18′-6″ IS PROVIDED FROM FACE OF GARAGE TO BACK OF SIDEWALK

Tract 5699

Tract 6172

Tract 6174

Tract 6176

Tract 6016

Tract 6173

Tract 6175

Tract 6177

Note: All Tracts are located in College Park East

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 5699

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

48

4349 Guava

10 Feet

49

4348 Guava

10 Feet

46

4333 Guava

10 Feet

51

4332 Guava

10 Feet

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 6174

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

45

3610 Primrose Circle

10 Feet

46

3611 Primrose Circle

10 Feet

43

3590 Primrose Circle

10 Feet

6

3600 Sunflower Circle

10 Feet

8

3620 Sunflower Circle

10 Feet

9

3630 Sunflower Circle

10 Feet

10

3631 Sunflower Circle

10 Feet

11

3621 Sunflower Circle

10 Feet

24

3590 Rose Circle

10 Feet

26

3610 Rose Circle

10 Feet

27

3620 Rose Circle

10 Feet

28

3621 Rose Circle

10 Feet

30

3601 Rose Circle

10 Feet

 

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 6175

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

3

3540 Heather Circle

10 Feet

5

3560 Heather Circle

10 Feet

6

3561 Heather Circle

10 Feet

8

3541 Heather Circle

10 Feet

13

3540 Goldenrod Circle

10 Feet

15

3560 Goldenrod Circle

10 Feet

16

3561 Goldenrod Circle

10 Feet

18

3541 Goldenrod Circle

10 Feet

23

3540 Fern Circle

10 Feet

25

3560 Fern Circle

10 Feet

26

3561 Fern Circle

10 Feet

28

3541 Fern Circle

10 Feet

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 6176

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

75

3540 Dahlia Circle

10 Feet

77

3560 Dahlia Circle

10 Feet

78

3561 Dahlia Circle

10 Feet

80

3541 Dahlia Circle

10 Feet

85

3540 Daffodil Circle

10 Feet

87

3569 Daffodil Circle

10 Feet

88

3570 Daffodil Circle

10 Feet

89

3561 Daffodil Circle

10 Feet

91

3541 Daffodil Circle

10 Feet

 

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 6177

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

1

3520 Clover Circle

10 Feet

3

3540 Clover Circle

10 Feet

4

3551 Clover Circle

10 Feet

5

3541 Clover Circle

10 Feet

7

3521 Clover Circle

10 Feet

11

3550 Carnation Circle

10 Feet

13

3570 Carnation Circle

10 Feet

14

3571 Carnation Circle

10 Feet

16

3551 Carnation Circle

10 Feet

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 6416

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

7

3580 Wisteria Circle

10 Feet

9

3560 Wisteria Circle

10 Feet

10

3561 Wisteria Circle

10 Feet

12

3581 Wisteria Circle

10 Feet

43

3610 Teaberry Circle

10 Feet

45

3640 Teaberry Circle

10 Feet

46

3641 Teaberry Circle

10 Feet

48

3621 Teaberry Circle

10 Feet

 

Resolution Number 150

Adopted September 6, 1967

 

 

TRACT 6421

 

LOT NUMBER

STREET ADDRESS

FRONT SETBACK TO FRONT OPENING GARAGES

2

3591 Primrose Circle

10 Feet

15

3580 Pansy Circle

10 Feet

17

3600 Pansy Circle

10 Feet

18

3601 Pansy Circle

10 Feet

20

3521 Pansy Circle

10 Feet

Title 12 MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSION
Chapter 12.05 MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSION

Chapter 12.05 MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSION
12.05.005 Authority and Short Title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s police power and the authority of California Government Code Sections 65863.7, 65863.8 and 66427.4. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Seal Beach Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance.” (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:

Absentee Owner: a person who owns a mobile home in a mobile home park and does not reside at such mobile home.

Affected Mobile Home Owners and Residents: absentee owners, resident owners and resident tenants whose mobile home will be displaced by the conversion of a mobile home park.

Certificate of Acceptance: a written declaration expressing a conversion proposer’s acceptance of the conditions imposed by the city in connection with approval of a conversion impact report.

Commission: the Planning Commission of the City of Seal Beach, California. Also referred to as the “planning commission.”

Comparable Housing: housing that is equivalent (or better) in terms of amenities, condition, location, price and size (floor area and number of bedrooms) to the mobile home to which comparison is being made.

Comparable Mobile Home Park: a mobile home park that is equivalent (or better) in terms of amenities, condition, location and rental price to the mobile home park to which comparison is being made.

Conversion Proposer: a mobile home park owner who proposes to perform a mobile home park conversion.

Conversion Impact Report: a report, meeting the requirements of this chapter, describing the impacts of a mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents; and the measures that will be taken to mitigate adverse impacts of such conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.

Director: the Director of Development Services of the City of Seal Beach, California or the designee thereof.

Mobile Home: a “mobile home” as such term is defined in the Mobile Home Residency Law. “Mobile home” also means camping trailers, motor homes, slide-in campers and travel trailers when used as the occupant’s primary place of residence as established by 9 months continuous residency.

Mobile Home Improvements: carports, earthquake bracing, landscaping, new roofs, patios, porches and similar amenities and major repairs.

Mobile Home Park: a “mobile home park” as such term is defined in the Mobile Home Residency Law.

Mobile Home Park Conversion:

1.     The conversion of a mobile home park or any part thereof to another use;

2.     The closure of a mobile home park or any part thereof; and

3.     The cessation of use of land as a mobile home park.

Mobile Home Residency Law: California Civil Code Section 798 et seq. as such statute exists at the time of enactment of this chapter or as subsequently amended.

Resident Owner: a person who owns a mobile home in a mobile home park and resides at such mobile home.

Resident Tenant: a person who rents or leases a mobile home in a mobile home park and resides at such mobile home. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.015 Conversion Impact Report Requirement.
Unless a conversion impact report has been approved by the city and a certificate of acceptance has been recorded, no mobile home park owner shall do any of the following:

A.     Perform a mobile home park conversion.

B.     Display a sign announcing that the mobile home park is closing, may be closing or has been closed.

C.    Display a sign announcing a new use for the mobile home park property. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.020 Pre-Conversion Questionnaire.
A.     Prior to filing a conversion impact report for city approval, a conversion proposer shall distribute a pre-conversion questionnaire to affected mobile home owners and residents. The conversion proposer shall afford affected mobile home owners and residents no less than 30 days to complete the pre-conversion questionnaire.

B.     The director shall promulgate a pre-conversion questionnaire for use by conversion proposers. At a minimum, the pre-conversion questionnaire shall include provisions for declaration of the following:

1.     The purchase date and purchase price of the mobile home.

2.     The amount and terms of any outstanding mortgage obligation for the mobile home.

3.     Any mobile home improvements that have been paid for by the respondent and the costs of such improvements.

4.     Any circumstances, including but not limited to job location, that restrict potential relocation areas. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.025 Relocation Specialist.
As deemed appropriate for preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, the director may require a conversion proposer to hire a relocation specialist to find alternate housing for affected mobile home owners and residents. The conversion proposer shall choose the relocation specialist with the director’s approval. The conversion proposer shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the relocation specialist. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.030 Conversion Impact Report Content.
A.     Required Contents of Conversion Impact Report. Each conversion impact report submitted for city approval shall contain the following:

1.     Legal description of the mobile home park.

2.     The purchase price paid by the conversion proposer to acquire the mobile home park.

3.     Current sale value of the mobile home park property as a mobile home park and as all other uses permitted by the zoning designation of the property.

4.     Description of any use proposed to replace the mobile home park.

5.     Any offers to sell the mobile home park.

6.     Timetable for the mobile home park conversion.

7.     Number of spaces in the mobile home park and the current rental rate for each space.

8.     Name, mailing address, age and disability status of each resident owner and resident tenant having a mobile home in the mobile home park and whether the mobile home constitutes such person’s primary place of residence.

9.     Name and mailing address of each absentee owner having a mobile home in the mobile home park.

10.   Name and mailing address of each lender having an interest in a mobile home in the mobile home park.

11.   Manufacture date, size, length of occupancy and the appraised on-site fair market value of each mobile home in the mobile home park. “Fair market value” shall be determined assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained condition. The appraisal shall be performed by an appraiser selected by the director. The conversion proposer shall pay all costs and expenses associated with the appraisal, including any appraisal fees.

12.   Estimates from 2 moving companies, chosen by the conversion proposer with the director’s approval, as to the cost of moving mobile homes, relocatable mobile home improvements, and personal property. The estimates shall include tear-down and set-up costs. “Set-up costs” include the cost of connecting utilities at the new location and the cost of any upgrades required to comply with applicable laws.

13.   Estimates from 2 temporary lodging facilities, chosen by the conversion proposer with the director’s approval, as to the cost of providing temporary lodging for resident owners and resident tenants who are unable to complete relocation within one day.

14.   Itemization of available mobile home spaces within comparable mobile home parks within a 50-mile radius. Such itemization shall indicate the rental rate for each space and whether the owner of that mobile home park has agreed in writing to accept affected mobile home owners and residents that are displaced by the mobile home park conversion.

15.   Itemization of available comparable housing within a 50-mile radius. Such itemization shall indicate the purchase price for each equivalent (or better) mobile home or condominium, as well as the rental rate for each equivalent (or better) mobile home, condominium or apartment.

16.   Completed pre-conversion questionnaires.

17.   Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.

B.     Additional Information Requirements. The director may require a conversion proposer to include information in the conversion impact report in addition to that specified in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.035 Public Hearing Regarding Conversion Impact Report.
A.     Public Hearing Notice Required. Upon the filing of a complete conversion impact report for city review, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with Title 11: Zoning, Chapter 11.5.10: General Procedures of this code and shall also be provided as set forth in subsection B of this section.

B.     Additional Public Hearing Notice Requirements. At least 30 days prior to the hearing date, the director shall perform the following actions:

1.     Mail a notice of the public hearing and a copy of conversion impact report to affected mobile home owners and residents, and to each lender having an interest in a mobile home in the mobile home park. The notice shall contain a general explanation of the matters to be considered by the commission. The copy of the conversion impact report shall not include the completed pre-conversion questionnaires but shall include the appraisal of the mobile home owned or resided in by that particular notice recipient.

2.     Inform the conversion proposer in writing of the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.56 regarding the conversion proposer’s duty to notify affected mobile home owners and residents of the proposed conversion. Such writing shall specify the manner in which the conversion proposer shall verify that affected mobile home owners and residents have been notified of the proposed conversion.

C.    Commission to Hold Public Hearing. The commission shall conduct a public hearing on the conversion impact report at the time and place set forth in the hearing notice. Such hearing shall not be held before the conversion proposer has satisfactorily verified that affected mobile home owners and residents have been notified of the proposed conversion pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.56.

D.    Costs of Public Hearing Notice. The conversion proposer shall pay all costs associated with providing notice, including any publishing and postage expenses. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.040 Decision Regarding Conversion Impact Report.
A.     Commission to Adopt Resolution. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall adopt a resolution approving or rejecting a proposed conversion impact report. The commission shall approve or conditionally approve a conversion impact report if it finds that the conversion impact report contains, or has been conditioned to contain, reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.

B.     Commission May Impose Conditions. Subject to subsection C of this section, the commission may impose conditions in connection with its approval of a conversion impact report. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, lump sum payments to affected mobile home owners and residents to mitigate the following expenses as applicable to each particular absentee owner, resident owner and resident tenant having a mobile home in the mobile home park:

1.     The Expense of Relocating the Mobile Home to a Comparable Mobile Home Park. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of moving, tear-down and set-up costs. “Moving costs” include the cost of moving the mobile home and the cost of moving associated relocatable mobile home improvements. “Set-up costs” include the cost of connecting utilities at the replacement mobile home park and the cost of any upgrades required to comply with applicable laws.

2.     The Expense of Forfeiting the Mobile Home. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: (i) the on-site fair market value of the mobile home and associated mobile home improvements; and (ii) any outstanding mortgage obligation of the owner. “Fair market value” shall be determined assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained condition.

3.     The Expense of Assuming Tenancy in a Comparable Mobile Home Park. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: moving costs; first month’s rent, last month’s rent and security deposit at the replacement mobile home park; differential between rental rates at the mobile home park being converted and the replacement mobile home park during the first year of relocation; and if necessary, the cost of purchasing an equivalent mobile home in the replacement mobile home park.

4.     The Expense of Assuming Tenancy in Comparable Housing. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: moving costs; first month’s rent, last month’s rent, and security deposit at the replacement housing; and differential between the rental rate at the mobile home park being converted and the replacement housing during the first year of relocation.

5.     The Expense of Purchasing Comparable Housing. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: moving costs; down payment for the replacement housing; and differential between the rental rate at the mobile home park being converted and the mortgage payment for the replacement housing during the first year of relocation.

C.    Limitations on Imposed Conditions. The conditions imposed in connection with approval of a conversion impact report shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation. Conditions shall only be imposed in order to ensure that the conversion proposer adequately mitigates adverse impacts of the mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.

In imposing conditions, the city shall interpret and apply this chapter in a manner consistent with applicable law. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.045 Certificate of Acceptance.
Upon city approval of a conversion impact report, the conversion proposer shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobile home park property. City approval of a conversion impact report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the director. The director shall promulgate a form certificate of acceptance for use by conversion proposers. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.050 Performance of Mitigation Measures.
The conversion proposer shall fully perform the mitigation measures set forth in, and the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved conversion impact report. No affected mobile home owner or resident shall be required to vacate a mobile home space unless the conversion proposer has performed all mitigation measures and conditions of approval applicable to such owner or resident. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.055 Modification of Conversion Impact Report.
A.     Commission to Hold Public Hearing. The commission may, upon request of conversion proposer and after holding a public hearing, modify the provisions of an approved conversion impact report. A modification may be approved where the commission finds that there has been a change in circumstances, or there is new information that could not have reasonably been known or considered at the time of the original hearing on approval of the conversion impact report.

B.     Commission May Impose Additional Conditions. The commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from a modification of an approved conversion impact report.

C.    Recordation of Certificate of Acceptance. Upon city approval of modification of an approved conversion impact report with additional conditions, the conversion proposer shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobile home park property. City approval of modification of an approved conversion impact report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the director. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.060 Expiration of Conversion Impact Report.
A.     Expiration Time Periods. An approved conversion impact report shall expire (1) 30 days after adoption of the resolution of approval, unless proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance is delivered to the director prior to such date; or (2) one year after delivery to the director of proof of recordation of a certification of acceptance, unless an extension is granted prior to such date pursuant to this section.

B.     Extension of Time—Public Hearing Required. The commission may, upon request of the conversion proposer and after holding a public hearing, extend the term of an approved conversion impact report. An extension may be granted where the commission finds that expiration of the conversion impact report would constitute an undue economic hardship to the conversion proposer.

C.    Commission May Impose Additional Conditions. The commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from an extension. The commission may grant multiple extensions of an approved conversion impact report but no single extension shall have a duration in excess of one year.

D.    Recordation of Certificate of Acceptance. Upon City approval of an extension of an approved conversion impact report with additional conditions, the conversion proposer shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobile home park property. City approval of an extension of an approved conversion impact report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the director. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.065 Nullification of Conversion Impact Report.
A.     Commission Public Hearing Required. The commission may, upon request of the director and after holding a public hearing, order an approved conversion impact report null and void. No nullification shall be ordered unless the commission makes either of the following findings:

1.     Fraudulent Approval of Conversion Impact Report. Approval of the conversion impact report was obtained fraudulently.

2.     Failure to Comply with Conditions Imposed. The conversion proposer has failed to comply with the mitigation measures set forth in, or the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved conversion impact report.

B.     New Conversion Impact Report Required. If a conversion impact report is nullified, then the conversion proposer shall not be entitled to perform the mobile home park conversion until a new conversion impact report is approved in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.070 Right of First Refusal.
A conversion proposer shall afford affected mobile home owners and residents a right of first refusal to purchase, lease or rent housing that is constructed for sale, lease or rental on the site of the mobile home park proposed to be converted. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.075 Appeal.
Any commission decision pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Title 1: General Provisions, Chapter 1.20: Review of Quasi-Judicial Decisions. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.080 Processing Fees.
Each conversion proposer seeking city approval, modification or extension of a conversion impact report shall pay a nonrefundable application deposit in an amount established by city council resolution. In addition, the conversion proposer shall reimburse the city for all costs, including staff time and attorney’s fees, incurred in processing and reviewing the proposer’s conversion impact report. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.085 Building Permits.
No building permit shall be issued for conversion of a mobile home park property until the conversion proposer has filed with the director a written statement confirming full performance of the mitigation measures set forth in, and the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved conversion impact report. Such statement shall specify in itemized form the name of each affected mobile home owner and resident and the date and type of relocation assistance provided to such person. The statement shall be executed under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1568)

 

12.05.090 Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to any mobile home park conversion resulting from an adjudication of bankruptcy. (Ord. 1568)

