


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.03    Claims Against the City

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Right of Entry

1.12    General Penalty

1.16    City Base or Datum

1.20    Official Map – Streets and Plazas

1.24    Appeals Before the City

1.28    Administrative Citation

1.30    Administrative Notice and Order Proceedings


Chapter 1.01       CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010  Adoption.

1.01.020  Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030  Codification authority.

1.01.040  Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

1.01.050  Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060  Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070  Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080  Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090  Effective date.

1.01.100  Constitutionality.


1.01.010  Adoption.

Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the California Code Annotated, there is adopted the "Sonoma Municipal Code", together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Sonoma Municipal Code". (Ord. 496 § 1, 1975).


1.01.020  Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the "Sonoma Municipal Code," and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "Sonoma Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinances adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Sonoma Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 496 § 2, 1975).


1.01.030  Codification authority.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Sonoma, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the California Code Annotated. (Ord. 496 § 3, 1975).


1.01.040  Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 488, passed March 11, 1974. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 488, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 490, 491, 492, 494, 75-1 and 75-2. (Ord. 496 § 4 1975).


1.01.050  Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Sonoma Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Sonoma, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 496 § 5, 1975).


1.01.060  Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 496 § 6, 1975).


1.01.070  Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 496 § 7, 1975).


1.01.080  Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 496 § 8, 1975).


1.01.090  Effective date.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter adopting this code as the "Sonoma Municipal Code" becomes effective as provided by law. (Ord. 496 § 9, 1975).


1.01.100  Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 496 § 10, 1975).


Chapter 1.03       CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY

Sections:

1.03.010  Claims presentation procedures.

1.03.020  Further procedures.


1.03.010  Claims presentation procedures.

All claims for money or damages against the city shall be presented to the city clerk or the city clerk’s designee. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993).


1.03.020  Further procedures.

Pursuant to Section 935 of the Government Code, the following claims procedures are established; all claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state law, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed in Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code, notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 954.4 of the Government Code relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council. (Ord. 93-7 § 2, 1993). 


Chapter 1.04       GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010  Definitions.

1.04.020  Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.030  Prohibited acts including causing, permitting, etc.

1.04.040  Construction.

1.04.050  Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.


1.04.010  Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Sonoma, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

A.  "City" means the city of Sonoma, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Sonoma, California, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision;

B.  "Computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday that day shall be excluded;

C.  "Council" means the city council of the city. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of the state of California;

D.  "County" means the county of Sonoma;

E.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder;

F.  "May" is permissive;

G.  "Month" means a calendar month;

H.  "Must" and "shall." Each is mandatory;

I.  "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed";

J.  "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it;

K.  "Ordinance" means a law of the city; provided, that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution;

L.  "Owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land;

M.  "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them;

N.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt;

O.  "Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively;

P.  "Property" includes real and personal property;

Q.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments;

R.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians;

S.  "State" means the state of California;

T.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state;

U.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others;

V.  Title of Office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city;

W.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed; 

X.  "Year" means a calendar year;

Y.  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning;

Z.  When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 464 § 1, 1973).


1.04.020  Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city:

A.  Gender. Any gender includes the other genders;

B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;

C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa;

D.  Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 464 § 2, 1973).


1.04.030  Prohibited acts including causing, permitting, etc.

Whenever, in the ordinances of the city, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 464 § 3, 1973). 


1.04.040  Construction.

The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 464 § 4, 1973).


1.04.050  Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 464 § 5, 1973).


Chapter 1.08       RIGHT OF ENTRY

Sections: 

1.08.010  Designated.


1.08.010  Designated.

Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24 hours’ written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 466 § 1, 1973). 


Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.12.010    Violation – Penalty.

1.12.020    Nuisance abatement proceedings.


1.12.010 Violation – Penalty.

The city council of the city of Sonoma intends to secure compliance with the provisions of this code. To the extent that such compliance may be achieved by less drastic methods of enforcement, the following alternate, separate and distinct methods may be utilized. Each method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each and every day any such violation exists constitutes a separate offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, each violation of the provisions of this code may be enforced alternatively as follows:

A. Infraction. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code may be prosecuted for an infraction. Written citations for infractions may be issued by code enforcement officers as defined in SMC 1.30.120. Notwithstanding any provision set forth in any other chapter of this code to the contrary, each and every criminal offense that is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by:

1. A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation.

2. A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same section within one year.

3. A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a third or subsequent violation of the same section within one year.

4. Notwithstanding the above, a violation of Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes) shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation, $500.00 for a second violation of the same section within one year, and $1,000 for a third or subsequent violation of the same section within one year.

B. Misdemeanor. Notwithstanding any provision set forth in any other chapter of this code to the contrary, any person in violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor. In its discretion, however, the prosecuting authority may charge any offense as an infraction or reduce any offense charged as a misdemeanor to an infraction during the prosecution. Written citations for misdemeanors may be issued by code enforcement officers as defined in SMC 1.30.120. Each and every misdemeanor violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C. Civil Action. In addition to or in lieu of the remedies provided in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the city prosecutor or city attorney may commence an action for abatement, including, but not limited to, an injunction thereof, in the manner required by law and shall take such other steps to obtain such relief as will abate or remove violations and restrain and enjoin any person from violating any provisions of this code, or other applicable laws and rules and regulations. All costs of such abatement shall be recoverable as set forth within SMC 1.12.020.

D. Administrative Notice and Order. Upon a finding by the city official vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of this code that a violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation under the provisions of Chapter 1.28 SMC or an administrative notice and order under the provisions of Chapter 1.30 SMC. The fines pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 for code violations imposed by these chapters shall be set forth in a schedule of penalties established by resolution of the Sonoma city council. In the event that a nuisance is found to exist in any proceeding commenced under Chapter 1.30 SMC and the city abates the nuisance, the nuisance abatement proceedings described within this chapter shall be applicable.

E. No building, zoning, fire, or other permit shall be issued to the responsible party until the penalty and appropriate permit fees related to the violation have been paid.

F. Each day any violation of this code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 03-2018 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 98-7 § 1, 1998; Ord. 465 § 1, 1973).


1.12.020 Nuisance abatement proceedings.

A. Public Nuisance. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, resolution of the city council, or statute of the state of California is hereby deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by this chapter or as otherwise provided by this code. Every day a public nuisance continues to exist shall constitute a new and separate offense.

B. Lien. Whenever any costs, related administrative costs, and/or attorneys’ fees are incurred by the city in an administrative or civil nuisance abatement proceeding, the cost of such abatement and attorneys’ fees, if elected as described below, shall become a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation of the property owner as provided under Government Code Section 38773.1. The city shall follow those procedures set forth under Government Code Section 38773.1 to place a lien against any property for nuisance abatement costs incurred under the authority of this code.

C. Special Assessment. As an alternative procedure for recovery of any costs, related administrative costs, and/or attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in an administrative or civil nuisance abatement proceeding, the cost of such abatement and attorneys’ fees, if elected as described below, may be made a special assessment, subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5. The city shall follow those procedures set forth under Government Code Section 38773.5 to place a special assessment on any property for nuisance abatement costs incurred under the authority of this code.

D. Attorneys’ Fees. In any civil action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a public nuisance in which the city elects at its initiation to seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees; provided, that the award does not exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 03-2018 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018).


Chapter 1.16       CITY BASE OR DATUM

Sections:

1.16.010  Established.


1.16.010  Established.

The base or datum in the city for the purpose of providing a uniform system of elevations for streets, sidewalks, curbs, sewer grades, etc., is established as follows:

Datum shall be tide water as indicated by the United States Surveys, especially its "benchmark," a circular metal plate or disc sunk in the brickwork of the store building at the northeast corner of Napa Street and First Street East. The elevation of the benchmark is given as 83 feet. This benchmark is 60 or 75 feet easterly from the east side of First Street in the building now known as Duhring’s Building. The exact point in the benchmark is a horizontal line in the middle. This shall be known as the initial benchmark. Its elevation shall be 83 feet.

From time to time as surveys progress, the city engineer shall take the elevation of some object not liable to be moved, record its elevation with reference to the initial benchmark, and describe it in such a manner that it may be recognized, sign his name as having so recorded it, and such new benchmark shall be regarded as a part of the system. (Ord. 139 § 1, 1914).


Chapter 1.20       OFFICIAL MAP  STREETS AND PLAZAS

Sections:

1.20.010  Adopted.

1.20.020  Public plaza.


1.20.010  Adopted.

The official map of the former pueblo or city of Sonoma, made by Jasper O’Farrell and being now on file in the recorder’s office of the county of Sonoma, shall be and the same is declared and adopted as the official map of the present city of Sonoma, so far as the map relates to the extent and boundaries of the present city; and all streets and parts of streets as designated upon the map and being within the boundaries of the present city shall be the streets of the present city, except such streets and parts of streets as have been heretofore sold by the trustees under an act of the Legislature of the state of California, entitled "An Act to Repeal an Act to Incorporate the City of Sonoma," approved April 26th, 1862, and the act amendatory thereof, approved April 10th, 1863, and excepting also all streets and parts of streets sold by the late pueblo commissioners under and by virtue of the several acts of the Legislature, relating to the pueblo commissioners, or to the former pueblo or city of Sonoma, approved respectively March 30th, 1868, March 29th, 1878 and April 4th, 1881. (Ord. 6 § 1, 1884).


1.20.020  Public plaza.

The plaza in the city shall be and remain a public plaza forever. (Ord. 6 § 2, 1884).


Chapter 1.24 APPEALS BEFORE THE CITY

Sections:

1.24.010    Applicability.

1.24.020    Notice.

1.24.030    Effect of filing notice.

1.24.040    Contents of notice.

1.24.050    Hearing.

1.24.060    Action of appellate body.

1.24.070    Appeals by council members.


1.24.010 Applicability.

Any person dissatisfied with any final decision of any city commission, board or official may appeal such final decision to the city council. Only final decisions may be appealed to the city council.

A. For purposes of this section, a “final decision” is one made by a body or official who, by state or federal law, or by virtue of a provision in this Sonoma Municipal Code or other enactment adopted by the city council, is authorized to make a decision that is binding upon the city and becomes effective without any additional approval or decision by any other body or official. Decisions by a body possessing only advisory powers are not “final decisions” for purposes of this chapter. Unless a city employee is expressly granted final decision-making authority by this Sonoma Municipal Code or other enactment adopted by the city council, the only employee who, acting on his or her own, can make a final decision appealable under this section is the city manager.

B. Except for SMC 1.24.040 and 1.24.070, this chapter does not apply to any final decision the appeal of which is governed by some other provision of this Sonoma Municipal Code and/or state or federal law. (Ord. 05-2013 § 1, 2013; Ord. 97-2 § 1, 1997).


1.24.020 Notice.

All appeals shall be initiated by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal on a form provided by the city clerk within 15 days of the date of the decision, together with any applicable fees as determined by council resolution. (Ord. 97-2 § 2, 1997).


1.24.030 Effect of filing notice.

The filing of the notice of appeal shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any permit until such time as the matter on appeal is resolved. (Ord. 97-2 § 3, 1997).


1.24.040 Contents of notice.

The notice of appeal shall state the decision being appealed, its identification number, the identity of the appellant and his interest in the matter, and, unless the appeal is by a member of the city council, shall set forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the appellant, render the decision unjustified or inappropriate. (Ord. 97-2 § 4, 1997).


1.24.050 Hearing.

Upon receipt of a notice of appeal in proper form and payment of required fee, the appellate body shall set a hearing date. (Ord. 97-2 § 5, 1997).


1.24.060 Action of appellate body.

The appellate body shall review the proceedings held by other officers or bodies of which prior decisions or interpretation were made. The appellate body’s decision may affirm or modify the previous decision or interpretation. (Ord. 97-2 § 6, 1997).


1.24.070 Appeals by council members.

Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance of this city, any member of the city council may, at his/her discretion, appeal any final decision of any city commission, board or official to the city council. If an appeal is made by a council member, there shall be a presumption applied that the reason for the appeal is because the appealed decision or interpretation has significant and material effects on the quality of life within the city of Sonoma. No inference of bias shall be made because of the appeal and no other reason need be stated by the council person in his/her notice of appeal. (Ord. 97-2 § 7, 1997).


Chapter 1.28 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION

Sections:

1.28.010    Purpose and application.

1.28.020    Definitions.

1.28.030    Fines.

1.28.040    Contents of citation.

1.28.050    Service procedures.

1.28.060    Satisfaction of the administrative citation.

1.28.070    Appeal of the administrative citation.

1.28.080    Hearing procedure.

1.28.090    Hearing officer’s decision.

1.28.100    Collection of unpaid fines.

1.28.110    Right to judicial review.


1.28.010 Purpose and application.

A. Any violation of this code may be redressed with an administrative fine through the proceedings set forth under this chapter.

B. It is the intent of this chapter that an administrative fine procedure be established as provided under Government Code Section 53069.4 which may be applied to any violation of this code.

C. The proceedings set forth under this chapter shall not be exclusive and may be in addition to any other available criminal, civil, or administrative remedy established under this code or under applicable state law or otherwise, except that no single offense within the meaning of SMC 1.12.010(F) shall be subject to proceedings under both this chapter and administrative fines proceedings under Chapter 1.30 SMC. This chapter shall be used at the sole discretion of the city.

D. When the proceedings set forth under this chapter are used for any violation of this code that pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, a notice of correction shall be issued by the code enforcement officer containing the following information prior to any other proceedings being commenced under this chapter:

1. All of the contents of a citation required under this chapter with the exception of a fine amount.

2. A date not less than 10 days and not more than 90 days from the date of the notice constituting a reasonable time by which the violation is to be corrected or remedied.

3. The statement that failure to correct or remedy the violation by the date established will result in administrative fine proceedings being commenced under this chapter. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.020 Definitions.

A. Responsible Person. For the purposes of this chapter, a “responsible person” is any of the following:

1. A person who causes a code violation to occur;

2. A person who maintains or allows a code violation to continue, by his or her action or failure to act;

3. A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a code violation by its action or failure to act;

4. A person who is the owner of, and/or a person who is a lessee or sublessee with the current right of possession of, real property where a property-related code violation occurs; or

5. A person who is the on-site manager of a business who normally works daily at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the activities of such premises.

B. For the purposes of this chapter, “person” includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity.

C. Enforcement Officer. For the purposes of this chapter, an “enforcement officer” shall mean any city of Sonoma employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this code or this chapter. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.030 Fines.

The city council shall establish the amounts of fines for violations of this code imposed pursuant to this chapter through a schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within one year from the date of the administrative citation. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.040 Contents of citation.

Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

A. Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was committed;

B. The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s);

C. The amount of the fine for the violation(s);

D. An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid;

E. Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation;

F. The name and signature of the enforcement officer issuing the citation; and

G. If the violation is one which is continuing, an order to correct the violation and an explanation of the consequences for failing to correct the violation. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.050 Service procedures.

Service of an administrative citation shall be made as follows:

A. Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

B. Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation shall be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. The location of the responsible person outside of Sonoma County shall be sufficient grounds for service of citation by mail without first attempting personal service. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.060 Satisfaction of the administrative citation.

A. Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must pay the fine to the city within 15 days from the date of the citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the city of Sonoma and delivered to City of Sonoma at #1 The Plaza, Sonoma, CA 95476.

B. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge a failure to correct continuing violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.070 Appeal of the administrative citation.

A. Time to File an Appeal. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a “request for hearing” form and returning it to the city within 15 days from the date the administrative citation is served or deemed to have been served, together with an advanced deposit of the fine. Such “request for hearing” forms shall be made available at no charge at City Hall. A failure to file a timely “request for hearing” shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the citation and to seek judicial review. The requirement that the fine be deposited in advance may be waived by the city manager upon a showing by the recipient of an economic hardship resulting to the recipient from having to make an advance deposit, which waiver shall be within the sole discretion of the city manager.

B. Return of Deposit. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

C. Hearing Officer. The city manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing on a rotational or other regular basis which is not subject to change in accordance with the terms and conditions of an agreement between the city and the hearing officer. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.080 Hearing procedure.

A. No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a timely “request for hearing” form has been completed and submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance or waived by the city manager as provided under SMC 1.28.070.

B. After receipt of the “request for hearing” and fine deposit, a hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 and not more than 60 days from the date that the “request for hearing” is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and be a bar to judicial review of the hearing officer decision based upon a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

C. The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation of this code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 

D. The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. The city shall have the burden of proof by preponderance of the evidence to establish that the violation was caused or maintained by the responsible person at or about the location and on or about the date(s) specified in the administrative citation.

E. The administrative citation and any additional document submitted by the issuing officer/employee shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

F. Upon request, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the issuing officer/employee when issuing the citation. In addition, if the issuing officer/employee submits any additional written reports concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of said documentation also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing.

G. The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the issuing officer/employee or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.090 Hearing officer’s decision.

After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may immediately issue a verbal decision which shall be followed by a decision in writing setting forth the findings supporting the decision within 30 days of the hearing or may issue a written decision setting forth the findings supporting the decision within 10 days of the hearing. The decision in writing shall include the reasons for the decision and such written decision shall be final. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. The written decision shall be served upon the recipient in the manner set forth by SMC 1.28.050. If no appeal is filed with the superior court pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 to the written decision within 20 calendar days after service, then the written decision is hereby deemed confirmed. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.100 Collection of unpaid fines.

Failure of any person to pay the penalty assessed by an administrative citation within 15 days or such other time limit set forth in the administrative citation or by the time determined by the hearing officer as provided in SMC 1.28.090 shall constitute a debt owed to the city and may be enforced as a personal obligation of the responsible party. Administrative penalties shall accrue interest at the same annual rate as any civil judgment in favor of the city. Interest shall accrue commencing on the twentieth day after the penalty becomes due. In the event a civil action is commenced to collect the administrative penalty, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs associated with the collection of the penalty, including, but not limited to, staff time and attorney fees incurred in the collection of the penalty and those costs set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5. The city may take such other actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the Enforcement of Judgments Law, California Code of Civil Procedure Section 680.010 et seq. The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.28.110 Right to judicial review.

Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may obtain judicial review of such decision by filing an appeal to be heard in the Sonoma County superior court in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served in person or by first class mail upon the city clerk. The appeal provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4 shall be applicable to an appeal under this chapter. (Ord. 03-2018 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 1.30 ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE AND ORDER PROCEEDINGS

Sections:

Article I. Purpose and Authority for Administrative Notice and Order Proceedings – Definitions

1.30.100    General enforcement authority for this chapter.

1.30.110    Violations of an ordinance subject to an administrative fine, remedy, or penalty.

1.30.120    Definitions.

Article II. Procedures for Administrative Notice and Order for Code Violations and Nuisances

1.30.130    Administrative notice and order.

1.30.140    Procedures after the administrative notice and order is issued – Recordation of administrative notice and order.

Article III. Administrative Hearing Procedures

1.30.150    Declaration of purpose.

1.30.160    Hearing officer.

1.30.170    Hearing procedures.

1.30.180    Hearing officer’s decision.

1.30.190    Recovery of administrative notice and order penalties and costs.

1.30.200    Limited appeal – Right to judicial review.

1.30.210    Private right of action.

Article IV. Collection of Administrative Fines and Penalties

1.30.220    Administrative hearing fund – General.

1.30.230    Maintenance of fund.

1.30.240    Filing of administrative enforcement order.

1.30.250    Repayment of administrative hearing fund.

1.30.260    Repealed.

1.30.270    Repealed.

1.30.280    Repealed.

1.30.290    Repealed.

1.30.310    Repealed.

Article I. Purpose and Authority for Administrative Notice and Order Proceedings – Definitions


1.30.100 General enforcement authority for this chapter.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the municipal affairs provision contained in Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State of California and Government Code Section 36900 for the purpose of making any violation of this code or of any ordinance enacted by the Sonoma city council subject to administrative fines, remedies, and penalties, to set forth the procedures authorized in Government Code Section 53069.4 for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of such fines and penalties, and to redress and enforce violations of this code that constitute public nuisances through a nuisance abatement mechanism. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to effectively enforce violations of this code committed on a continuing or ongoing basis. This chapter shall be used at the sole discretion of the city.

Whenever any provision of this code refers to the “administrative penalties” chapter, this chapter is being referenced. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.110 Violations of an ordinance subject to an administrative fine, remedy, or penalty. 

This section declares that a violation of this code or of any ordinance enacted by the Sonoma city council may be subject to an administrative fine, remedy, or penalty in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The procedures are activated by an administrative notice and order, which may be used at the sole discretion of the city of Sonoma. The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to and cumulative of all other remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city of Sonoma to address any violation of its ordinances. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.120 Definitions.

A. For the purposes of this chapter, “code enforcement officer” shall mean any city of Sonoma employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this code or ordinance.

B. For the purposes of this chapter, “responsible party” means the person or persons responsible for the event or incident and may include any of the following regarding the property where the violation exists:

1. An owner of record;

2. A manager of the property;

3. One in charge of the premises;

4. An occupant of the premises;

5. A user.

If a responsible party is a minor, then the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the minor shall be the responsible party.

C. Notice and Method of Service. Except as otherwise set forth below, whenever a notice is required to be given under this chapter, the notice shall be served by any of the following methods:

1. Personal service; or

2. Prepaid first class United States Postal Service; or

3. Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property; or

4. Printed verification of notice by electronic mail (email).

Where real property is in violation of this code, written notice shall be personally served or mailed to the property owner at the address as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll available. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted at the property which is in violation of this code.

Notwithstanding the method of delivery, the failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under the Sonoma Municipal Code.

D. “Penalty” refers to the fines in a resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 1.28.030 and shall include any of the following:

1. Penalty or penalties shall include both the singular and plural form;

2. Fine or fines shall include both the singular and plural form;

3. Abatement of a nuisance or violation shall include both the singular and plural form.

E. “City manager” refers to the city manager or his or her designee.

F. The administrative costs include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the hearing officer including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, the services of the hearing officer, any abatement costs, costs for all inspections necessary to enforce the administrative notice and order or the administrative enforcement order, including attorneys’ fees.

1. Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, when the action or proceeding is for the abatement of a nuisance, the prevailing party is entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees and these fees may be included in the costs charged as administrative costs when the city prevails. An award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).

Article II. Procedures for Administrative Notice and Order for Code Violations and Nuisances


1.30.130 Administrative notice and order.

A. Whenever a code enforcement officer determines that a violation of a provision of this code has occurred, the code enforcement officer may issue an administrative notice and order to the responsible party for the violation.

B. Each administrative notice and order shall contain the following elements:

1. The date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is unknown, the date the violation is identified;

2. The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred, such as a tax assessor parcel number (A.P.N.);

3. The section of this code that the responsible party has violated and a description of how the responsible party has violated the section;

4. A description of the action necessary to correct the violation and a reasonable time designated to correct the violation prior to the imposition of penalties;

5. The amount of the penalty for the code violation;

6. An explanation of how the penalty shall be paid, the time period in which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty;

7. An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation described within administrative notice and order;

8. A description of the administrative review procedures. The description shall include the time, date and place of the hearing, which shall be at least 10 days after the date of the administrative notice and order. The description shall also state that the purpose of the hearing will be to make a determination on the existence of the violation(s) and public nuisance and on the adoption of an administrative order, including imposition of civil penalties and administrative costs under this chapter;

9. The name, date, and signature of the code enforcement officer;

10. A statement that any violation of this code is deemed to constitute a public nuisance, which if not corrected or abated as required under this notice and order may be found to exist and ordered to be abated after a public hearing, with abatement and related administrative costs being imposed on the responsible person and/or property owner, and collected judicially, or by special assessment or tax collection, as provided under this chapter. 

C. For a continuing violation of this code pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues, that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the code enforcement officer shall serve a correction notice on the person responsible for the violation containing the following information: 

1. The date the violation was observed;

2. The address or a description of the location where the violation was observed;

3. The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;

4. A date not less than 10 days and not more than 90 days from the date of the notice constituting a reasonable time by which the violation is to be corrected or remedied;

5. The statement that failure to correct or remedy the violation by the date established will result in proceedings being commenced under this chapter; and

6. The name and signature of the enforcement officer issuing the correction notice. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.140 Procedures after the administrative notice and order is issued – Recordation of administrative notice and order.

If the responsible party does not comply with the order within a reasonable time, the code enforcement officer may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying the following:

A. That the building, structure, or property is in violation of this code or of an uncodified ordinance adopted by the city council;

B. That the owner has been so notified.

This certificate may be filed either prior to the administrative hearing designated in the administrative notice and order, or prior to any continuance thereof, or within a reasonable time following the filing of the administrative enforcement order as that term is defined in SMC 1.30.180.

Whenever the corrections ordered in the administrative notice and order shall thereafter have been completed or the building, structure, or property has been repaired, demolished, or removed so that it no longer exists as a violation thereof, the code enforcement officer shall, at his sole discretion, either file, or cause to be filed, with the county recorder, or, in lieu of such filing, provide to the property owner with notice, a new certificate certifying that the building, structure, or property has been brought into compliance with the administrative notice and order, or that all required corrections have been made so that the building, structure, or property conforms to the requirements contained in the administrative notice and order. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).

Article III. Administrative Hearing Procedures


1.30.150 Declaration of purpose.

The purpose of the hearing is to provide a review of the administrative notice and order by a hearing officer and an opportunity to the person subject to a notice and order to object to the determination that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist or that a public nuisance exists. The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to the determination of facts contained in the administrative notice and order and whether a public nuisance as defined under this code exists. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.160 Hearing officer.

A. The city manager shall appoint one or more individuals as the hearing officer for administrative hearings held pursuant to this chapter.

B. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative notice and order penalties upheld by the hearing officer. 

C. The hearing officer shall not be a city employee or an appointed city official. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.170 Hearing procedures.

A. Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery need not apply. The city manager or his/her designees may from time to time adopt procedure, and format, for the administrative hearing.

B. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

C. The burden of proof in an administrative hearing is to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence.

D. The hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to applicable staff reports, oral, physical, and documentary evidence regarding the alleged violation, proposed method of abatement, and the administrative costs incurred by the city.

E. Each witness, prior to testifying, shall be sworn by the hearing officer or a clerk designated by the hearing officer.

F. Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of the party’s cause.

G. The failure of a responsible party named in an administrative notice and order to appear at the administrative notice and order hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust the party’s administrative remedies.

H. On its own motion or on the motion of either party, the hearing officer may continue the hearing for good cause; provided, that notice is given to each party. The notice shall include the time, date and place to which the hearing is continued.

I. City staff has the right to withdraw any item from the administrative hearing agenda. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.180 Hearing officer’s decision.

A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall, within 45 days, file a written decision with the code enforcement officer. The decision is to be entitled “administrative enforcement order” and shall either uphold or cancel the administrative notice and order as to each named responsible party. The decision shall list the finding in support of the decision and the imposition of the administrative fine or penalty. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance exists then the written decision shall also include all of the following: (1) a description of the nuisance, which if based upon a violation of this code shall identify the provision being violated; (2) factual findings and determinations supporting the decision; (3) an order to correct or abate the nuisance by a certain date, which if not complied with shall direct that the city take those steps necessary to enter onto the property and abate the nuisance at the cost of the property owner through a special assessment or lien as provided under Chapter 1.12 SMC.

B. The hearing officer shall serve the administrative enforcement order on each party; when the administrative enforcement order is served on the code enforcement officer, the order shall be final.

C. When the administrative enforcement order cancels the administrative notice and order as to a responsible party, the case shall be terminated as to that party.

D. When the administrative enforcement order upholds the administrative notice and order as to one or more responsible parties, the hearing officer shall impose and assess the prescribed fine and/or penalty against each responsible party. When the administrative enforcement order directs that the nuisance be corrected or abated it shall also impose and assess administrative costs against each responsible party. When the administrative enforcement order directs the abatement of a violation, including a nuisance, the violation may be corrected or abated as authorized within this chapter or as otherwise permitted by law.

E. The administrative enforcement order shall include notice to the responsible party that the administrative costs may become the subject of a lien against the property where the violations occurred if a nuisance is determined to exist and payment is not received within 30 days of the date of the final order. The administrative enforcement order shall also state the penalty for any late payment and that, if the violation continues, the responsible party may be subject to additional penalties authorized by law. The administrative enforcement order shall also state that fines and any penalty for late payment shall be collectible as set forth under SMC 1.28.100 and shall include a restatement of that section.

F. Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition of a substandard building or structure is not commenced within 30 days after any final administrative enforcement order issued under this chapter becomes effective:

1. The code enforcement officer shall cause the building, structure, or other property described in such order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

SUBSTANDARD BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice.

Code Enforcement Officer

City of Sonoma.

2. No person shall occupy any building that has been posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition, or removal ordered by the code enforcement officer has been completed and, where applicable, a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code.

3. Code enforcement officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the city to abate, repair, or demolish any building, structure, or other property pursuant to an administrative enforcement order. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission to enter, inspect, abate, repair, or demolish any thing described in such order, the code enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.

4. The code enforcement officer may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building, structure, or other property to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions that render the building substandard as set forth in the administrative enforcement order; or, if the administrative enforcement order required demolition or abatement, to cause the building, structure, or other property to be sold and demolished; or, to be demolished, and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.190 Recovery of administrative notice and order penalties and costs.

The city may collect any past due penalty assessed in the administrative enforcement order by all available legal means. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.200 Limited appeal – Right to judicial review.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 1.24 SMC or California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 or 1094.6, within 20 days after service of the final administrative order or decision of the local agency is made pursuant to an ordinance enacted in accordance with California Government Code Section 53069.4 regarding the imposition, enforcement or collection of the administrative fines or penalties, any person contesting the fine in the final administrative order or decision made pursuant to this chapter may seek review by filing an appeal to be heard by the superior court. The right to appeal is limited to the terms and conditions set out in California Government Code Section 53069.4. In the event that a copy of the notice of appeal is served in person or by first-class mail upon the city of Sonoma by the contestant-appellant pursuant to the appeal to the superior court, the time for payment shall be suspended from the date of said service until the judgment of the court is final. Any finding in an administrative enforcement order that a nuisance exists and any order made within an administrative enforcement order to abate or correct the nuisance shall constitute a final, administrative determination, not be appealable, and shall be subject to judicial review in the superior court by filing with the court a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to the provisions and time limits set in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.210 Private right of action.

Any person, entity, association, or organization aggrieved by a willful violation of any provision of this chapter, where the owner(s) of a property has failed or refused to correct and/or abate a violation under this chapter for 40 days after the administrative enforcement order becomes final, shall have the right to file an action and/or proceeding for injunctive relief and damages against the owner(s) of such property. Any person, entity, association, or organization which prevails or is successful in any such action or proceeding shall be entitled, in addition to any other relief, to recover all reasonable costs, expenses and attorneys’ fees incurred in such action or proceeding. Treble damages also shall be awarded for such willful failure to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).

Article IV. Collection of Administrative Fines and Penalties


1.30.220 Administrative hearing fund – General.

A. The city council shall establish a special revenue fund to be designated as the administrative hearing fund.

1. Revenue to the fund shall include, but is not limited to, assessments and personal obligations made pursuant to this chapter.

2. Transfers or expenditures from administrative hearing fund shall be budgeted for and approved by the city council. Reimbursements shall be budgeted for said funds to reimburse or defray the costs and expenses that may be incurred by the city in doing or causing to be done the necessary work involving one or more violations identified in an administrative notice and order or in an enforcement order.

B. When any work, including but not limited to repair, demolition, or abatement, is to be done pursuant to this chapter, the city manager, under his or her signing authority, shall cause the work to be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract, pursuant to SMC 1.08.010. Any amount in excess of the city manager’s signature authority shall be approved by the city council. Plans, specifications, and other work requirements necessary to accomplish the objectives of this chapter therefore may be prepared by or at the direction of the city manager, who may employ such labor or professional services on a contract basis as may be deemed reasonably necessary. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.230 Maintenance of fund.

The city council may at any time transfer to the administrative hearing fund, out of any money in the general fund of the city, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite an administrative notice and order or an enforcement order, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the administrative hearing fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections hereinafter provided for. All funds collected under the proceedings hereinafter provided for shall be paid to the city of Sonoma which shall credit the same to the administrative hearing fund. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.240 Filing of administrative enforcement order.

If the responsible party does not comply with the administrative enforcement order and a public nuisance has been found to exist, the code enforcement officer may file with the county recorder a copy of the administrative enforcement order with which the responsible party has failed to comply. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.250 Repayment of administrative hearing fund.

All money recovered by payment of the fine shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction who shall credit the same to the administrative hearing fund. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005. Formerly 1.30.300).


1.30.260 Report to assessor and tax collector – Addition of assessment to tax bill.

Repealed by Ord. 03-2018. (Ord. 03-2018 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018; Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.270 Filing copy of report with county auditor.

Repealed by Ord. 03-2018. (Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.280 Priority of lien.

Repealed by Ord. 03-2018. (Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.290 Collections of assessment – Penalties for foreclosure.

Repealed by Ord. 03-2018. (Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


1.30.310 Satisfaction of lien.

Repealed by Ord. 03-2018. (Ord. 02-2005 § 3, 2005).


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.01    City Council

2.02    Campaign Contribution Limitations

2.04    Council Committees

2.08    City Manager

2.10    Finance Director

2.12    Personnel Classification and Compensation

2.20    Police Department

2.21    Fire Department

2.24    Unclaimed Property Held by Police Department

2.28    Public Library

2.32    Public Cemeteries

2.36    Disaster Relief

2.40    Boards and Commissions – General Provisions

2.44    Planning Commission

2.48    Community Services and Environment Commission

2.56    Cultural and Fine Arts Commission

2.60    Design Review and Historic Preservation Commission

2.65    Repealed

2.70    Living Wage

2.80    Minimum Wage


Chapter 2.01 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.01.010    Meetings.

2.01.020    Councilmembers’ salaries.


2.01.010 Meetings.

A. Location. The city council will hold regular city council meetings at 177 First Street West, City of Sonoma, Sonoma County, California.

B. Dates of Regular Council Meetings. The city council of the city shall from time to time establish, by resolution, the date and time of regular council meetings and may establish, by resolution, the procedures for the conduct of meetings. (Ord. 89-8, 1989).


2.01.020 Councilmembers’ salaries.

A. Each member of the council shall receive, as salary, the sum of $300.00 per month, as prescribed in Section 36516 of the Government Code for cities of up to and including 35,000 in population, payable at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city.

B. This section shall become operative only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the city council become eligible for the salary prescribed herein by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the general municipal election next succeeding the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 06-2007 § 1, 2007).


Chapter 2.02       CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITATIONS

Sections:

2.02.010  Findings and purpose – Statutory authority.

2.02.020  Definitions.

2.02.030  Contributions – Restrictions generally.

2.02.040  Campaign expenditure ceilings and contribution limits.

2.02.050  Reporting of contributions during the last 10 days of a campaign.


2.02.010  Findings and purpose – Statutory authority.

Pursuant to the authority granted to the city council in Government Code Section 81013 permitting the imposition of additional local requirements to the Political Reform Act of 1974, the city council hereby finds that it is in the public interest to place realistic and enforceable limits on the amounts which may be contributed to political campaigns in municipal elections. (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002).


2.02.020  Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, definitions codified in the Political Reform Act, beginning at Section 82000 et seq., shall apply to this chapter. (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002).


2.02.030  Contributions – Restrictions generally.

A.  No person or committee shall make any monetary contribution or contributions which exceed the aggregate amount of $100.00.

B.  No person or committee shall make any nonmonetary contribution or contributions which exceeds the aggregate amount of $400.00.

C.  Return of Excess Contributions. If the contribution limitation set forth in subsections A and B of this section is exceeded, the candidate must, within 15 days after receipt, return to the contributor the excess amount in monetary value form.

D.  Limits Applied Separately. The candidate contribution limit of subsections A and B of this section apply to each person. Therefore, a husband and wife may each make contributions up to the specified limit, including contributions made from shared or community property. When a husband or wife makes a contribution to a candidate or committee, using a joint checking account or other instrument, the contribution will apply to the spouse signing the check.

E.  Nothing in this section shall limit the amount which a candidate may contribute to his or her campaign for an elected city office.

F.  The prohibitions stated in subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to contributions made or received in support of, or in opposition to, a ballot measure. (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002).


2.02.040  Campaign expenditure ceilings and contribution limits.

A.  A candidate who adopts a campaign expenditure ceiling of $10,000 is permitted a higher contribution limit of $200.00 for monetary contributions and $800.00 for nonmonetary contributions.

B.  Each candidate shall file a campaign expenditure statement on a form provided by the city clerk, adopting or rejecting the campaign expenditure ceilings of subsection A of this section at the time of filing nomination papers.

C.  A candidate’s adoption of the campaign expenditure ceilings of subsection A of this section may not be withdrawn. (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002).


2.02.050  Reporting of contributions during the last 10 days of a campaign.

During the last 10 days prior to election day, all monetary contributions which exceed the aggregate amount of $100.00 and nonmonetary contributions which exceed the aggregate amount of $400.00 must be reported to the city clerk on the appropriate campaign contribution form within 24 hours of the date of contribution (unless said contributions fall on a Saturday in which case the contribution shall be reported on the next regular business day). (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002).


Chapter 2.04       COUNCIL COMMITTEES

Sections:

2.04.010  Special committees.

2.04.020  When committees shall report.


2.04.010  Special committees.

Special committees may be appointed to take charge of any subject brought before the city council. (Ord. 68 Art. III, Subd. I § 2, 1900).


2.04.020  When committees shall report.

Each committee shall report to the city council on the matters referred to such committee, on or before the next regular meeting after the same has been duly referred, unless otherwise ordered by the council. (Ord. 68 Art. III, Subd. I § 3, 1900).


Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER*

Sections:

2.08.010    Office created.

2.08.020    Residence.

2.08.030    Bond.

2.08.040    Temporary manager.

2.08.050    Compensation.

2.08.060    Removal of city manager.

2.08.070    Limitations on removal.

2.08.080    Powers and duties generally.

2.08.090    Law enforcement.

2.08.100    Authority over employees.

2.08.110    Power of appointment.

2.08.120    Reorganization of offices.

2.08.130    Ordinances.

2.08.140    Attendance at council meetings.

2.08.150    Financial reports.

2.08.160    Budget.

2.08.170    Purchasing agent.

2.08.180    Investigations.

2.08.190    Public buildings and equipment.

2.08.200    Hours of employment.

2.08.210    Additional duties.

2.08.220    Council-manager relations.

2.08.230    Departmental cooperation.

2.08.240    Attendance at commission meetings.

2.08.250    Authority to sign contracts and conveyances.

2.08.260    City manager designated as director of finance.

2.08.270    Duties of director of finance.

2.08.280    Revocation of ordinances.

*Code reviser’s note: Wherever in this code the term “city administrator” is used, it shall be held to mean the “city manager.”


2.08.010  Office created.

The office of city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 377 § 1, 1967).


2.08.020  Residence.

Residence within the Sonoma Valley Unified School District at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of appointment, but within 180 days thereafter the city manager shall become a resident of the district, or the city council shall declare the office of city manager vacant.

No person elected or appointed to membership on the city council shall, subsequent to such election or appointment, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after he has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 97-9 § 1, 1997; Ord. 377 § 2, 1967).


2.08.030  Bond.

The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond, to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 377 § 3, 1967).


2.08.040  Temporary manager.

The city manager shall appoint, subject to approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of city manager during the period of absence or disability of the city manager, subject, however, to the person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in SMC 2.08.030. (Ord. 377 § 4, 1967).


2.08.050  Compensation.

A. The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution, and the compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council designates.

B. Pursuant to Government Code Section 37683, the city manager shall receive $1.00 annually for each cemetery plot cared for within the city of Sonoma, to be paid only from the income of the cemetery fund. All such cemetery compensation actually paid shall be deducted from the amount otherwise provided for in annual compensation of the city manager. In the event that the income of the fund is insufficient, the city manager shall only receive from the fund the amount earned or $1.00 per cemetery plot cared for, whichever is less.

C. The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred in traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, upon a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended, and approved by the city council. (Ord. 92-17 § 1, 1992; Ord. 377 § 5, 1967).


2.08.060  Removal of city manager.

The city council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him by a four-fifths vote of the whole city council. In the case of his intended removal, the city manager shall be furnished with written notice of such intention to be removed, at least 30 days before the date of such intended removal. Within seven days after receipt of such notice, the city manager may, by written notice, request a public hearing before the council, and thereafter the council shall fix a time for the public hearing at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the 30-day period, at which time the manager may appear and be heard.

In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend on any showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is for the city manager to publicly present to the city council his grounds for opposition to removal prior to its action. (Ord. 377 § 6, 1967).


2.08.070  Limitations on removal.

Notwithstanding other sections of this chapter, the city manager shall not be removed from office during a period of 60 days next preceding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected, nor shall the city manager be removed from office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow newly elected members of the city council to observe the actions and abilities of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of this 150-day period, the provisions of SMC 2.08.060 as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 377 § 7, 1967).


2.08.080  Powers and duties generally.

The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or state law. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head of the city and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty, and he or she shall have the powers set forth in SMC 2.08.090 through 2.08.210. In addition, the city manager is appointed, pursuant to Government Code Section 37683, as cemetery fund administrator. (Ord. 92-17 § 2, 1992; Ord. 377 § 8, 1967).


2.08.090  Law enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced, and that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. (Ord. 377 § 8(a), 1967).


2.08.100  Authority over employees.

It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinates, officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. (Ord. 377 § 8(b), 1967).


2.08.110  Power of appointment.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and the city manager shall, appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney, subject to personnel rules and regulations as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 05-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 377 § 8(c), 1967).


2.08.120  Reorganization of offices.

It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business. (Ord. 377 § 8(d), 1967).


2.08.130  Ordinances.

It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption, such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient. (Ord. 377 § 8(e), 1967).


2.08.140  Attendance at council meetings.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, upon his own request, by the mayor or the council, or unless excused therefrom when his own removal is under consideration. (Ord. 377 § 8(f), 1967).


2.08.150  Financial reports.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. (Ord. 377 § 8(g), 1967).


2.08.160  Budget.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be prepared and submitted to him by each department, division or service of the city government itemized annual estimates of expenditures required by any of them for capital outlay, salaries, wages and miscellaneous operating costs; to tabulate the same into a preliminary consolidated municipal budget, and submit the same to the city council before May 30th of each year, with his recommendation as to such changes which he deems advisable. (Ord. 97-9 § 2, 1997; Ord. 377 § 8(h), 1967).


2.08.170  Purchasing agent.

It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall be responsible for, the purchase of all supplies for all departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager. (Ord. 377 § 8(i), 1967).


2.08.180  Investigations.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. He shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government, and in regard to services maintained by public utilities in the city. (Ord. 377 § 8(j), 1967).


2.08.190  Public buildings and equipment.

It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall exercise general supervision over, all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.

It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall, compile and keep up to date a complete inventory of all property, real and personal, owned by the city, and to recommend to the city council the purchase of new machinery, equipment and supplies, whenever in his judgment the same can be obtained at the best advantage, taking into consideration trade-in value of machinery and equipment in use. (Ord. 377 § 8(k), 1967).


2.08.200  Hours of employment.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire working time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. (Ord. 377 § 8(1), 1967).


2.08.210  Additional duties.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. (Ord. 377 § 8(m), 1967).


2.08.220  Council-manager relations.

The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for purposes of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council, and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. No individual councilman shall in any manner attempt to influence the city manager in the making of any appointment or in the purchase of supplies. (Ord. 377 § 9, 1967).


2.08.230  Departmental cooperation.

It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, and the city attorney, to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically, and harmoniously, so far as to be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. (Ord. 05-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 377 § 10, 1967).


2.08.240  Attendance at commission meetings.

The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, public utilities commission, and any other commission, boards or committees, hereafter created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commission, boards or committees, as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees, appointed by the city council. (Ord. 377 § 11, 1967).


2.08.250  Authority to sign contracts and conveyances.

Pursuant to Government Code Section 40602, the city manager has the same authority as the mayor of the city to sign written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city when expressly authorized by appropriate resolution or motion of the city council in particular cases, and either may sign if so authorized. (Ord. 93-18 § 1, 1993).


2.08.260  City manager designated as director of finance.

The city manager or his/her designee is hereby designated as the director of finance of the city of Sonoma and shall assume all financial and accounting duties and responsibilities identified by the applicable portions of staff law and local ordinance. (Ord. 96-1 § 1, 1996).


2.08.270  Duties of director of finance.

The director of finance shall assume all duties and responsibilities concerning certification and approval of payrolls previously performed by the city clerk before the creation of the office of director of finance as referred to and provided for in California Government Code Section 37207, et seq., including the signing of city warrants. (Ord. 96-1 § 2, 1996).


2.08.280  Revocation of ordinances.

Any motion, resolution or ordinance to the contrary of SMC 2.08.260 is hereby revoked. (Ord. 96-1 § 3, 1996).


Chapter 2.10       FINANCE DIRECTOR*

Sections:

2.10.010  Office established.

2.10.020  Statutory authority for certain duties.

2.10.030  Powers and duties.

2.10.040  Bond required.

*Code reviser’s note: See also Chapter 2.08 SMC, City Manager.


2.10.010  Office established.

The city council does establish the office of finance director. (Ord. 95-1 § 1, 1995).


2.10.020  Statutory authority for certain duties.

By the authority granted under Section 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state, all rights, powers and duties of the city clerk pertaining to financial matters of the city, as defined in Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code, are transferred to the office of finance director. (Ord. 95-1 § 2, 1995).


2.10.030  Powers and duties.

The powers and duties of the finance director, in addition to those referred to in SMC 2.10.020, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.  The finance director shall be the accounting officer for the city and shall maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city.

B.  The finance director shall prepare and present to the city council monthly a written summary statement of receipts and disbursements by departments and funds, including opening and closing fund balances in the treasury.

C.  The finance director shall, at the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present a written summary statement of all the preceding year’s receipts and disbursements by departments and funds, including opening and closing fund balances in the treasury.

D.  The finance director shall cause the annual financial statement to be published in the city. Such statement shall be published not later than 120 days after the close of the fiscal year for the report compiled.

E.  The finance director shall prepare and present to the city council a written suggested budget for the city, showing the suggested budget for each department. The written suggested budget shall be submitted to the city council on or before May 30th of each year.

F.  The finance director shall study and present such additional written reports as the city council may from time to time direct. (Ord. 95-1 § 3, 1995).


2.10.040  Bond required.

The finance director shall give bonds and maintain same as otherwise required by the city clerk by Section 36518 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 95-1 § 4, 1995).


Chapter 2.12       PERSONNEL CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION

Sections:

2.12.010  Salaries, wages and working conditions to be fixed by resolution.


2.12.010  Salaries, wages and working conditions to be fixed by resolution.

From and after July 1, 1976, the salaries, wages, hours of work, working conditions and similar matters relating to the employment of city personnel shall be fixed by resolution of the city council, pursuant to the authority vested in it by Section 36506 of the Government Code. (Ord. 76-15 § 2, 1976).


Chapter 2.20       POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

Article I. Peace Officers

2.20.010  Qualification.

2.20.020  Compliance required.

Article II. Public Safety Dispatchers

2.20.030  Qualification.

2.20.040  Adherence.

2.20.050  Commission’s right to inquire.

Article I. Peace Officers


2.20.010  Qualification.

The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 341 § 1, 1963).


2.20.020  Compliance required.

Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of the California Penal Code, the city, while receiving aid from the state of California pursuant to Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 341 § 2, 1963).

Article II. Public Safety Dispatchers


2.20.030  Qualification.

The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 89-2 § 1, 1989).


2.20.040  Adherence.

Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the city will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). (Ord. 89-2 § 2, 1989).


2.20.050  Commission’s right to inquire.

Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the city’s public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 89-2 § 3, 1989).


Chapter 2.21       FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.21.010  Chemical spills.


2.21.010  Chemical spills.

The city fire department shall have the responsibility and duty to answer immediately any call or report of the spill or escape of chemical substances known or suspected to be dangerous to human or animal life, health or safety, whether resulting from explosion, leakage, vehicular accident, or any other cause whatsoever. The fire department shall take all measures within its control to contain such spillage, to prohibit the approach of persons at the scene, except authorized persons, to isolate the scene, and all reasonable measures to prevent injury. The police department, public works department, and other city departments shall assist as requested by the fire chief or fire department officers acting in his place. (Ord. 83-13 § 1, 1983).


Chapter 2.24       UNCLAIMED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.24.010  Legislative authority.

2.24.020  Property record to be kept by chief of police.

2.24.030  Disposition of property taken from an arrested or accused person.

2.24.040  Disposition of unclaimed property.

2.24.050  Storage and holding period of unclaimed property.

2.24.060  Restitution of unclaimed property to owner.

2.24.070  Return of lost property to finder.

2.24.080  Quick sale of unclaimed property in danger of perishing, etc.


2.24.010  Legislative authority.

The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted in Section 2080.4 of the Civil Code of the state of California. (Ord. 483 § 1(A), 1974; Ord. 437 § 1, 1971).


2.24.020  Property record to be kept by chief of police.

All property or money taken from persons under arrest, or taken under suspicion or with knowledge of its having been stolen or feloniously obtained, all property or money constituting evidence or proceeds of crime, or taken from intoxicated or insane persons, or other persons incapable of taking care of themselves, and all property or money lost or abandoned that may come into the possession of any member of the police department shall be delivered to the chief of police, who shall enter or cause to be entered in a record to be kept by him for that purpose a detailed description of the same, together with the name of the person, or persons from whom received, the names of any claimants thereto, the time of the seizure and the final disposition thereof. (Ord. 437 § 2, 1971).


2.24.030  Disposition of property taken from an arrested or accused person.

When any person arrested is adjudged innocent of the offense charged by a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall adjudge that the property or money belongs to such person, the chief of police shall thereupon deliver such property or money to him personally, and not to his attorney or agent, and take his receipt therefor. If the accused is held for trial or examination, such money or property shall remain in the custody of the chief of police until the discharge or conviction of the person accused, unless prior thereto he has delivered the same to a state or county officer, as provided by law. (Ord. 437 § 3, 1971).


2.24.040  Disposition of unclaimed property.

All unclaimed property that has been in the possession of the police not otherwise disposed of or required to be held and is no longer needed as evidence shall be disposed of by the chief of police in one of the following ways:

A.  It shall be destroyed, if so directed by federal, state or city laws and may be destroyed if authorized by the laws;

B.  All guns or firearms which are not required or authorized to be destroyed by federal or state laws shall be destroyed in the manner specified in the Dangerous Weapons Control Law of the state of California;

C.  If the use of any such property is requested by any department of the city and the property so requested is not subject to destruction under applicable federal, state or city laws, or as provided herein, the property shall be turned over to the city manager, who shall sign a receipt therefor, for distribution to the department making the request;

D.  All such property which is not disposed of as hereinabove provided in subsections A, B and C shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. Such public auction sale shall be held at least once each year at a time and place to be fixed by the chief of police of the city. The chief of police shall give notice of the auction sale at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. The notice shall state the day and hour when such sale shall commence, the place at which it is to be held, and shall contain a general description of the property to be sold, or shall refer to a list thereof on file with the city clerk. The notice shall be signed by the chief of police. The proceeds of such sale shall, together with all moneys unclaimed for a period of six months, be paid into the city treasury;

E.  Any property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the city shall be deemed to be of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as the city manager directs;

F.  Unclaimed Bicycles – Charitable Donations.

1.  In addition to subsections A through E of this section, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 217, the city council declares that any bicycles in the possession of the police department of the city which have been unclaimed for a period of at least 60 days may be turned over to any charitable or nonprofit organization which is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency.

2.  Any charitable or nonprofit organization that the city determines qualifies to receive bicycles under this section and which the city approves to receive said bicycles shall enter into an agreement with the city to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any actions against it arising out of the city’s donation. (Ord. 95-3 § 1, 1995; Ord. 437 § 4, 1971).


2.24.050  Storage and holding period of unclaimed property.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all unclaimed property in the possession of the police department shall be held and stored by the chief of police for the following periods:

A.  Unclaimed bicycles for a period of at least three months;

B.  All other unclaimed property for a period of at least four months. (Ord. 437 § 5, 1971).


2.24.060  Restitution of unclaimed property to owner.

The chief of police shall restore unclaimed property in the possession of the police department to its legal owner, upon proof of such ownership satisfactory to him and upon the payment of all reasonably necessary costs incurred in the care and protection thereof, and cost of publication, if any. Where any such property may be needed or required as evidence in any criminal proceeding, the chief of police shall delay the restoration of such property to its legal owner until the conclusion of such proceedings. If such property is introduced as evidence in a criminal case, it shall be disposed of only upon order of the proper court. If the legal owner is a person prohibited by law from possessing such property, restitution shall not be made. (Ord. 437 § 6, 1971).


2.24.070  Return of lost property to finder.

Where lost money or other lost personal property is found or saved by a person other than in the course of employment as an employee of any public agency and is turned over to the police department in accordance with the provisions of Section 2080.1 of the State Civil Code or otherwise, and no owner appears and proves his ownership of such property within 90 days thereafter, the police department shall, if such property is of a value of $10.00 or more, cause to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, notice of the found or saved property. If, after seven days following the first publication of the notice, no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property, the property shall be returned to the finder on payment of all reasonable charges, including cost of publication. The police department may require the finder to deposit with it an amount sufficient to cover the cost of publication before so proceeding. Where such property is of a value of less than $10.00, it may be returned to the finder without publication of notice after expiration of the minimum applicable holding period specified in this chapter, if no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the finder is a person prohibited by law from possessing such property. (Ord. 437 § 7, 1971).


2.24.080  Quick sale of unclaimed property in danger of perishing, etc.

Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, when any unclaimed property in the possession of the police department is in danger of perishing, or of losing the greater part of its value, or when the reasonably necessary costs incurred in the care and protection of any such property amount to two-thirds of its value, the police department may sell such property by public auction in the manner and upon the notice of sale of personal property under execution, if it is a thing which is commonly the subject of sale, when the owner cannot, with reasonable diligence, be found, or, being found, refuses upon demand to pay the reasonably necessary costs incurred in the care and protection thereof. (Ord. 437 § 8, 1971).


Chapter 2.28       PUBLIC LIBRARY

Sections:

2.28.010  Established.

2.28.020  Management.

2.28.030  Trustees – Meetings – Time – Place.

2.28.040  Trustees – Powers.

2.28.050  Trustees – Report.

2.28.060  Access.

2.28.070  Book lending – Contracts.

2.28.080  Property – Title.


2.28.010  Established.

A public library in and for the city is established, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 27301 through 27456 of the Education Code. The public library shall be known as the Sonoma Public Library. (Ord. 483 § 1(C), 1974; Ord. 101 § 1, 1909).


2.28.020  Management.

The management of the public library shall be conducted by a board of library trustees to consist of five members, to be appointed by the city council. Such trustees shall severally hold office for three years, serving without compensation; provided, that the members of the first board appointed shall so classify themselves by lot that one of their number shall go out of office at the end of the current fiscal year, two at the end of one year thereafter, and the other two at the end of two years thereafter.

Men and women shall be equally eligible to such appointment, and vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in the same manner. (Ord. 483 § 1(B), 1974; Ord. 101 § 2, 1909).


2.28.030  Trustees – Meetings – Time – Place.

The board of library trustees shall meet at least once a month at such times and places as they may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any time by three trustees, by written notice served upon each member at least three hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board shall appoint one of their number president who shall serve for one year and until his successor is appointed, and in his absence shall select a president pro tem. The board shall cause a proper record of its proceedings to be kept, and at the first meeting, it must immediately upon organizing cause to be made out and filed with the State Librarian at Sacramento, a certificate showing that such library has been established, with the date thereof, the name of the trustees, and of the officers of the board chosen for the first year. (Ord. 101 § 3, 1909).


2.28.040  Trustees – Powers.

The board of library trustees shall have power:

First: To make and enforce all rules, regulations and bylaws necessary for the administration, government and protection of the library under its management, and all property belonging thereto;

Second: To administer any trust declared or created for such library, and receive by gift, devise or bequest and hold in trust or otherwise, property situated in this state or elsewhere, and where not otherwise provided, dispose of the same for the benefit of such library;

Third: To prescribe the duties and powers of the librarian and other officers and employees of the library; to determine the number of and appoint all such officers and employees, and fix their compensation, which officers and employees shall hold their offices or position at the pleasure of the board;

Fourth: To purchase necessary books, journals, publications and other personal property;

Fifth: To purchase such real property, and erect or rent and equip such building or buildings, room or rooms, as may be necessary when in their judgment a suitable building or portion thereof has not been provided by the city council for such library;

Sixth: To require the Secretary of State and other state officials to furnish the library with copies of any and all reports, laws, and other publications of the state not otherwise disposed of by law;

Seventh: To borrow books from, lend books to and exchange the same with other libraries, and to allow nonresidents to borrow books upon such conditions as they may prescribe;

Eighth: To do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of Sections 27301 through 27456 of the Education Code. (Ord. 483 § 1(C), 1974; Ord. 101 § 4, 1909).


2.28.050  Trustees – Report.

The board of library trustees shall, on or before the last day of July in each year, make a report to the city council, giving the condition of the library on the thirtieth day of June preceding, together with a statement of their proceedings for the year then ended, and must immediately upon the publication of such report forward a copy thereof for filing to the State Library at Sacramento. (Ord. 101 § 5, 1909).


2.28.060  Access.

The Sonoma Public Library shall be forever free to the inhabitants and nonresident taxpayers of Sonoma, subject always to such rules, regulations and bylaws as may be made by the board of library trustees; and provided, that for violations of the same a person may be fined or excluded from the privileges of the library. (Ord. 101 § 6, 1909).


2.28.070  Book lending – Contracts.

The board of library trustees may contract with the city councils of neighboring municipalities, or with the boards of supervisors of the counties in which public libraries are situated, for lending the books of such library to residents of such counties or neighboring municipalities upon a reasonable compensation to be paid by such counties or neighboring municipalities. (Ord. 101 § 7, 1909).


2.28.080  Property – Title.

The title to all property acquired for the purposes of such library, when not inconsistent with the terms of its acquisition or otherwise designated, shall vest in the city, and in the name of the city may be sued for and defended by action at law or otherwise. (Ord. 101 § 8, 1909).


Chapter 2.32       PUBLIC CEMETERIES

Sections:

2.32.010  Public cemeteries.

2.32.020  Vaults.

2.32.030  Control and management.

2.32.040  Right of burial.

2.32.050  Regulations.

2.32.060  Maintenance and supervision of public cemeteries.

2.32.070  Construction, alteration and improvements by private parties.

2.32.080  Disinterment.

2.32.090  Grave reservations.

2.32.100  Public vaults.

2.32.110  Appeal.

2.32.120  Nighttime hours.

2.32.130  Violation of SMC 2.32.120 – Misdemeanor.

2.32.140  Endowment care.


2.32.010  Public cemeteries.

The following cemeteries are the public cemeteries of the city: Mountain Cemetery and each and every annex thereto; Valley Cemetery and each annex thereto; Veterans Memorial Park Cemetery and each annex thereto. (Ord. 12-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 305 § 1.00, 1960).


2.32.020  Vaults.

All public vaults in the public cemeteries of the city shall be deemed to be included in the term "public cemeteries." (Ord. 305 § 1.01, 1960).


2.32.030  Control and management.

The city council shall, subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, exercise control and management of the public cemeteries. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.02, 1960).


2.32.040  Right of burial.

Any person shall have the right to inter any human remains in the public cemeteries, or hold human remains in any vault therein; provided all applicable rules and regulations, ordinances and laws have been fully complied with. (Ord. 305 § 1.03, 1960).


2.32.050  Regulations.

The city council shall establish rules and regulations, in conformity with this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city, for the orderly control and conduct of the public cemeteries; provided, that before the rules and regulations and any subsequent amendments thereto become effective, they shall be submitted to the city council for approval; and the city council, in order that the rules and regulations shall be effective, must approve same by resolution.

The rules and regulations referred to above shall include a comprehensive fee schedule covering all charges to be levied in the public cemeteries of any type whatsoever. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.04, 1960).


2.32.060  Maintenance and supervision of public cemeteries.

The city manager shall be in charge of the maintenance, supervision and upkeep of all city cemeteries. The city manager or his/her designee shall perform all duties necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and state law or regulations respecting the conduct of public cemeteries. The duties of the city manager shall be as set forth by resolution. (Ord. 12-2003 § 2, 2003; Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 372 § 1, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.05, 1960).


2.32.070  Construction, alteration and improvements by private parties.

No person, firm or corporation shall commence any new construction, repair, alteration or improvement of or to a vault or plot site, without first requesting a permit therefor and submitting plans and specifications therefor to the city manager for approval by the public works administrator of the city. The approval shall not be given and no permit issued unless the proposed construction, alteration, and/or improvement satisfies all uniform building codes then in effect in the city; and provided further, the permit shall not be issued unless the proposed work of improvement is in substantial conformity with general standards of improvement hereafter adopted for the cemeteries and is compatible with existing or planned cemetery improvements, including landscaping, and with any approved master plan for any cemetery. (Ord. 12-2003 § 3, 2003; Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.06, 1960).


2.32.080  Disinterment.

Disinterment shall be deemed to mean any removal of human remains whatsoever, from any public vault or other vault, grave, niche or mausoleum to any other vault, grave, niche or mausoleum or from a city cemetery to any other cemetery, whether or not such cemetery is under the control of the city, or for private possession of cremated remains.

No disinterment whatsoever may be made unless application is made therefor at the office of the city manager at least four working days in advance of the time requested for the disinterment. All disinterments must be approved by the city and shall be performed by or under the supervision of city personnel. Scheduling of disinterments shall be as approved by the city. (Ord. 96-19 § 1, 1996; Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.07, 1960).


2.32.090  Grave reservations.

Reservations may be made for interment space in the public cemeteries of the city under the following terms and conditions:

A.  Payment of the minimum fee must be made at the time of making application for such reservations;

B.  Payment of the full amount must be received within one year following the aforesaid application; in the event the same is not made, the reservation shall be deemed waived, and payments made thereon retained by the city as consideration for the granting of the reservation;

C.  The reservation may be cancelled, and in the event such cancellation is made, a refund will be made less such service charge or charges as shall be fixed in the rules and regulations of the city council;

D.  When use is made of the reserved interment space during any reservation period as set forth herein, the balance owed on the reserved space shall become immediately due and payable;

E.  No reservation shall be in effect for longer than the life of the person, or the last survivor of a group of persons, for whom such reservations are made. When such period has lapsed, the reservation shall be deemed canceled and of no force and effect. (Ord. 12-2003 § 4, 2003; Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 372 § 1, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.08, 1960).


2.32.100  Public vaults.

A.  It is unlawful to place in the public vault, or in any private vault of any public cemetery of the city, the body of any person who has died, or is suspected to have died, of a contagious or infectious disease, and all such bodies shall be interred according to applicable laws and regulations of the city, the county of Sonoma, and the state of California.

B.  The use of the public vault shall be solely on a temporary basis, under such rules and regulations as are established by the city council. (Ord. 12-2003 § 5, 2003; Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 372 § 1, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.09, 1960).


2.32.110  Appeal.

Any party aggrieved by the action of the city manager or his/her designee, in any matter affecting the cemeteries or use thereof, may appeal in writing from the decision or act complained of within 10 days after the decision has been rendered or the act performed, as follows: the appeal shall be made to the city council which shall set a date for public hearing thereon and render a decision thereon within 60 days after the filing of the appeal. (Ord. 12-2003 § 6, 2003; Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 372 § 1, 1967; Ord. 305 § 1.10, 1960).


2.32.120  Nighttime hours.

It is the policy of the city that the Mountain and Valley Cemeteries, and any other cemeteries which may be owned or controlled by the city, shall be generally closed during nighttime hours. For this purpose, the city council may, by resolution adopted from time to time, order the closing of the cemeteries at particular hours and between particular hours, taking into account the season of the year and the times of dusk and dawn, to the end that city cemeteries will be closed during the hours of darkness and for reasonable periods of time immediately before darkness and immediately thereafter. It is the purpose of the city to discourage and, to the extent possible, prevent trespass and vandalism in city cemeteries, and the city council shall consider this purpose in adopting its closing regulations. (Ord. 488 § 1, 1974).


2.32.130  Violation of SMC 2.32.120 – Misdemeanor. 

The willful violation of any order promulgated by the city council pursuant to resolution adopted by authority of SMC 2.32.120 shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law. (Ord. 488 § 2, 1974).


2.32.140  Endowment care.

A.  There is hereby created an endowment care fund which shall be administered by the city manager or his/her designee and into which shall be deposited all endowment care income received by the city.

B.  The city shall determine the amount to be collected from each purchaser of a cemetery plot for endowment care. Said amount shall be specified and listed in the schedule of fees adopted by the council. 

C.  The endowment care fund shall be invested and the earned income from such investments may be used for the general care and maintenance of the grounds and buildings.

D.  Endowment care is that care and maintenance necessitated by natural growth and ordinary wear which can be provided at reasonable intervals with income from the endowment care fund, and includes the planting, cutting, watering, and care of lawns, trees and shrubs; the cleaning and upkeep of buildings; and the maintenance of utilities, walls, roadways and walks. The city council may also direct and use a portion of the income from such fund for such general care, maintenance, repairs, and section embellishment as its sound discretion shall deem to be for the best interest of the cemetery to the end that the cemetery generally be kept in the best condition possible within the limits of such income. (Ord. 12-2003 § 8, 2003).


Chapter 2.36       DISASTER RELIEF

Sections:

2.36.010  Purposes.

2.36.020  Definition.

2.36.030  Disaster council membership.

2.36.040  Disaster council powers and duties.

2.36.050  Director and assistant director of emergency services – Offices created.

2.36.060  Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services.

2.36.070  Emergency organization.

2.36.080  Emergency plan.

2.36.090  Expenditures.

2.36.100  Penalty for violation.


2.36.010  Purposes.

The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 446 § 1, 1972).


2.36.020  Definition.

As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy which conditions are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 446 § 2, 1972).


2.36.030  Disaster council membership.

The city of Sonoma disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

A.  The mayor who shall be chairman;

B.  The city manager, who shall be director of emergency services, and who shall be vice chairman;

C.  The assistant director of emergency services;

D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans’, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 446 § 3, 1972).


2.36.040  Disaster council powers and duties.

It shall be the duty of the city of Sonoma disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption of the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. (Ord. 446 § 4, 1972).


2.36.050  Director and assistant director of emergency services – Offices created. 

A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 446 § 5, 1972).


2.36.060  Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services.

A.  The director is empowered to:

1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5.  Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered to do the following:

a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such person shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority;

B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office to take effect in the event the director is not available to attend meetings or otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council;

C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 446 § 6, 1972).


2.36.070  Emergency organization.

All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of SMC 2.36.060 (A)(6), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 446 § 7, 1972).


2.36.080  Emergency plan.

The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war caused emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 446 § 8, 1972).


2.36.090  Expenditures.

Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 446 § 9, 1972).


2.36.100  Penalty for violation.

It is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC, for any person, during an emergency, to:

A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 446 § 10, 1972).


Chapter 2.40 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

2.40.010    Attendance.

2.40.020    Meeting schedules.

2.40.030    Removals.

2.40.040    Quorum.

2.40.050    Repealed.

2.40.060    Compensation.

2.40.070    Repealed.

2.40.080    Commission officers.

2.40.090    Repealed.

2.40.100    Repealed.

2.40.110    Repealed.

2.40.120    Effect of tie votes as a result of absences. 


2.40.010 Attendance.

Attendance by members at the regular and special meetings of all boards, commissions, and advisory or assisting groups of the city (hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as “commissions” or “commission” and their members referred to as “commissioners” or “commissioner”) appointed by the city council now in existence, or hereafter established, shall be subject to the following rule:

If a member of any board or commission of the city fails to attend the regular or special meetings of such a board or commission for three consecutive meetings or one-third of any calendar year’s meetings, the office becomes vacant automatically, without any declaration to that effect, and shall thereafter be filled as any other vacancy. Upon request by a commissioner, the council may waive the attendance rules due to special circumstances. (Ord. 07-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.020 Meeting schedules.

Regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held monthly with special meetings being scheduled on call by the chair or in the absence of the chair, on call by the vice chair. Regular meetings of other boards and commissions shall be held once each calendar quarter, unless a more frequent meeting schedule is approved by the city council. Special meetings of any commission can be called by the chair or a majority of the commission members. (Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.030 Removals.

All commissioners serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed from any commission by a three-fifths vote of the full council. (Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.040 Quorum.

A quorum shall consist of a majority of eligible commissioners serving at such time as any meeting is scheduled or called. (Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.050 Public meetings.

Repealed by Ord. 05-2017. (Ord. 99-15 § 1, 2000; Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.060 Compensation.

All commissioners shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.070 Term of office.

Repealed by Ord. 05-2017. (Ord. 99-15 § 2, 2000; Ord. 87-8 § 1, 1987).


2.40.080 Commission officers.

Each commission shall select a chairman and vice chairman from the eligible members of their respective commissions during a regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984).


2.40.090 City council may waive limitation on successive terms of office.

Repealed by Ord. 05-2017. (Ord. 2003-03 § 1, 2003; Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984. Formerly 2.40.100).


2.40.100 Appointments.

Repealed by Ord. 05-2017. (Ord. 07-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2003-03 § 1, 2003; Ord. 84-8 § 2, 1984. Formerly 2.40.110).


2.40.110 Alternates.

Repealed by Ord. 05-2017. (Ord. 07-2015 §§ 3, 4, 2015; Ord. 03-2007 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2003-03 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2000-14 § 1, 2000. Formerly 2.40.120).


2.40.120 Effect of tie votes as a result of absences. 

When the action of any commission is a tie vote as a result of absences of one or more members of that commission, the matter shall be rescheduled for commission reconsideration at a meeting at which all, or an odd number of, commissioners will be in attendance. This section shall not apply when a tie vote is a result of recusal necessitated by conformance with the California Political Reform Act. (Ord. 09-2008 § 1, 2008).


Chapter 2.44 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.44.010    Composition – Planning commission.

2.44.020    General plan.

2.44.030    Powers and duties.


2.44.010 Composition – Planning commission.

The planning commission shall consist of seven members, six of whom shall be qualified electors of the city. The remaining member may be a qualified elector in Sonoma Valley, as defined by the council commission and committee appointment policy. All members shall be appointed and hold office in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 2.40 SMC and rules and procedures established by city council resolution. No person shall be elected, appointed, reelected, or reappointed as chair or vice chair of the planning commission, unless such person is a qualified elector of the city. Any person so elected or appointed shall maintain city residence as a qualification for the office, and upon loss of such residence, shall vacate the office. (Ord. 02-2018 § 1, 2018; Ord. 05-2017 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2003-03 § 2, 2003; Ord. 84-8 § 3, 1984).


2.44.020 General plan.

The planning commission shall have such power as is described by state law, and it shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to prepare and adopt a comprehensive long-term master plan for the physical development of the city. Such plan shall be known as the general plan and shall be so prepared that all, or portions thereof, may be adopted by the city council in accordance with law. (Ord. 84-8 § 3, 1984).


2.44.030 Powers and duties.

The planning commission shall have such other authority and responsibilities as delegated by the city council and specified by various ordinances within this code and by state law. (Ord. 84-8 § 3, 1984).


Chapter 2.48 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND ENVIRONMENT COMMISSION

Sections:

2.48.010    Purpose.

2.48.020    Composition – Community services and environment commission.

2.48.030    Duties and responsibilities.


2.48.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the community services and environment commission shall be to advise the city council on matters related to the preservation and enhancement of the parks, recreational facilities, open space and the natural environment under the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 99-15 § 3, 2000).


2.48.020 Composition – Community services and environment commission.

Appointments to and holding a position on the community services and environment commission and its operation shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 2.40 SMC and rules and procedures established by city council resolution. The community services and environment commission shall be composed of seven voting members, of which at least six shall be qualified electors of the city. The remaining voting member may be a qualified elector of Sonoma Valley, as defined by the commissions appointment administrative policy. Qualified applicants who also have professional background, expertise or education in one or more of the following areas may be appointed to the commission: landscape architecture, recreation planning or management, resource or habitat conservation, hazardous materials management, environmental education, arboriculture, alternative energy production, or a related field. A minimum of four seats on the commission may be held at any one time by persons having such expertise. One nonvoting “youth member” shall also be selected. Said youth member shall be 14 to 18 years old and shall be a resident of the city or the greater Sonoma Valley, as defined by the council commission and committee appointment policy. (Ord. 02-2018 § 2, 2018; Ord. 05-2017 § 3, 2017; Ord. 99-15 § 3, 2000).


2.48.030 Duties and responsibilities.

A. The community services and environment commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in matters pertaining to:

1. The planning and implementation of new recreation facilities and services;

2. Open space acquisition and preservation;

3. The restoration of important habitat areas within the city;

4. Proposed improvements or modifications to existing city parks, cemeteries, trails, bikeways and related facilities;

5. Policies related to the use of the Plaza and other city parks;

6. Policies and programs related to tree preservation and expanding tree planting opportunities in the city;

7. Policies and programs related to resource conservation (soil, water, energy, etc.);

8. Policies and programs intended to preserve and enhance the natural environment;

9. Such other duties and responsibilities as delegated by the city council.

B. Two members of this commission shall serve as members of the city’s tree committee. (Ord. 05-2017 § 4, 2017; Ord. 99-15 § 3, 2000).


Chapter 2.56 CULTURAL AND FINE ARTS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.56.010    Purpose.

2.56.020    Composition – Cultural and fine arts commission.

2.56.030    Duties and responsibilities.

2.56.040    City council review.


2.56.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the cultural and fine arts commission is to develop and establish a balanced arts and cultural program that promotes, enriches and advances the cultural and fine arts community. (Ord. 96-3 § 1, 1996).


2.56.020 Composition – Cultural and fine arts commission.

The cultural and fine arts commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed and hold office in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 2.40 SMC and rules and procedures established by city council resolution. At least six members shall be qualified electors of the city. The remaining member may be a qualified elector of Sonoma Valley, as defined by the council commission and committee appointment policy. (Ord. 02-2018 § 3, 2018; Ord. 05-2017 § 5, 2017; Ord. 96-3 § 1, 1996).


2.56.030 Duties and responsibilities.

The cultural and fine arts commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

A. Assist existing community arts and cultural organizations by encouraging and promoting cooperation among them, and by acting as liaison and coordinating body between them and the city. The commission shall also establish communication and act as city liaison with regional and state arts and cultural organizations;

B. Advise the city on all matters affecting the arts, culture and aesthetics of the city to include reviewing and recommending arts acquisitions and beautification activities, and reviewing related arts and cultural matters that may come before other city commissions;

C. Establish and maintain a current inventory of city-owned art, statuary and cultural acquisitions, noting their present condition and whereabouts with annual recommendations to the council on any care, maintenance or improvements that may be necessary;

D. When requested by council or the appropriate commission, offer advice on arts, cultural or aesthetic matters relating to schools, quasi-public buildings, cultural facilities and site developments in the community;

E. Organize advisory and resource subcommittees from among its membership, or in conjunction with other interested individuals or organizations, deemed appropriate to advise the commission concerning all matters within the commission’s functions;

F. Receive and review the city’s draft annual budget, and make recommendations as they pertain to the commission’s functions, during the time specified;

G. Initiate, request and solicit grants, donations and gifts to help support the commission’s approved activities. (Ord. 96-3 § 1, 1996).


2.56.040 City council review.

The city council shall review the duties, responsibilities and effectiveness of the cultural and fine arts commission on an annual basis commencing one year from the effective date of this section. (Ord. 96-3 § 1, 1996).


Chapter 2.60 DESIGN REVIEW AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION

Sections: 

2.60.010    Purpose.

2.60.020    Composition – Design review and historic preservation commission.

2.60.030    Duties and responsibilities.

2.60.040    City council review.


2.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the design review and historic preservation commission shall be to protect the architectural heritage of Sonoma, identify and preserve significant historic resources, enhance the visual character of the built environment, and promote excellence in town design and architecture through its review of projects in accordance with this chapter and other applicable provisions of the Sonoma Municipal Code. (Ord. 06-2013 §§ 1 (Exh. A), 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 96-2 § 1, 1996).


2.60.020 Composition – Design review and historic preservation commission.

The design review and historic preservation commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed and hold office in accordance with Chapter 2.40 SMC and rules and procedures established by city council resolution. At least four members shall be qualified electors of the city. The other member may be a qualified elector of Sonoma Valley, as defined by the council commission and committee appointment policy. The members of the commission shall include persons who have demonstrated special interest, competence, experience or knowledge in the following areas: historic preservation, cultural geography, or other historic preservation-related discipline; architecture and architectural history; prehistoric and historic archaeology; urban planning; landscape architecture; or related disciplines, to the extent such persons are available in the community. All members must have demonstrated interest in and knowledge of the cultural heritage of the city. (Ord. 02-2018 § 4, 2018; Ord. 05-2017 § 6, 2017; Ord. 06-2013 §§ 1 (Exh. A), 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2001-3 § 1, 2001; Ord. 96-2 § 1, 1996).


2.60.030 Duties and responsibilities.

The design review and historic preservation commission shall have the following responsibilities:

A. Exercise the authority set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided in the municipal code.

B. Recommend to the city council policies and programs in support of historic preservation including but not limited to goals and policies for the general plan and other regulatory plans as well as programs for historic preservation incentives.

C. Review and make recommendation to the State Office of Historic Preservation regarding nominations of property located within the city to the National Register of Historic Places.

D. Perform the duties pursuant to the certified local government provisions of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. This shall include undertaking review and comment upon those projects on which the city as a certified local government has an obligation or opportunity to provide review and comment under the National Historic Preservation Act including but not limited to private and public projects undertaken within the Sonoma Plaza National Landmark District, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the municipal code.

E. Administer the nomination, designation, and registry of local historic resources and districts as set forth in SMC 19.42.020.

F. Develop and administer historic preservation plans, historic resource inventories, context statements, design guidelines and other information, plans and procedures related to historic preservation.

G. Implement the applicable provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act pertaining to historic and cultural resources, consistent with its authority under the provisions of Chapter 19.54 SMC.

H. Conduct the review of applications for the demolition or relocation of buildings and structures within the historic overlay zone and of potentially historic buildings and structures located outside of the historic overlay zone, in accordance with SMC 19.54.090 (Demolition permit).

I. Conduct architectural review, in accordance with SMC 19.54.080 (Site design and architectural review).

J. Conduct sign review in accordance with the provisions of SMC Title 18.

K. Conduct landscaping review in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14.32 SMC.

L. Consult with, advise, and report to the city council on a regular basis in connection with the exercise of the commission’s duties and functions.

The above-listed duties and functions shall be performed in compliance with SMC 19.52.020 (Authority for land use and zoning decisions), Table 5-1 (Review Authority for Planning Permits), and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as applicable. (Ord. 06-2013 §§ 1 (Exh. A), 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 96-2 § 1, 1996).


2.60.040 City council review.

The city council shall review the duties, responsibilities and effectiveness of the design review and historic preservation commission on an annual basis commencing one year from the effective date of this section. (Ord. 06-2013 §§ 1 (Exh. A), 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 96-2 § 1, 1996).


Chapter 2.65       ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 99-15)


Chapter 2.70 LIVING WAGE

Sections:

2.70.010    Title and purpose.

2.70.020    Findings.

2.70.030    Definitions.

2.70.040    Employers subject to the requirements of this chapter.

2.70.050    Waivers.

2.70.060    Compensation required to be paid to employees.

2.70.070    Required contract provisions.

2.70.080    Exemptions.

2.70.090    Retaliation and discrimination prohibited.

2.70.100    Employee complaints to the city.

2.70.110    Private right of action.

2.70.120    Responsible bidding and use of city funds and facilities.

2.70.130    Labor relations neutrality.

2.70.140    Phase in for nonprofits and for part-time city employees.


2.70.010 Title and purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to improve the quality of services to beneficiaries of city contracted agencies and to assure that city employees, employees of city service contractors, subcontractors, and employees and contractors of city financial assistance earn an hourly wage that is sufficient to live with dignity and to achieve economic self-sufficiency. The city contracts with many businesses and organizations to provide services to the public, and provides financial assistance to developers for the purpose of promoting economic development and job growth. Such public expenditures should also be spent to set a community economic standard that permits workers to live out of poverty. The city council finds that the use of city funds to provide living wage jobs will decrease poverty, increase consumer income, invigorate neighborhood businesses and reduce the need for taxpayer funded social service programs.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “city of Sonoma living wage ordinance.” The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare. It does this by requiring that public funds be expended in such a manner as to facilitate individual self-reliance by employees of city contractors, lessees, recipients of city financial aid and their respective subcontractors. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.020 Findings.

The city of Sonoma awards contracts to private firms and other businesses to provide services to the public and to city government; and

The city of Sonoma has a limited amount of taxpayer resources to expend; and

The use of taxpayer dollars to promote sustenance and creation of living wage jobs will increase consumer income, decrease levels of poverty and reduce the need for taxpayer-funded social programs in other areas; and

When city funds are used to contract for services, such contracts should demonstrate an effort to promote an employment environment that enhances the general quality of life within the community and maximizes the productive effect of the city’s limited resources; and

The city’s use of contractors that do not provide health insurance to their employees can result in imposing the costs of their medical care on the county, state and federal governments; and

That employees are far likelier to be healthy if their employer provides reasonable health insurance to them and their dependents; and

The payment of a minimum level of compensation as required by the chapter enacted by this chapter benefits these interests. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.030 Definitions.

The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:

A. “City” means the city of Sonoma and all city agencies.

B. “City financial aid recipients” means all persons or entities that receive from the city direct assistance in the form of grants, loans, or loan guarantees, in-kind services, waivers of city fees, real property or other valuable consideration in the amount of more than $100,000 in any 12-month period. This term shall not include those who enjoy an economic benefit as an incidental effect of city policies, regulations, ordinances, or charter provisions.

C. “Service contractor” means any person or entity that enters into a service contract as hereafter defined in an amount equal to or greater than $10,000.

D. “Employee” means any individual employed by an employer unless he or she spends less than 20 percent of his or her work time on work arising from a service contract, city financial aid, or city lease, including subcontracts therefrom. No work may be reassigned in order to evade coverage under this chapter. For the purposes of determining whether an employer employs more than six employees for the purpose of this chapter, such number shall be determined by the most recent payroll period unless the employer had less than seven employees during the preceding eight payroll periods and will have less than seven during the next eight payroll periods.

E. “Employer” means those persons identified in SMC 2.70.040, except that no person other than the city shall be deemed an employer until they receive a new contract, lease, concession, franchise, or financial aid from or through the city. For these purposes the term “new” includes any arrangement entered into after this chapter was introduced, or any amendment, extension or renewal of a preexisting arrangement, or the city allowing continued occupancy by tenants with periodic tenancies (such as month-to-month tenants). A subcontractor shall be deemed to have received a new contract through the city when the person to whom it is subcontracting receives a new city contract, lease, franchise, or financial aid.

F. “Nonprofit” shall mean a nonprofit organization described in Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 which is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c) of that code, or any nonprofit educational organization qualified under Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

G. “Person” means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, or other entity that may employ individuals or enter into contracts.

H. “Service contract” means a contract given a contractor by the city for the furnishing of services to or for the city, except contracts where services are incidental to the delivery of products, equipment or commodities. Service contracts include but are not limited to security guard services, janitorial services, waste management, landscaping, parking attendant services, towing, and health care.

I. “Credit for the amount spent providing medical health benefits to such employee” shall be defined as follows: (1) the actual hourly contribution made by the employer for medical health benefits; (2) if the employer is not making an hourly contribution, then the amount spent during the preceding month by such employer on medical health benefits for such employee divided by the hours worked, except that the city manager shall have discretion for good cause shown to allow an employer to use an alternate method of determining its average hourly contribution; (3) if the amount contributed by the employer varies between employees (such as a greater contribution for family versus single coverage), then the employer, at its option, may set the amount of the credit at the average it contributes for all employees covered by this chapter receiving health benefits; (4) if the employer is self-insured and employees covered by this chapter are pooled with other workers, then if the employer finds it impractical to determine the amount spent on health benefits just for employees covered by this chapter, then the employer may approximate this calculation on the basis of the best data reasonably available and approved by the city manager (for example, using the average spent by the employer for its entire workforce). (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.040 Employers subject to the requirements of this chapter.

The persons and entities described below shall comply with the minimum compensation standards established by this chapter if they employ more than six employees:

A. The city of Sonoma, including all its agencies, departments and offices.

B. For-profit service contractors which receive contract(s) for $10,000 or more from the city in a 12-month period.

C. Nonprofit service contractors which receive contracts from the city of $75,000 or more in a 12-month period.

D. Recipients of city leases, concessions, or franchises which employ 25 or more employees and have $350,000 or more in annual gross receipts.

E. City financial aid recipients which receive more than $100,000 in loans or other cash and/or noncash assistance in any 12-month period. Compliance shall be required for a period of five years following receipt of this aid.

F. Subcontractors or subtenants of any of the persons described in subsections B through E of this section and which have $50,000 or more in annual gross receipts.

G. Public agencies, which receive contract(s) for $10,000 or more from the city in a 12-month period. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.050 Waivers.

A. Any employer which contends that it is unable to pay all or part of the living wage must provide a detailed explanation in writing to the city manager (or the city manager’s designee) who may recommend a waiver to the city council.

B. The explanation must set forth the reasons for its inability to comply with the provisions of this chapter, including a complete cost accounting for the proposed work to be performed with the financial assistance sought, including wages and benefits to be paid all employees, as well as an itemization of the wage and benefits paid to the five highest paid individuals employed by the employer.

C. The employer must also demonstrate that the waiver will further the interests of the city of Sonoma in creating training positions which will enable employees to advance into permanent living wage jobs or better and will not be used to replace or displace existing positions or employees or to lower the wages of current employees.

D. The city council may grant a waiver only upon a finding and determination that the employer has demonstrated economic hardship and that waiver will further the interests of the city of Sonoma in providing training positions which will enable employees to advance into permanent living wage jobs or better.

E. However, no waiver will be granted if the effect of the waiver is to replace or displace existing positions or employees or to lower the wages of current employees.

F. Waivers from the chapter are disfavored and will be granted only where the balance of competing interests weighs clearly in favor of granting the waiver.

G. If waivers are to be granted, partial waivers are favored over blanket waivers. Moreover, any waiver shall be granted for no more than one year. At the end of the year, the employer may reapply for a new waiver which may be granted subject to the same criteria for granting the initial waiver.

H. The city council of the city of Sonoma reserves the right to waive the requirements of this chapter upon a finding and determination of the city council that a waiver is in the best interests of the city of Sonoma. The city council may also waive the requirements of this chapter during an emergency due to war or natural or human made disasters.

I. All of the provisions of this chapter, or any part hereof, may be waived by a bona fide collective bargaining agreement, but only if the waiver is explicitly set forth in such agreement in clear and unambiguous terms. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.060 Compensation required to be paid to employees.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an employer subject to this chapter shall provide its covered employees the following minimum compensation:

A. Living Wages. The employer shall pay each employee an hourly wage of not less than $13.20, except that the employer shall receive credit for the amount spent providing health benefits to such employee. (For example, if an employer spends $1.50 per hour on health benefits, then the employer must pay a cash wage of only $11.70 per hour).

B. Time Off. Employees shall be entitled to at least 22 days off per year for sick leave, vacation, or personal necessity. Twelve of the required days off shall be compensated at the same rate as regular compensation for a normal working day. Ten of the required 22 days may be uncompensated days off. Employees who work part-time shall be entitled to accrue compensated days off in increments proportional to that accrued by full-time employees. Employees shall be eligible to use accrued days off after the first six months of satisfactory employment or consistent with employer policy, whichever is sooner. Paid holidays, consistent with established employer policy, may be counted toward provision of the required 12 compensated days off. Compensation for paid leave for part-time on-call employees, pro-rated as described herein above, shall be provided as premium pay twice a year to employees who worked a minimum of 520 hours in the previous six months.

C. Additional Compensation Permissible. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit an employer’s discretion to provide greater wages or time off to its employees.

D. The initial rates set forth in subsection A of this section shall increase annually on July 1st, in accordance with any increase due to a cost of living adjustment for city employees, equal to the average cost of living adjustment (excluding equity pay increases) for all city nonsafety, nonmanagement employees as of the date of the most recent adjustment of the pay of nonsafety, nonmanagement employees, but no more than the most recent December Consumer Price Index for San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose (CPI-U), published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.070 Required contract provisions.

Every city contract, lease, license, concession agreement, franchise agreement or agreement for financial aid with an employer described in SMC 2.70.040 or amendment thereto shall contain provisions requiring it to comply with the requirements of this chapter as they exist on the date when the employer entered its agreement with the city or when such agreement is amended. Such contract provisions shall address the employer’s duty to promptly provide to the city documents and information verifying its compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and sanctions for noncompliance. Such contract provisions shall also require the employer to notify each of its affected employees with regards to wages that are required to be paid pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.080 Exemptions.

The requirements of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following employees:

A. An employee participating in a temporary job training program approved by the city in which a significant component of the employee’s training consists of acquiring specialized knowledge, abilities, skills or job readiness (e.g., the importance of proper work attire, punctuality and workplace demeanor).

B. An employee who is under 21 years of age employed by a nonprofit entity for after-school or summer employment or as a trainee for a period not longer than 120 days.

C. An employee employed on a temporary project which will not exceed six months in duration.

D. Volunteers, including part-time firefighters with EMT certification, part-time paramedics and part-time emergency medical technicians; provided, there is no replacement or displacement of existing firefighter positions or employees.

E. Employees of contractors on city public works projects subject to the requirements of Division 2, Part 7, of the California Labor Code, when said code requires compensation greater than that required by this chapter.

F. Employees who are standing by or on-call according to the criteria established by the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. Section 201. This exemption shall apply only during the time when the employee is actually standing by or on-call.

G. Any disabled employee who:

1. Is covered by a current sub-minimum wage certificate issued to the employer by the U. S. Department of Labor; or

2. Would be covered by such a certificate but for the fact that the employer is paying a wage equal to or higher than the minimum wage.

H. An employee for whom application of the requirements of this chapter is prohibited by state or federal law.

I. An employee subject to a bona fide collective bargaining agreement where the waiver of the provisions of this chapter are set forth in clear and unambiguous terms in such an agreement.

J. City employees during their first six months of employment which is considered a training or probationary period. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.090 Retaliation and discrimination prohibited.

It shall be unlawful to retaliate or discriminate against any person on account of his having claimed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.100 Employee complaints to the city.

A. A person who alleges violation of any provision of the requirements of this chapter may report such acts to the city. The city manager may establish a procedure for receiving and investigating such complaints and take appropriate enforcement action.

B. Any complaints received shall be treated as confidential matters, to the extent permitted by law. Any complaints received and all investigation documents related thereto shall be deemed exempt from disclosure pursuant to California Government Code Sections 6254 and 6255. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.110 Private right of action.

A. A person claiming violation of this chapter may bring an action in the Superior Court of the State of California against an employer and obtain the following remedies:

1. Back pay for each day during which the employer failed to pay the compensation required by this chapter.

2. Reinstatement, compensatory damages and punitive damages.

3. Reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.

B. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other ordinances to the contrary, no criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of this chapter.

C. No remedy set forth in this chapter is intended to be exclusive or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce any rights hereunder in a court of law. This chapter shall not be construed to limit an employee’s right to bring a common law cause of action for wrongful termination.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize a claim for damages against the city based upon another employer’s failure to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.120 Responsible bidding and use of city funds and facilities.

Prior to commencement of the contract’s term or execution by the city, each contractor, subcontractor, lessee of city property or other city-funded employer will certify to the satisfaction of the city that its employees are paid a living wage as provided by the chapter. As part of any bid, application or proposal for any contract, or other funding arrangement with the city covered by SMC 2.70.040, the submitter shall (1) include an acknowledgement in a form acceptable to the city of the terms of this chapter and intent to comply therewith, and (2) complete a form to be created by the city manager indicating whether any charges, complaints, citations or findings of violation of law or regulation by any regulatory agency or court have occurred within the last 10 years, including but not limited to California DFEH, OSHA, Department of Industrial Relations (Labor Commissioner), EPA, and NLRB.

By seeking such contract or arrangement from the city the submitter shall be deemed to have authorized the city to obtain additional information upon request, about the submitter’s history as an employer, including but not limited to information about employee turnover and complaints lodged by employees (unless disclosure is prohibited by their legal right of privacy), so that the city may ascertain the submitter’s ability to provide the promised services without disruption and without adverse effect on the city’s proprietary interests. To the extent permitted by law, the council shall consider such matters in deciding whether to award the contract, financial assistance, or other arrangement being sought from the city. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.130 Labor relations neutrality.

No employer covered by SMC 2.70.040 shall use any city funds or property to assist, promote or deter union organizing. This restriction shall be subject to the definitions and exclusions found in Government Code Sections 16645, 16646, and 16647 as of January 1, 2002. City staff may enforce this chapter by awaiting citizen complaints. Nothing herein shall be construed as a promise by the city to actively monitor contractor compliance. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


2.70.140 Phase in for nonprofits and for part-time city employees.

A. All 501(c) nonprofit organizations subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be exempted from its wage requirements for the first three years following its enactment, unless they agree with the city to comply earlier.

B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to part-time city employees for the first six months following its enactment. (Ord. 04-2004 § 1, 2004).


Chapter 2.80 MINIMUM WAGE

Sections:

2.80.010    Definitions.

2.80.020    Employment in city.

2.80.030    Minimum wages.

2.80.040    Exemptions.

2.80.045    Exemption for collective bargaining agreement.

2.80.050    No waiver of rights.

2.80.060    Retaliatory action prohibited.

2.80.070    Enforcement.

2.80.080    Notifications and retention of records.

2.80.090    Coexistence with other available relief.

2.80.100    No preemption of higher standards.

2.80.110    Conflicts.

2.80.120    Regulations.


2.80.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A. “City” shall mean the city of Sonoma.

B. “Employee” shall mean any person who:

1. In a particular week performs more than two hours of work within the geographic boundaries of the city for an employer; and

2. Qualifies as an employee entitled to payment of a minimum wage from any employer under the California minimum wage law, as provided under Sections 1182.12 and 1197 of the California Labor Code.

C. “Employer” shall mean any person, including corporate officers or executives, who directly or indirectly (including through the services of a temporary services or staffing agency or similar entity) employs or exercises control over the wages, hours or working conditions of any employee.

D. “Franchise” means a written agreement by which:

1. A person is granted the right to engage in the business of offering, selling, or distributing goods or services under a marketing plan prescribed or suggested in substantial part by the grantor or its affiliate;

2. The operation of the business is substantially associated with a trademark, service mark, trade name, advertising, or other commercial symbol; designating, owned by, or licensed by the grantor or its affiliate; and

3. The person pays, agrees to pay, or is required to pay, directly or indirectly, a franchise fee.

E. “Franchisee” means a person to whom a franchise is offered or granted.

F. “Franchisor” means a person who grants a franchise to another person.

G. “Governmental agencies” shall include federal agencies, state agencies, school districts and auxiliary organizations as defined under Education Code Sections 72670(c) and 89901. “Governmental agency” does not include the city.

H. “Large employer” shall mean an employer for which normally 26 or more persons work for compensation during a given week, including persons employed outside the city.

I. “Minimum wage” shall have the meaning set forth in SMC 2.80.030.

J. “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, business trust, estate, trust, association, joint venture, agency, instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity, whether domestic or foreign. “Person” shall also include the city.

K. “Small employer” shall mean an employer for which normally 25 or fewer persons work for compensation during a given week, including persons employed outside the city.

L. In determining the number of persons performing work for an employer during a given week, all persons performing work for the same business enterprise for compensation on a full-time, part-time, or temporary basis shall be counted, including persons made available to work through the services of a temporary services or staffing agency or similar entity, regardless of whether the employees work inside of or outside of the city. Separate entities will be considered an integrated enterprise and a single employer under this chapter where a separate entity controls the operation of another entity. The factors to consider in making this assessment include but are not limited to: (1) degree of interrelation between the operations of multiple entities; (2) degree to which the entities share common management; (3) centralized control of labor relations; and (4) degree of common ownership or financial control over the entities. The term “small employer” shall not include a franchisee associated with a franchisor or a network of franchises with franchisees that employ more than 25 employees in aggregate. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.020 Employment in city.

A. Employees are covered by this chapter for each hour worked within the geographic boundaries of the city.

B. An employee who is typically based outside the city and performs work in the city on an occasional basis is covered by this chapter in a one-week period only if the employee performs more than two hours of work for an employer within the city during that one-week period.

1. Once an employee who works in the city on an occasional basis performs more than two hours of work for an employer within the city during a one-week period, payment for all time worked in the city during that one-week period shall be made in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

2. Time spent in the city solely for the purpose of traveling through the city from a point of origin outside the city to a destination outside the city, with no employment-related or commercial stops in the city except for refueling or the employee’s personal meals or errands, is not covered by this chapter. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.030 Minimum wages.

A. A large employer shall pay an employee a wage of no less than the following hourly rate:

1. On January 1, 2020, the hourly wage shall be no less than $13.50.

2. On January 1, 2021, the hourly wage shall be no less than $15.00.

3. On January 1, 2022, the hourly wage shall be no less than $16.00.

4. On January 1, 2023, the hourly wage shall be no less than $17.00.

5. On and after January 1, 2024, the hourly wage shall be no less than the amount set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

B. A small employer shall pay an employee a wage of no less than the following hourly rate:

1. On January 1, 2020, the hourly wage shall be no less than $12.50 an hour.

2. On January 1, 2021, the hourly wage shall be no less than $14.00 an hour.

3. On January 1, 2022, the hourly wage shall be no less than $15.00 an hour.

4. On January 1, 2023, the hourly wage shall be no less than $16.00 an hour.

5. On and after January 1, 2024, the hourly wage shall be no less than the amount set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

C. 1. On January 1, 2024, and annually thereafter, the minimum wage for all employees will increase 3.5 percent or by a percentage (“index”) set by separate council resolution, whichever is less.

2. If the rate of change in the index for the period which ends the closest to December 1st of any given year and for which said index’s data is available as of December 1st of that year is negative, there shall be no increase or decrease in the minimum wage pursuant to this chapter on the immediately following January 1st.

3. The city manager or his/her designee shall announce the adjusted rates on December 1st and publish a bulletin on the city’s website announcing the adjusted rates, which shall take effect on the following January 1st of each year. In calculating the adjusted rates, the city manager shall use the most recent index information available prior to December 1st.

D. If the Governor of the state makes a final determination to temporarily suspend the state scheduled minimum wage increases pursuant to California Labor Code Section 1182.12 (or its successor statute) for the following year, all dates specified in subsections (A) and (B) of this section that are subsequent to the date of the Governor’s final determination shall be postponed by an additional year. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.040 Exemptions.

A. An employee who is at least 14 but not older than 17 years of age and who is a “learner,” as defined in California Welfare Commission Order No. 4-2001, shall be paid not less than 85 percent of the minimum wage required by SMC 2.80.030 and rounded to the nearest nickel during his/her first 160 hours of employment. After more than 160 hours of employment, employees covered by this subsection shall be paid the applicable minimum wage pursuant to SMC 2.80.030.

B. An employer may not deduct any amount from wages due an employee pursuant to this chapter on account of any tip or gratuity, or credit the amount or any part thereof of a tip or gratuity, against and as a part of the wages due the employee from the employer pursuant to this chapter.

C. Governmental agencies are exempt from the minimum wage requirements set forth in this chapter under the principle of governmental immunity when the work performed is related to the agency’s governmental function.

D. Commissions or guaranteed gratuities, not including discretionary tips or gratuities, may be counted toward payment of the minimum wage specified herein when the commissions or guaranteed gratuities or tips are earned and paid together with other compensation paid to an employee (if any) and together are equal to or greater than the current minimum wage. For each pay period, employers shall pay the employee an amount that equals or exceeds the current hourly minimum wage set forth herein.

E. The employer may not offset a portion of the minimum wage otherwise owed to an employee hereunder for housing and meal costs paid for or provided by the employer.

F. If the employer pays at least $1.50 per hour per employee towards an employee medical benefits plan, which allows the employee to receive care from a licensed physician or other medical-care provider paid for by said medical benefits plan, the employer shall pay the employee the minimum wage as specified in SMC 2.80.030, less $1.50. The immediately preceding sentence shall take effect on January 1, 2021. In promulgating rules and regulations implementing this chapter, the city manager may include guidelines for calculating this medical plan credit, as well as address any procedures required for obtaining this credit. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.045 Exemption for collective bargaining agreement.

All or any portion of the applicable requirements of this chapter may be waived in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement, but only if the waiver is explicitly set forth in that agreement in clear and unambiguous terms. Unilateral implementation of terms and conditions of employment by either party to a collective bargaining relationship shall not constitute or be permitted as a waiver of all or any part of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.050 No waiver of rights.

Any waiver by an employee of any or all of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed contrary to public policy and shall be void and unenforceable. Any attempt by an employer to have an employee waive rights given by this chapter shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.060 Retaliatory action prohibited.

A. No employer shall discharge, reduce in compensation or otherwise discriminate against any employee for opposing any practice proscribed by this chapter, for participating in proceedings related to this chapter, for seeking to enforce his or her rights under this chapter by any lawful means, or for otherwise asserting rights under this chapter. Rights protected under this chapter include but are not limited to: the right to file a complaint or inform any person about any party’s alleged noncompliance with this chapter; and the right to inform any person of his or her potential rights under this chapter and to assist him or her in asserting such rights. Protections of this chapter shall apply to any person who mistakenly, but in good faith, alleges noncompliance with this chapter.

B. Taking adverse action against a person within 120 days of the person’s exercise of rights protected under this chapter shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of such rights.

C. No employer may fund increases in compensation required by this chapter, nor otherwise respond to the requirements of this chapter, by reducing the wage rate paid to any employee nor by increasing charges to him/her for parking, meals, uniforms or other items. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.070 Enforcement.

A. Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter and any entity a member of which is aggrieved by a violation of this chapter may bring a civil action against the employer or other person violating this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall be entitled to all remedies available to remedy any violation of this chapter, including but not limited to back pay, the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 to each employee or person whose rights under this chapter were violated for each day that the violation occurred or continued, reinstatement in employment and/or injunctive relief. Provided, however, that any person or entity enforcing this chapter on behalf of the public as provided for under applicable state law shall, upon prevailing, be entitled only to equitable, injunctive or restitutionary relief to employees, and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. Violations of this chapter are declared to irreparably harm the public and covered employees generally. The court shall award reasonable attorneys’ fees, witness fees and expenses to any plaintiff who prevails in an action to enforce this chapter. No criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of this chapter.

B. Remedies for the violation of this chapter shall include, but are not limited to:

1. Reinstatement, and the payment of back wages unlawfully withheld, and the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 to each employee or person whose rights under this chapter were violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued.

2. Interest on all due and unpaid wages at the rate of interest specified in Section 3289(b) of the California Civil Code, which shall accrue from the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date the wages are paid in full.

3. For an employee found to have been unlawfully retaliated against in violation of SMC 2.80.060(A), triple the wages lost due to the violation. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.080 Notifications and retention of records.

A. By December 1st of each year, the city shall publish on the city’s website a bulletin or notice announcing the adjusted minimum wage rate for the upcoming 12-month period, which shall take effect on the following January 1st. In conjunction with and at the same time the city publishes this bulletin, the city shall publish on its website a downloadable notice suitable for posting by employers in the workplace informing employees of the adjusted minimum wage rate for the upcoming 12-month period and their rights under this chapter. Such notice shall be in English, Spanish and such other languages as provided in any regulations promulgated pursuant to SMC 2.80.120. Every employer shall post in a conspicuous place at any workplace or job site where any employee works the current notice described in this subsection.

B. Each employer shall give written notification to each current employee and to each new employee at time of hire of his or her rights under this chapter. The notification shall be in all languages spoken by more than 10 percent of the employer’s employees and shall also be posted prominently in areas at the work site where it will be seen by all employees. The city is authorized to prepare sample notices and employer use of such notices shall constitute compliance with this subsection.

C. Each employer shall maintain for at least three years for each employee a record of his or her name, hours worked, and pay rate. Each employer shall provide each employee or his or her representative a copy of the records relating to such employee upon the employee’s or representative’s reasonable request. Where an employer does not maintain or retain adequate records documenting wages paid or does not allow reasonable access to such records, it shall be presumed in any judicial enforcement proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter that the employee’s account of how much he or she was paid is accurate, absent clear and convincing evidence otherwise.

D. Each employer shall provide each employee, upon hire and annually, a written notification setting forth the employer’s legal name, address, and telephone number, and the name and contact information for a person responsible for inquiries concerning compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.090 Coexistence with other available relief.

The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as limiting any employee’s right to obtain relief to which he or she may be entitled at law or in equity. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.100 No preemption of higher standards.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure minimum labor standards. This chapter does not preempt or prevent the establishment of superior employment standards (including higher wages) or the expansion of coverage by ordinance, resolution, contract, or any other action of the city. This chapter shall not be construed to limit a discharged employee’s right to bring a common law cause of action for wrongful termination. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.110 Conflicts.

Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with any federal or state law. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


2.80.120 Regulations.

The city manager or designee may promulgate regulations for the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. Any regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee shall have the force and effect of law and may be relied on by employers, employees, and other parties to determine their rights and responsibilities under this chapter. (Ord. 02-2019 § 1, 2019).


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.04    City Purchasing Procedure

3.06    Sale or Disposal of the City’s Surplus Personal Property

3.08    Transfer of City Tax Function to County

3.12    Sales and Use Tax

3.13    2012 Transactions and Use Tax

3.16    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.20    Documentary Stamp Tax

3.24    Construction Tax

3.28    Gas Tax Improvement Fund

3.32    Capital Outlay Fund

3.36    Emergency Reserve Fund


Chapter 3.04 CITY PURCHASING PROCEDURE

Sections:

3.04.010    Expenditures – Compliance required.

3.04.020    Delegated authority to purchase.

3.04.030    Cost information.

3.04.040    Exceptions to procurement policy bidding guidelines.

3.04.050    Sole source purchases.

3.04.060    Green purchasing policy.

3.04.070    Formal bids for public projects.

3.04.080    Informal bids for public projects.

3.04.090    Emergencies.

3.04.100    Other public projects.


3.04.010 Expenditures – Compliance required.

All expenditures of city funds in connection with purchases or other material procurements must be made strictly in accordance with the duly adopted budget and, in order that budgetary control may be effectively exercised, must be made in conformance with the city of Sonoma procurement policy, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 05-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2001-6 § 2, 2001).


3.04.020 Delegated authority to purchase.

A. The city manager or designee shall be granted authority to purchase. The city manager or designee shall develop and maintain a current procurement policy for all city purchases in accordance with this chapter and any other applicable rules and regulations prescribed by the city council.

B. The city manager or designee shall have authority to purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any department in accordance with:

1. Amounts specified in the currently adopted city budget;

2. City of Sonoma procurement policy;

3. Other rules and regulations as prescribed by the city council or state law.

C. The city manager exclusively shall have authority to dispense with the requirements of subsection (B)(1) and (2) of this section if emergency conditions are deemed to exist. An emergency shall be deemed to exist if:

1. There is a great public calamity such as a flood, fire or earthquake;

2. There is an immediate need to prepare for national or local defense;

3. There is a breakdown in machinery or an essential service which requires the immediate purchase of supplies and equipment to provide essential city services;

4. An essential departmental operation affecting the public health, welfare or safety would be greatly hampered if the prescribed purchasing procedure would cause an undue delay in procurement of the needed item. (Ord. 2001-6 § 2, 2001).


3.04.030 Cost information.

Notwithstanding SMC 3.04.060, any official of the city authorized to make purchases shall, before making same, secure accurate and comparative cost information concerning the articles to be purchased, and shall act to procure for the city the needed quality and quantity of supplies and equipment at the least expense to the city. (Ord. 2001-6 § 2, 2001).


3.04.040 Exceptions to procurement policy bidding guidelines.

Conditions which constitute sufficient cause to dispense with the competitive bidding guidelines are:

A. Situations where no bids have been received following bid announcements.

B. Emergency conditions which require that an order be placed with the most expedient source of supply as outlined in SMC 3.04.020(C).

C. Products or services for which other public agencies have gone through a competitive bidding process and are able to have the bid prices they received extended to the city of Sonoma.

D. Other items exempt by law. (Ord. 2001-6 § 2, 2001).


3.04.050 Sole source purchases.

Commodities and services which can be obtained from only one vendor are exempt from competitive bidding. All sole source purchases shall be supported by written documentation. Final determination that an item is a valid sole source purchase shall be made by the city manager exclusively. (Ord. 2001-6 § 2, 2001).


3.04.060 Green purchasing policy.

In an effort to comply with the State of California Public Contract Code, the city recognizes the state guidelines referencing purchase of recycled products. (Ord. 05-2011 § 1, 2011).


3.04.070 Formal bids for public projects

A. Public projects, as defined by Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code, of more $125,000 or an amount as increased by the California State Controller’s Office pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22032 shall be let by formal bid. In accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22037, a notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. The notice shall be published at least 14 calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the jurisdiction of the city or, if there is no newspaper of general circulation printed and published within the jurisdiction of the city, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated within the jurisdiction of the city. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in California Public Contract Code Section 22036. The notice shall be sent at least 15 calendar days before the date of opening the bids. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city council may award the contract to whichever low bidder the city council chooses. 

B. The city council, in its discretion, may reject all bids. The city council may also declare that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the city and reject all bids on that basis; provided, that written notice is provided to the apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the apparent low bidder of the city’s intention to reject the bid. The notice shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the city intends to reject the bid. 

If, after the first invitation of bids, all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city council shall have the option of any of the following:

1. Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids.

2. Modifying the project and re-advertising for bids by use of formal bids or by the informal bidding process provided for in SMC 3.04.080, depending on the project amount.

3. By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote declaring that the project can be performed more economically by the employees of the city, have the project done by force account without further complying with this section. 

C. If no bids are received, the project may be performed by city employees by force account or by negotiated contract, awarded by the city council, without further compliance with this section.

D. The city council shall adopt plans, specifications and working details for all public projects exceeding $125,000. Any person may examine the plans, specifications or working details, or all of these, for any project.

E. The monetary thresholds and requirements specified herein shall be adjusted automatically so as to remain in conformance with the requirements of Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 05-2011 § 2, 2011).


3.04.080 Informal bids for public projects.

A. Public projects, as defined by Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code, in the amount less than or equal to $30,000 or an amount as increased by the California State Controller’s Office may be performed by city employees by force account, by negotiated contract or by purchase order. Such contracts may also be let by the informal procedures set forth in this section. Public projects of between $30,000 and $125,000 or an amount as increased by the California State Controller’s Office pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22032 may be let to contract by the informal procedures set forth in this section. Public projects of more than $125,000 or an amount as increased by the California State Controller’s Office shall, except as otherwise provided in the California Public Contract Code, be awarded following formal bidding procedures in conformance with SMC 3.04.070. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, these monetary thresholds and requirements shall be adjusted automatically so as to remain in conformance with the limits and requirements of Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 

B. Informal Bid Procedures for Public Contracts.

1. The city shall maintain a list of contractors in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and the criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (“Commission”).

2. A notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list referred to above. Notice shall also be mailed to all construction trade journals as specified by the Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids. If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids shall be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

3. The mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals shall be completed not less than 10 calendar days before bids are due.

4. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and further specify how more detailed information about the project may be obtained.  The notice shall also state the time and place for the submission of bids.

5. If the bids received are in excess of the authorized informal bid limit per Public Contract Code, the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract for an additional 10 percent to the lowest responsible bidder if the city council determines the cost estimate for the project was reasonable.

C. The city manager is authorized to award and execute all contracts of $25,000 or less. (Ord. 05-2011 § 3, 2011).


3.04.090 Emergencies.

In cases of emergency when repair or replacement are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the governing body, by contractor or by a combination of the two. In the case of emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with Section 22050 of the California Public Contract Code. (Ord. 05-2011 § 4, 2011).


3.04.100 Other public projects.

When contracting to perform other public projects that do not fall within the definition of “public project” as defined in Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code, the city may utilize the bidding procedures set forth in SMC 3.04.070 and 3.04.080 depending on the dollar value of the public project. (Ord. 05-2011 § 5, 2011).


Chapter 3.06 SALE OR DISPOSAL OF THE CITY’S SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY

Sections:

3.06.010    Surplus personal property defined.

3.06.020    Authority.

3.06.030    Property with no salvage value.

3.06.040    Records.

3.06.050    Proceeds of sale.


3.06.010 Surplus personal property defined.

Personal property owned by the city that is no longer necessary or convenient for use by the city shall be considered surplus personal property. Surplus personal property may include personal property which has no commercial value or for which the estimated costs of continued care, handling, maintenance or storage would exceed the estimated proceeds of sale. (Ord. 01-2009 § 1, 2009).


3.06.020 Authority.

A. City Manager. The city manager, or his or her designee, has the authority to identify, sell, or otherwise dispose of all surplus personal property, or to exchange the same for or trade the same in on new supplies and equipment. Disposition may include abandonment, destruction, or donation to public bodies, charitable, civic or nonprofit organizations. Services of a salvage or auction company or a paid auctioneer may be used at the discretion of the city manager. The city manager has the authority to make transfers between city departments of any usable surplus personal property. 

B. City Council. City council approval is needed for disposition of surplus personal property when the total estimated value of any item exceeds $25,000. (Ord. 01-2009 § 1, 2009).


3.06.030 Property with no salvage value.

Surplus personal property with no salvage value, as determined by the city manager or his or her designee, shall be disposed of in a manner that salvages recyclable components, if practical. (Ord. 01-2009 § 1, 2009).


3.06.040 Records.

The city manager or his or her designee shall maintain records which identify surplus personal property disposed of, the method of disposal, and the amounts received from its disposal and shall maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of surplus personal property for a period of time in compliance with the state law and the city’s records retention schedule. (Ord. 01-2009 § 1, 2009).


3.06.050 Proceeds of sale.

Proceeds from the sale of surplus personal property shall be deposited in the appropriate city fund as determined by city manager. (Ord. 01-2009 § 1, 2009).


Chapter 3.08 TRANSFER OF CITY TAX FUNCTION TO COUNTY

Sections:

3.08.010    Determination.


3.08.010 Determination.

The duties of the city assessor with respect to the assessment of property in the city for municipal taxes, and all other duties incident thereto, and the duties of the city council with respect to the equalization and correction of property assessments for municipal taxes and all other duties incident thereto, and certain duties of the city clerk and the city tax collector with respect to such matters, having been transferred to officers of the county of Sonoma for the fiscal year 1959-1960 and thereafter, and the General Law of the state having been amended to make mandatory the transfer of such functions on a permanent basis by January 1, 1969, the city council finds and determines that all city functions relating to the assessment of property for taxation, the equalization, collection and enforcement thereof, including the sale of property for the nonpayment of taxes or assessments, have been transferred to the proper officers of the county of Sonoma pursuant to the General Law of the state of California. The previously established offices of assessor and tax collector of the city are abolished, and all duties of such officers otherwise provided by ordinance which are not transferred pursuant to the General Law and performed by officers of the county of Sonoma are delegated for performance to the city clerk. (Ord. 483 § 1(E), 1974; Ord. 290 § 1, 1958).


Chapter 3.12       SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.12.010  Short title.

3.12.020  Purpose.

3.12.030  Operative date.

3.12.040  Rate.

3.12.050  Contract with state.

3.12.060  Sales tax – Imposition.

3.12.070  Sales tax – Place of sale.

3.12.080  Use tax – Imposition.

3.12.090  Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.12.100  Limitations on adoption of state law.

3.12.110  Permit not required.

3.12.120  Exclusions and exemptions.

3.12.130  Amendments.

3.12.140  Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.12.150  Penalty for violation.


3.12.010  Short title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "uniform local sales and use tax ordinance". (Ord. 84-7 § 1, 1984).


3.12.020  Purpose.

The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will be, to the degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 84-7 § 4, 1984).


3.12.030  Operative date.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on October 1, 1984. (Ord. 84-7 § 3, 1984).


3.12.040  Rate.

The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be ninety-seven and one-half hundredths of one percent. (Ord. 84-7 § 2, 1984).


3.12.050  Contract with state.

Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 84-7 § 5, 1984).


3.12.060  Sales tax – Imposition.

For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in SMC 3.12.040 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 84-7 § 6, 1984).


3.12.070  Sales tax – Place of sale.

For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 84-7 § 7, 1984).


3.12.080  Use tax – Imposition.

An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in SMC 3.12.040 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 84-7 § 8, 1984).


3.12.090  Adoption of provisions of state law.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 84-7 § 9, 1984).


3.12.100  Limitations on adoption of state law.

In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 84-7 § 10, 1984).


3.12.110  Permit not required.

If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 84-7 § 11, 1984).


3.12.120  Exclusions and exemptions.

A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state, shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 84-7 § 12, 1984).


3.12.130  Amendments.

All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 84-7 § 13, 1984).


3.12.140  Enjoining collection forbidden.

No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 84-7 § 14, 1984).


3.12.150  Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 84-7 § 15, 1984).


Chapter 3.13 2012 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.13.010    Title.

3.13.020    Operative date.

3.13.030    Purpose.

3.13.040    Contract with state.

3.13.050    Transactions tax rate.

3.13.060    Place of sale.

3.13.070    Use tax rate.

3.13.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.13.090    Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

3.13.100    Permit not required.

3.13.110    Exemptions and exclusions.

3.13.120    Amendments.

3.13.130    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.13.140    Expiration.


3.13.010 Title. 

This chapter shall be known as the city of Sonoma transactions and use tax ordinance. The city of Sonoma hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.020 Operative date. 

“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being July 2, 2012. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.030 Purpose. 

This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax chapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

B. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.

D. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.040 Contract with state. 

Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.050 Transactions tax rate. 

For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.060 Place of sale. 

For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.070 Use tax rate. 

An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.080 Adoption of provisions of state law. 

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 

In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A. Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1. The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

3. In those sections, including but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a. Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

b. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

4. In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B. The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.100 Permit not required. 

If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.110 Exemptions and exclusions. 

A. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a. With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

b. With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

5. For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C. There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

5. For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

6. Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

7. “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D. Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.120 Amendments.

All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.

No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 04-2012 § 2, 2012).


3.13.140 Expiration.

The authority to levy the tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall expire on September 30, 2022, unless extended by a majority vote of the voters of the city. (Ord. 14-2016 § 2, 2016).


Chapter 3.16 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections:

3.16.010    Short title.

3.16.020    Definitions.

3.16.030    Tax imposed.

3.16.040    Exemptions.

3.16.050    Operator’s duties.

3.16.060    Registration.

3.16.070    Reporting and remitting.

3.16.080    Penalties and interest.

3.16.090    Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by tax administrator.

3.16.100    Appeal.

3.16.110    Records.

3.16.120    Refunds.

3.16.130    Actions to collect.

3.16.140    Penalty for violation.


3.16.010 Short title.

The ordinance codified herein shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city of Sonoma”. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1965).


3.16.020 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

A. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended, or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof;

B. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes;

C. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both;

D. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit;

E. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever;

F. “Tax administrator” means the city manager;

G. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein may be considered. (Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 354 § 2, 1965).


3.16.030 Tax imposed.

For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax measured by the rent charged by the operator. The tax is calculated by multiplying the rent by the tax rate, and the tax rate shall be 12 percent effective January 1, 2019, and may be increased by the city council to 13 percent by January 1, 2024. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. (Ord. 10-2018 § 2, 2018; Ord. 92-14 § 1, 1992; Ord. 92-14 § 1, 1992; Ord. 88-8 § 1, 1988; Ord. 78-14 § 1, 1978; Ord. 472 § 1, 1973; Ord. 410 § 1, 1969; Ord. 354 § 3, 1965).


3.16.040 Exemptions.

No tax shall be imposed upon:

A. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

B. Any federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business;

C. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim thereof made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 354 § 4, 1965).


3.16.050 Operator’s duties.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator.

No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 354 § 5, 1965).


3.16.060 Registration.

Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A. The name of the operator;

B. The address of the hotel;

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D. This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of this chapter by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting the tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. (Ord. 354 § 6, 1965).


3.16.070 Reporting and remitting.

Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 354 § 7, 1965).


3.16.080 Penalties and interest.

A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 354 § 8, 1965).


3.16.090 Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by tax administrator.

If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within 10 days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the property tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in SMC 3.16.100. (Ord. 354 § 9, 1965).


3.16.100 Appeal.

Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix the time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 354 § 10, 1965).


3.16.110 Records.

It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 354 § 11, 1965).


3.16.120 Refunds.

A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C; provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B. An operator may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established, in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator, that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 354 § 12, 1965).


3.16.130 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 354 § 13, 1965).


3.16.140 Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC.

Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 354 § 14, 1965).


Chapter 3.20       DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX

Sections:

3.20.010  Short title.

3.20.020  Tax imposed.

3.20.030  Payment by whom.

3.20.040  Nonapplicability.

3.20.050  Liability.

3.20.060  Conveyance – Nonapplicability.

3.20.070  Securities and Exchange Commission – Nonapplicability.

3.20.080  Partnership – Transfer of interest.

3.20.090  Administration.

3.20.100  Refund claims.


3.20.010  Short title.

The ordinance codified herein shall be known as the "real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Sonoma." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 389 § 1, 1967).


3.20.020  Tax imposed.

There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 389 § 2, 1967).


3.20.030  Payment by whom.

Any tax imposed pursuant to SMC 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 389 § 3, 1967).


3.20.040  Nonapplicability.

Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 389 § 4, 1967).


3.20.050  Liability.

The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Ord. 389 § 5, 1967).


3.20.060  Conveyance – Nonapplicability.

Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment:

A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

B.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

C.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

D.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections A to D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 389 § 6, 1967).


3.20.070  Securities and Exchange Commission – Nonapplicability.

Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 389 § 7, 1967).


3.20.080  Partnership – Transfer of interest.

A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 389 § 8, 1967).


3.20.090  Administration.

The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 389 § 9, 1967).


3.20.100  Refund claims.

Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 389 § 10, 1967).


Chapter 3.24       CONSTRUCTION TAX*

Sections:

3.24.010  Short title.

3.24.020  Purpose – Authority.

3.24.030  Definitions.

3.24.040  Imposition of tax.

3.24.050  Exemptions.

3.24.060  Fee rates.

3.24.070  Tax credit for public dedication of real property.

3.24.080  Payment of tax.

3.24.090  Disposition and use of revenue.

3.24.100  Refunds.

3.24.110  Appeals.

*See also SMC Title 14, Buildings and Construction.


3.24.010  Short title.

The ordinance codified herein shall be known as the "construction tax ordinance," and the tax imposed shall be known as the "construction tax". (Ord. 463 § 1, 1973).


3.24.020  Purpose – Authority.

A.  The construction of buildings in the city for new or expanded residential, commercial, and industrial land uses, with the attendant increase in the city’s population, has created the need for public facilities in addition to those which may be provided by existing sources of city revenue. The purpose of the tax levied is to provide funds for public capital improvements, including the planning, acquisition, improvement, and expansion of parks, recreational facilities, open spaces, public safety facilities, public works facilities, and other public facilities.

B.  The council of the city declares that the tax required to be paid is assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city and solely for the purpose of producing revenue. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1973).


3.24.030  Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the words defined herein shall have the meanings assigned to them, unless the context requires otherwise:

A.  "Bedroom" means any room designed or intended for sleeping purposes;

B.  "Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and designed for the shelter or housing of any persons, animals, or chattel;

C.  "Commercial or industrial building" means any building other than a single-family dwelling, duplex, or multiple dwelling;

D.  "Construction" means the putting together, assembling, erecting, or altering of construction materials, components or modules into a structure, or portion of a structure, and includes reconstructing, enlarging or altering any structure. Construction also includes the moving and locating of a building, or portion thereof, onto a lot or parcel of land, and also includes the improvement of a mobilehome lot to prepare it for occupancy, where the mobilehome lot was not previously suitably constructed for occupancy;

E.  "Duplex" means a building containing not more than two kitchens, designed and/or used to house not more than two families, living independently of each other, including all necessary employees of each such family;

F.  "Dwelling unit" means a building or part of a building, designed for or used to house not more than one family, including all necessary employees of such family;

G.  "Family" means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house. A family shall be deemed to include necessary servants;

H.  "Mobilehome" means a vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, camp cars, recreational vehicles, tent trailers, motor homes, and other such vehicles;

I.  "Mobilehome lot" means any area designated, designed, improved, or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome on a temporary, semipermanent, or permanent basis;

J.  "Multiple dwelling" means a building or portion thereof used and designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking in the building, including apartment houses, apartment hotels and flats, but not including automobile courts;

K.  "Person" includes every association, firm, corporation, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, or individual;

L.  "Single-family dwelling" means a building designed for or used to house not more than one family, including all necessary employees of such family;

M.  "Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. (Ord. 463 § 3, 1973).


3.24.040  Imposition of tax.

A tax is imposed, at the rates and in the manner herein set out, upon every person who constructs, or causes to be constructed, any building, or portion thereof, or improves any mobilehome lot, in the city, in which the person has an equity or title or other interest either as owner, lessee or otherwise. (Ord. 463 § 4, 1973).


3.24.050  Exemptions.

The tax imposed herein shall not apply to the following:

A.  Any construction by the United States of America, the state of California, any county, city and county, city, district, or any political subdivision of the state of California, any other governmental agency, or any agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing;

B.  Any construction by any bank, including national banking associations;

C.  Any construction by an insurer as that term is defined in Article XIII, Section 14 4-5 of the Constitution of the state of California;

D.  Any construction by a nonprofit corporation, which construction is to be used exclusively and directly for religious, educational, hospital, or charitable purposes;

E.  The construction of any building, or portion thereof, or mobilehome lot which is a replacement for a unit being removed from the same lot or parcel of land on which the construction is to take place. The exemption shall equal but not exceed the tax which would be payable hereunder if the unit being replaced were being newly constructed. Development of the property to a higher use than previously existed shall require full payment of the tax as though no structure had previously been on the property. (Ord. 463 § 5, 1973).


3.24.060  Fee rates.

The rates of the fees imposed by this chapter are as follows:

A.  Single-Family Dwelling Construction:

For each dwelling constructed with 

one bedroom	$410.00

For each dwelling constructed with 

two bedrooms	$478.00

For each dwelling constructed with 

three bedrooms	$614.00

For each dwelling constructed with 

four or more bedrooms	$614.00

B.  Multiple-Family Dwelling and Duplex 

Construction:

For each dwelling unit constructed 

with one bedroom	$410.00

For each dwelling unit constructed 

with two bedrooms	$478.00

For each dwelling unit constructed 

with three bedrooms	$614.00

For each dwelling unit constructed 

with four or more bedrooms	$614.00

C.  Additions and Alterations to Dwelling:

For each additional bedroom	$68.00

D.  Mobilehome Lot Construction:

For each mobilehome lot 

constructed	$152.00

E.  Commercial and Industrial Building 

Construction: 

For each square foot of building area 

constructed	$0.19

F.  Additions to Commercial and Industrial 

Buildings: 

For each square foot of building area 

added	$0.19

(Ord. 86-17 § 1, 1986; Ord. 83-6 § 1, 1983; Ord. 82-14 § 1, 1982; Ord. 78-9 § 1, 1978; Ord. 463 § 6, 1973).


3.24.070  Tax credit for public dedication of real property.

Upon application by any person liable for payment of taxes under this chapter and after review by the planning commission, the city council may grant a credit for all or part of the tax due under this chapter, in consideration of real property and/or improvements to real property, in fee simple to the city. (Ord. 463 § 7, 1973).


3.24.080  Payment of tax.

The full amount of the tax levied, based upon the construction of any building, part thereof, or mobilehome lot, shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for such construction. (Ord. 463 § 8, 1973).


3.24.090  Disposition and use of revenue.

The revenue collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in any city capital improvement fund and may be used for any purpose for which moneys may legally be expended from any such fund. (Ord. 463 § 9, 1973).


3.24.100  Refunds.

Any tax paid to the city under this chapter, based upon the construction of any building, part thereof, or mobilehome lot, which is not constructed, shall be refunded upon application of the taxpayer and a showing to the satisfaction of the public works director that the construction has not been completed or commenced, and that the building permit issued for the construction has been canceled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction upon which the tax was based. (Ord. 463 § 10, 1973).


3.24.110  Appeals.

Any decision of the public works director relating to the refund of the tax paid under this chapter, or of the building official relating to the amount of the tax due under this chapter, may be appealed to the city council for redetermination upon the application of any person applying for a refund, or being assessed the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 463 § 11, 1973).


Chapter 3.28       GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND

Sections:

3.28.010  Establishment.

3.28.020  Deposit.

3.28.030  Expenditures.


3.28.010  Establishment.

The city clerk is authorized and directed to establish a special fund to be known and designated by the title of "special gas tax street improvement fund" and make appropriate entries in the account books of the city indicating the establishment of the fund as above designated. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1936).


3.28.020  Deposit.

It is further provided that all funds received from the state of California which shall arise from payments of gas tax allocations under the General Law of the state shall be deposited in the fund so designated. (Ord. 483 § 1(F), 1974; Ord. 190 § 2, 1936).


3.28.030  Expenditures.

All moneys deposited in the fund shall be expended only in such manner as will not conflict with the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California. (Ord. 190 § 3, 1936).


Chapter 3.32       CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND

Sections:

3.32.010  Established.

3.32.020  Purpose.

3.32.030  Authority to levy and collect taxes for the accumulation of a fund for capital outlay.

3.32.040  Authority to levy and collect assessments for the accumulation of a fund for capital outlays.

3.32.050  Transfer of unencumbered surplus funds.

3.32.060  Budget.

3.32.070  Fund to remain inviolate for the making of capital outlays.

3.32.080  Allocations.


3.32.010  Established.

There is established a "capital outlay fund" for the city. (Ord. 336 § 1.01, 1963).


3.32.020  Purpose.

The city council declares that it is establishing the capital outlay fund in accord with Article 4, Division 2, Title 5 of the Government Code of the state of California, Sections 53730 to 53737, inclusive, of the Government Code, for the purpose of accumulating a fund for necessary capital outlays. (Ord. 336 § 1.02, 1963).


3.32.030  Authority to levy and collect taxes for the accumulation of a fund for capital outlay.

The city council is given the right and power by ordinance to levy and collect taxes, within the limitations prescribed or authorized by law, for the purpose of accumulating a fund for capital outlays. (Ord. 336 § 2.01, 1963).


3.32.040  Authority to levy and collect assessments for the accumulation of a fund for capital outlays.

The city council may levy and collect assessments in the operation of its water system, its sanitary sewer system, cemetery system, or any of its other functions for the purpose of accumulating a fund for capital outlays. (Ord. 336 § 3.01, 1963).


3.32.050  Transfer of unencumbered surplus funds.

The city council may transfer to the capital outlay fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of a fiscal year. (Ord. 336 § 4.01, 1963).


3.32.060  Budget.

All or part of the capital outlay fund may be shown in the budget as reserves for future expenditures in subsequent years and when so shown shall be identified as to purpose but need not be itemized. (Ord. 336 § 5.01, 1963).


3.32.070  Fund to remain inviolate for the making of capital outlays.

Money shall not be disbursed from the fund except for the making of capital outlays unless a proposition is submitted to the electors in accord with Section 53736 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 336 § 6.01, 1963).


3.32.080  Allocations.

The city council may, from time to time, provide for basic allocations in the capital outlay fund. (Ord. 336 § 7.01, 1963).


Chapter 3.36       EMERGENCY RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.36.010  Established.

3.36.020  Amount of reserve.

3.36.030  Use of reserve.

3.36.040  Emergency defined.


3.36.010  Established.

There is established an "emergency reserve fund" for the city which shall be an element of the city’s general fund. (Ord. 98-2 § 1, 1998).


3.36.020  Amount of reserve.

The emergency reserve fund shall be funded annually from unallocated funds; the city shall attempt to maintain the fund at an amount equal to 10 percent of the city’s annual general fund budget. The fund shall be provided a separate accounting number, and shall draw interest at the rate of interest equal to the average rate of interest obtained by the city’s invested funds. (Ord. 98-2 § 1, 1998).


3.36.030  Use of reserve.

A.  Money shall be disbursed for the emergency reserve fund only after passage of a resolution of the city council authorizing such disbursement.

B.  The city council resolution approving disbursement of funds from the emergency reserve fund shall identify the amount to be disbursed and an emergency which justifies and requires the disbursement. (Ord. 98-2 § 1, 1998).


3.36.040  Emergency defined.

As used in this chapter, "emergency" means:

A.  A catastrophic earthquake, flood, windstorm, firestorm, mudslide or similar natural event causing widespread damage in the city of Sonoma;

B.  A severe and unexpected financial shortfall resulting from acts of the State Legislature re-allocating funds otherwise anticipated in the current adopted city budget to be paid to the city’s general fund;

C.  Unbudgeted and substantial financial obligations imposed upon the city by the United States or by the state of California;

D.  A court order, judgment or settlement resulting from the conclusion of litigation brought against the city requiring the expenditure of a substantial unbudgeted sum;

E.  Such other emergency as determined by the city council after conducting a noticed public hearing;

F.  Such other emergency as declared by unanimous vote of the city council, or by proclamation of the President of the United States or the Governor of the state of California. (Ord. 98-2 § 1, 1998).

 


Title 4       (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    General Provisions

5.08    License Tax

5.12    Handbills

5.16    Taxicabs and Public Transportation Conveyance

5.20    State Video Franchises

5.24    Repealed

5.28    Ambulance Services

5.30    Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

5.32    Telecommunications Facility and Antenna Criteria

5.34    Music Venue Licensing


Chapter 5.04       GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

5.04.010  Definitions.

5.04.020  Revenue measure.

5.04.030  Effect on other ordinances.

5.04.040  License and tax payment required.

5.04.050  Branch establishments – Separate license required.

5.04.060  Evidence of doing business.

5.04.070  Constitutional apportionment.

5.04.080  Exemptions.

5.04.090  Contents of license.

5.04.100  Application for first license.

5.04.110  Renewal of license.

5.04.120  Statements and records.

5.04.130  Information confidential.

5.04.140  Failure to file statement or corrected statement.

5.04.150  Appeal.

5.04.160  Additional power of collector.

5.04.170  License nontransferable – Changed location and ownership.

5.04.180  Duplicate license.

5.04.190  Posting and keeping licenses.

5.04.200  License tax – How and when payable.

5.04.210  Delinquent taxes – Penalties – Installment payment.

5.04.220  Refunds of overpayments.

5.04.230  Rules and regulations.

5.04.240  Enforcement.

5.04.250  License tax a debt.

5.04.260  Remedies cumulative.

5.04.270  Effect of ordinances on past actions – Unexpired licenses.

5.04.280  Charitable organizations.

5.04.290  Partial refund of annual tax.


5.04.010  Definitions.

For the purpose of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A.  "Average number of persons employed" shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by all employees of applicant within the city during the previous calendar year, and dividing the total number of hours of service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a year’s work of one full-time employee according to the custom or laws governing such employment. In computing the average number of persons employed, a fraction of one-half or more of the customary or equal annual full-time employee hours shall be considered as one additional employee. For the purposes of this section, the term "person employed" includes proprietors and persons who have an interest in the business as well as relatives and members of the family who render services.

B.  "Business" includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

C.  "Collector" means the city manager or designee.

D.  "Person" includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee.

E.  "Sale" includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall be deemed to include any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

F.  "Sworn statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 2000-13 § 1, 2000; Ord. 421 § 1, 1970).


5.04.020  Revenue measure.

Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulation. (Ord. 421 § 2, 1970).


5.04.030  Effect on other ordinances.

Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances.

No license issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. (Ord. 421 § 3, 1970).


5.04.040  License and tax payment required.

There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC.

This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC. (Ord. 421 § 4, 1970).


5.04.050  Branch establishments – Separate license required.

A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, however, that if a separate federal income tax return is filed for a particular business, it shall, for purposes of this section, be conclusively presumed to be a separate business for which a separate license is required. (Ord. 421 § 5, 1970).


5.04.060  Evidence of doing business.

When any person makes use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, or newspapers, advertises, hold outs, or represents that he is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the city, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he is conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 483 § 1(G), 1974; Ord. 421 § 6, 1970).


5.04.070  Constitutional apportionment.

None of the license taxes provided for by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the state of California.

In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show this method of business and such information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the collector shall have the power to base the license tax upon any measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC. (Ord. 421 § 7, 1970).


5.04.080  Exemptions.

Nothing in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from the payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC.

The collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC.

The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. (Ord. 421 § 8, 1970).


5.04.090  Contents of license.

Every person required to have a license under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the collector of the city and, upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following information:

A.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

B.  The business licensed;

C.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

D.  The date of the expiration of such license; and

E.  Such other administrative information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC.

Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, the collector shall issue only one license; provided, that he may issue, for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid, one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax. (Ord. 421 § 9, 1970).


5.04.100  Application for first license.

Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information:

A.  The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested;

B.  The place where such business is to be carried on and, if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residences of the owners of same;

C.  In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of those owning the business;

D.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof;

E.  In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by average number of persons employed, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant;

F.  Any further administrative information which the collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license applied for.

If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by average number of persons employed, he shall estimate the average number of persons to be employed for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the collector, showing the average number of persons employed during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued.

The collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person has furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required. (Ord. 421 § 10, 1970).


5.04.110  Renewal of license.

In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector on or before July 1st an application for renewal containing a sworn statement upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding calendar year as may be required by the collector to enable him to verify the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC. (Ord. 421 § 11, 1970).


5.04.120  Statements and records.

No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder.

In the event that the collector deems it necessary, he may require that a licensee or applicant for license submit a statement by a certified public accountant attesting to such financial information as may be necessary to ascertain the amount of license fee due, or, at the option of the licensee or applicant, may authorize the collector, his deputies, or authorized employees of the city to examine his records or business transactions in order that the proper license fee may be computed. (Ord. 421 § 12, 1970).


5.04.130  Information confidential.

It is unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A.  The disclosure of records and equipment to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

B.  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city;

C.  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when, in his opinion, the public interest would suffer thereby;

D.  The disclosure, by way of public meeting or otherwise, of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;

E.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 421 § 13, 1970).


5.04.140  Failure to file statement or corrected statement.

If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the collector he fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC fails to apply for a license, the collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain and shall give written notice thereof to such person. (Ord. 421 § 14, 1970).


5.04.150  Appeal.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council within 15 days after receipt of written notice from the collector. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Sonoma, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC. (Ord. 421 § 15, 1970).


5.04.160  Additional power of collector.

In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding 30 days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued. (Ord. 421 § 16, 1970).


5.04.170  License nontransferable – Changed location and ownership.

No license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be transferable; provided, that where license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee of $5.00 have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved; provided further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. (Ord. 421 § 17, 1970).


5.04.180  Duplicate license.

A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact and, at the time of filing such statement, paying to the collector a duplicate license fee of $5.00. (Ord. 421 § 18, 1970).


5.04.190  Posting and keeping licenses.

A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued. (Ord. 421 § 19, 1970).


5.04.200  License tax – How and when payable.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year; provided, that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after the first day of January, may be prorated 50 percent for the final six months of the license period. For new businesses within the city the business license tax shall become due prior to the opening of the business but no later than five days after mailing a notice of the amount of such tax by the tax collector.

Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:

A.  Semiannual license taxes on the first day of July and the first day of January of each fiscal year;

B.  Quarterly license taxes on the first day of July, October, January, April of each fiscal year;

C.  Monthly license taxes on the first day of each and every month;

D.  Weekly flat-rate license taxes on Monday of each week in advance;

E.  Daily flat-rate license taxes each day in advance;

F.  Other flat-rate license taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business and thereafter on the first day of any applicable period. (Ord. 86-11 § 20, 1986; Ord. 421 § 20, 1970).


5.04.210  Delinquent taxes – Penalties – Installment payment.

A.  License tax must be paid for all times during which a business is carried on within the city even for periods when the business has been carried on illegally due to lack of a valid license.

B.  For failure to pay a license tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of 10 percent of the license tax on the first day of each month after the due date thereof until paid. When the last day of the month falls on a day when the City Hall is closed, payment of the license tax due may be made on the first working day of the next month without penalty. Penalties in such cases shall attach on the second working day of the succeeding month.

C.  The tax collector shall have no authority to waive penalties for delinquent payment of taxes, and penalties shall be added automatically. It shall be the obligation of the business to furnish statements to the city when requested and to pay the tax when due, and failure on the part of the city to send notice of the tax due shall be no excuse for failure to pay the tax on time. It is the business owner’s responsibility to see that the business license fee is paid promptly and in due time.

D.  Any license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC may be suspended by the collector upon the failure of the licensee to pay any charges imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC or to file reports as required by this article within 60 days after such charges or reports become delinquent. No license shall be issued, nor shall one which has been suspended or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any person who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the city for any delinquent license taxes, unless such person, with the consent of the collector, enters into a written agreement with the city, through the collector, to pay such delinquent taxes, plus five percent simple annual interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments, or oftener, extending over a period of not to exceed one year.

E.  In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the city and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid shall become immediately due and payable and that his current license shall be revocable by the collector upon 30 days’ notice. In the event legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including a reasonable attorney’s fee. The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided in this section, but no penalties shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement, after the execution of the agreement, and the payment of the first installment, and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. (Ord. 86-11 § 21, 1986; Ord. 82-4 § 6, 1982; Ord. 421 § 21, 1970).


5.04.220  Refunds of overpayments.

No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within a period of one year from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims for refund of the amount of the overpayment must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by him and in the manner prescribed by him. Upon the filing of such a claim and when he determines that an overpayment has been made, the collector may refund the amount overpaid. (Ord. 421 § 22, 1970).


5.04.230  Rules and regulations.

The collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC. (Ord. 421 § 25, 1970).


5.04.240  Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the collector, and he is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector or the city council.

The collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, may examine, or cause to be examined, any place of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC have been complied with.

The collector and each and all of his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority (upon obtaining an inspection warrant therefor) to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein, and demand an exhibition of its license. Any person having such license theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC. It shall be the duty of the collector and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions. (Ord. 421 § 26, 1970).


5.04.250  License tax a debt.

The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. (Ord. 421 § 27, 1970).


5.04.260  Remedies cumulative.

All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord. 421 § 28, 1970).


5.04.270  Effect of ordinances on past actions – Unexpired licenses.

Neither the adoption of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC nor their superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.

Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by the city, and the tax paid for the business for which the license has been issued under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted, and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for the business by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall have subtracted therefrom the prorated amount of the unexpired license. (Ord. 421 § 29, 1970).


5.04.280  Charitable organizations.

The provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC shall not be deemed to require payment of a license fee to carry on a business wholly and exclusively for the benefit of philanthropic, social service, benevolent or patriotic purposes. (Ord. 421 § 32, 1970).


5.04.290  Partial refund of annual tax.

Effective July 1, 1975, any person who has paid an annual business license tax in advance and who terminates the subject business during the first half of the fiscal year for which the tax is paid may have a refund of one-half the annual tax on condition that application is made to the city clerk within 30 days after the date on which the business is terminated. (Ord. 75-7 § 1, 1975).


Chapter 5.08       LICENSE TAX

Sections:

5.08.010  Generally.

5.08.020  Classification "A".

5.08.030  Classification "B".

5.08.040  Classification "C".

5.08.040.01  Real estate brokers and agents.

5.08.050  Classification "D".

5.08.060  Classification "E".

5.08.070  License tax – Specifically enumerated businesses.

5.08.075  Automatic adjustment in license tax based on per capita income within the state.

5.08.076  Nonoperation of SMC 5.08.075 during fiscal year 1981-82.

5.08.080  Utilities.

5.08.090  Hospitals.

5.08.100  Hotels, motels and apartments.

5.08.110  Trailer parks and mobilehome parks.

5.08.120  Taxicabs.

5.08.130  Motor vehicle delivery.

5.08.140  Soliciting.

5.08.150  Peddlers.

5.08.160  Astrologers.

5.08.170  Auctioneers.

5.08.180  Bankrupt sales.

5.08.190  Amusements.

5.08.200  Coin-operated vending machines – License required.

5.08.200.1  Coin-operated play device – Definition.

5.08.200.2  Coin-operated play device – Rate of tax.

5.08.200.3  Vending machine license – Statement required.

5.08.201  Patio, garage and yard sales – License required.

5.08.201.1  Patio, garage and yard sales – Definition.

5.08.201.2  Patio, garage and yard sales – Frequency of sale – Duration of sale.

5.08.201.3  Patio, garage and yard sales – Inspection by police department.

5.08.201.4  Patio, garage and yard sales – Advertising.

5.08.201.5  Patio, garage and yard sales – Information required.

5.08.201.6  Patio, garage and yard sales – Hours of sale.

5.08.201.7  Patio, garage and yard sales – License fee to be paid.

5.08.202  Personal property rentals.

5.08.203  Flea markets.

5.08.210  Penalty for violation.

5.08.220  Bowling alleys.

5.08.221  Billiards and poolrooms.

5.08.222  Handbill distribution.


5.08.010  Generally.

Every person who engages in business within the city shall pay a license tax at the rates as set out in SMC 5.08.020 through 5.08.060. (Ord. 421 § 23, 1970).


5.08.020  Classification "A".

Every business engaged in selling to the general public, at retail in the city, goods, wares, merchandise or commodities, including restaurants and other food dispensers, unless otherwise provided for in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, shall pay an annual license tax based upon average number of persons employed during the previous calendar year at the following rates:

One employee	.$74.00

Each additional employee 	$31.00

(Ord. 86-11 § 1, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 1, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 1, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 1, 1978; Ord. 421 § 23, 1970).


5.08.030  Classification "B".

Every person engaged in the business of providing a service or similar business or occupation in the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of persons employed in such service or similar business or occupation during the previous calendar year as set forth in the following schedule:

One employee	$74.00

Each additional employee.	$31.00

The businesses referred to in this classification include the following plus any similar business or occupation: Apartment management, appliance repair, art galleries, auto rentals, auto repair, bail bonds, barbershops, beauty salons, beauty schools, blueprinting, business schools, car wash, catering, cleaners, collection agencies, correspondence schools, credit service, dance studios, employment agencies, estimators, finishing schools, furniture refinishing, gardening, golf courses, grinding service, hostess service, hydraulic jack service, janitorial service, laundry, leatherette repair, locksmiths, manicurists, masseurs, mobilehome service, music instruction, nursery schools, painters, parking lots, pest control, photography, piano tuners, pool service, private investigators, rental service, rototilling, savings and loans, sawshops, secretarial service, security service, sewer cleaning, shoe repair, sign painters, silver repair shop, swim centers, soft water service, tailoring and dressmaking, telephone answering service, theaters, title companies, travel agencies, tree service, wig styling. (Ord. 86-11 § 2, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 2, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 2, 1983; Ord. 78-13 §§ 2, 24, 1978; Ord. 421 § 23, 1970).


5.08.040  Classification "C".

Every person engaged in professional, semiprofessional and connected businesses in the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon each professional, semiprofessional and other employees engaged in such business during the previous calendar year, according to the following schedule:

For one professional or semiprofessional, $186.00, plus the additional amount of $31.00 for each of the other professional, semiprofessional and other employees in such office.

The businesses referred to in this classification are as follows: accountants, advertising, appraisers, architects, assayers, attorneys, auditors, bacteriologists, business or investment counselors, brokers of all types, except real estate brokers, certified public accountants, chemists, chiropodists, chiropractors, dental laboratories, dentists, designers or decorators, draftsmen, electrologists, engineers, engravers, family counselors, geologists, income tax agents, insurance or claims adjusters, landscape architects, lapidaries, management and planning consultants, medical laboratories, morticians, oculists, opticians, optometrists, orthodontists, physical therapists, physicians, podiatrists, radiologists, surgeons, surveyors, taxidermists, veterinarians, and any recognized profession not specifically named in this section nevertheless shall be taxed as provided therein. (Ord. 86-11 § 3, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 3, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 3, 1983; Ord. 82-4 § 1, 1982; Ord. 78-13 §§ 3, 24, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 2, 1975; Ord. 421 § 23, 1970).


5.08.040.01  Real estate brokers and agents.

Each person holding a real estate broker license shall pay a business license fee of $186.00, plus the additional amount of $37.00 for each licensed real estate salesman employed in the business by the real estate broker.

Every person who solicits a buyer or buyers for real estate within the city, who does not maintain a fixed place of business within the city, and who places any advertising upon any lot or parcel of land indicating that he is the agent or broker for the owner of said lot or parcel of land, shall be deemed as doing business in the city and shall pay an annual license fee in the sum of $57.00. (Ord. 86-11 § 4, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 4, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 4, 1983; Ord. 82-4 § 2, 1982; Ord. 78-13 § 4, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 3, 1975).


5.08.050  Classification "D".

Every person transacting or carrying on the business of general building contractor, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or roofing contractor, or other specialty contractor shall pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of persons employed in such a business who actually worked within the city during the previous calendar year as set forth in the following schedule:

First owner or employee, $74.00;

Each additional owner or employee, up to five employees, $31.00;

Plus an amount to be paid at the time each permit is issued by the building official in the amount of $1.00 per $1,000 estimated value of the construction or any part thereof when the estimated value of the construction is $2,000 or over.

In the event that a specialty contractor is not required to obtain a permit from the building official, he shall pay an annual license tax as set forth in SMC 5.04.030.

Each general contractor or owner-builder shall furnish the building official with a list of subcontractors’ and material delivery firms’ names and addresses at the time each building permit is issued or as soon thereafter as practical. (Ord. 86-11 § 5, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 5, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 5, 1983; Ord. 82-4 § 3, 1982; Ord. 78-13 § 4,-1978; Ord. 424 § 1, 1970; Ord. 421 § 23, 1970).


5.08.060  Classification "E".

Every business engaged in selling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale in the city, unless otherwise provided in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, shall be exempt from payment of an annual license tax. Every business engaged in manufacturing, processing or fabricating goods, wares or merchandise shall pay an annual license tax equal to $22.00 for each person employed in the business, with a minimum annual tax of $150.00.

When the gross receipts of any business within this section do not exceed $3,000, the license tax shall be 50 percent of the above rates. The first license issued on this basis may be on the estimated gross receipts. At the end of the licensing period, a settlement shall be made to the city based on actual gross receipts. This figure shall then be used to determine the amount of the renewal license tax to be paid. The application for payment on the basis of gross receipts shall be on a form provided by the license collector with any information to be provided as is necessary to determine the proper fee. (Ord. 86-11 § 6, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 6, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 6, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 6, 1978; Ord. 436 § 1, 1971; Ord. 421 § 23, 1970).


5.08.070  License tax – Specifically enumerated businesses.

Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses herein enumerated shall pay a license tax as set out in SMC 5.08.080 through 5.08.200. (Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.075  Automatic adjustment in license tax based on per capita income within the state.

The rate of the license tax payable for the license period beginning July 1st and each year thereafter shall be adjusted upward or downward automatically as follows: Beginning July 1, 1980, each flat rate tax shall be adjusted upward or downward automatically in proportion to the increase or decrease of per capita income within the state as reported officially by the executive department of the state for the annual period ending the preceding March 31st. The flat rate tax in effect for the year beginning July 1, 1979, shall be used as the base. If there is either an increase or decrease in such per capita income, the city clerk shall make a corresponding adjustment in the rate of license tax, rounded off to the nearest full dollar, payable for the succeeding fiscal year. The annual maximum increase in the sale of the license tax shall not exceed eight percent in one fiscal year. (Ord. 82-4 § 4, 1982; Ord. 80-8 § 1, 1980; Ord. 78-13 § 27, 1978).


5.08.076  Nonoperation of SMC 5.08.075 during fiscal year 1981-82. 

SMC 5.08.075 shall not apply during the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1981, and license taxes during the fiscal year shall remain at the amounts fixed for the fiscal year which commenced July 1, 1980. (Ord. 81-5 § 1, 1981).


5.08.080  Utilities.

Every person engaged in the business of operating a railroad, bus company, telegraph, telephone, gas or electric company or other public utilities within the city shall be required to obtain a license and pay the license tax prescribed by SMC 5.08.030, Classification "B"; provided, however, that the provisions of all ordinances with reference to the granting of a franchise to such public utility and requiring the payment of a franchise tax by them shall remain in full force and effect. In the event the utility pays a franchise tax, this section shall not require an additional license tax and the provisions of SMC 5.08.030 shall control such utility. (Ord. 75-4 § 9, 1975; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.090  Hospitals.

Every person carrying on the business of conducting, managing or operating a hospital, rest home, sanitarium, convalescent home or other similar establishment or institution shall pay an annual license tax in the amount of $44.00 for the first four beds and $3.00 for each additional bed; provided, however, that any such hospital or sanitarium conducted or carried on by the city or any other political subdivision shall be exempt from the payment of the license tax specified in SMC 5.08.080 through 5.08.210. (Ord. 86-11 § 7, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 7, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 7, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 7, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.100  Hotels, motels and apartments.

For the business of renting or letting rooms in any hotel, motel, or bed-and-breakfast establishment, there shall be a minimum charge of $44.00 per year for the first unit plus $3.00 for each additional room per year. Apartment buildings shall be charged $40.00 per year for the first four units plus $3.00 for each additional apartment per year. (Ord. 86-11 § 8, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 8, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 8, 1983; Ord. 83-3 § 1, 1983; Ord. 82-4 § 5, 1982; Ord. 78-13 § 8, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.110  Trailer parks and mobilehome parks.

For the business of renting or letting parking space for automobile trailers or mobilehomes which are used for living quarters or housekeeping purposes, or conducting an automobile trailer park or mobilehome court for such trailers, a license fee according to the number of trailer spaces for rent or to let shall be as follows: At the rate of $44.00 per year for the first four units and $3.00 for each additional unit. (Ord. 86-11 § 9, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 9, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 9, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 9, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.120  Taxicabs.

For the business of operating a taxicab or taxicabs, which includes the picking up and/or the delivering of passengers within the limits of the city, a charge shall be made for each person or firm engaging in such business which shall be determined by the number of taxicabs operated, and the rate for each such taxicab so operated shall be the sum of $53.00 per year for one taxicab and $37.00 for each additional taxicab. (Ord. 86-11 § 10, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 10, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 10, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 10, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.130  Motor vehicle delivery.

For each such motor vehicles used for the delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or tangible personal property within the city from a stock or supply outside the city, an annual license fee shall be charged in accordance with the following schedule:

A.  For delivering goods, wares, merchandise or tangible personal property intended for redistribution or resale, $44.00 for each vehicle;

B.  For delivery of construction materials to job sites, $60.00 for each vehicle;

C.  For delivery of goods to homes, selling or distributing merchandise at retail from a truck or otherwise, $67.00 for each vehicle;

D.  For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of collecting articles to be cleaned, dyed, sponged, pressed or laundered either from homes or business establishments, $67.00 for each vehicle.

This section does not apply to vehicles owned and operated in connection with a regularly established laundry, cleaning, and dyeing plant or cleaning and dyeing business within the city for which a license has been issued under SMC 5.08.080, Classification "B". (Ord. 86-11 § 11, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 11, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 11, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 11, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 5, 1975; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.140  Soliciting.

For soliciting for retail orders for services, goods, wares, merchandise, property of all kinds, books, maps, pictures, photographs or enlargements of pictures or photographs, the license fee shall be the sum of $90.00 per year. It is provided further that such license fee shall not be payable by any person, firm or corporation who has a fixed place of business in Sonoma, and who is required and has paid any other license under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, the soliciting of orders being deemed a part of the business so licensed. (Ord. 86-11 § 12, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 12, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 12, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 12, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.150  Peddlers.

For any person peddling or going from place to place or house to house in the city and selling or distributing merchandise at retail from a truck or otherwise, the license fee shall be the sum of $90.00 per year. (Ord. 86-11 § 13, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 13, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 13, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 13, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.160  Astrologers.

For every person who carries on, practices or professes to practice the business or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life readings, fortunetelling, cartomancy, handwriting analysis, chirography, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophesy, augury, divination, magic, necromancy, numerology, or similar business, trade or calling, and who is not prohibited from doing or conducting any of these practices, professions, businesses or callings by any statute of this state, ordinance of the city or by any other law, and who demands or receives a fee or compensation for the exercise or exhibition of his art therein, or who gives an exhibition thereof at any place where an admission fee is charged, the license fee shall be the sum of $186.00 per year. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to those persons providing bona fide and incidental entertainment and amusement for the guests and patrons of and on the premises of any other business duly licensed by the city for which no separate or additional charge or consideration shall be paid by the guests and patrons or received or accepted by the persons who perform or practice such businesses or arts. (Ord. 88-2 § 1, 1988; Ord. 86-11 § 14, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 14, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 14, 1983; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.170  Auctioneers.

For the business of selling land, tenements, hereditaments, goods, wares, merchandise or real or personal property of any kind or description at auction or public outcry, the license fee shall be the sum of $114.00 per year. No license shall be required for the selling at public sale of goods or property belonging to the United States or to the state of California, or by virtue of process issued by any state or federal court or by the legally appointed administrator, executor or guardian of an estate. (Ord. 86-11 § 15, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 15, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 15, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 14, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.180  Bankrupt sales.

For selling or offering for sale any bankrupt, assigned or damaged stock of goods, wares or merchandise of whatsoever nature or kind (other than in a store otherwise licensed hereunder) the license fee shall be the sum of $114.00 per day. (Ord. 86-11 § 16, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 16, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 16, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 15, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.190  Amusements.

For any of the following amusements, shows or places of recreation to which an admission is charged, the following rates shall apply:

A.  Carnival. For every carnival, as defined in this section, $446.00 for the first two days or part thereof and $112.00 for each additional day. For the purpose of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, the word "carnival" means any group of attractions such as ball games, dice games, merry-go-rounds, ships, ferris wheels or other riding devices, dancing shows, or any other like entertainments or games for which a charge is made for attending or for playing or participating therein;

B.  Circus. For each exhibition for pay of a circus, menagerie, or entertainment at which feats of horsemanship, acrobatic feats, and trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed, the sum of $223.00 per performance or exhibition and the charging of a separate or an additional price shall be deemed a separate performance;

C.  Dance, Public. For public dances, either where conducted alone or in conjunction with any other business, occupation, show, exhibition or entertainment, the sum of $37.00 per day or $372.00 per year. For the purpose of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC, "public dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in and to which the public is admitted;

D.  Games and Concessions. For every game for amusement or test of skill, strength, physical endurance or capacity of any kind whatsoever, and for every exhibition or entertainment conducted as a sideshow or concession at or during the period of a local celebration if not included within a carnival organization, the sum of $22.00 per day;

E.  Merry-Go-Round. For every merry-go-round, ferris wheel, or other riding device not in conjunction with any other show or carnival, the sum of $37.00 per day;

F.  Open Air Theater. For every open air theater or tent show wherein vaudeville, comic, dramatic or operatic productions or performances are given, or motion pictures exhibited, the sum of $148.00 for each performance. (Ord. 86-11 § 17, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 17, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 17, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 16, 1978; Ord. 421 § 24, 1970).


5.08.200  Coin-operated vending machines – License required.

Any person renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines within the city, other than coin-operated vending play devices as defined in SMC 5.08.200.1, shall pay a business license tax equal to one percent of the gross receipts from all such machines within the city but not less than $5.00. (Ord. 78-13 § 17, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 7, 1975; Ord. 421 § 13, 1970).


5.08.200.1  Coin-operated play device – Definition.

A "coin-operated play device" means any coin-operated vending machine, device, video game or apparatus made possible by the deposit into such machine any coin, token, disc or slug, or by the payment of any fee for use as a game of chance or contest, or which may be used for any such game or contest. Coin-operated play device shall also include jukeboxes or similar music devices which upon the deposit of any coin, token, disc or slug in any slot or receptacle attached to said device or connected thereto, phonographic records or cylinders are played.

In addition to the above, each vendor shall display his name, address and telephone number on each machine. This information shall be permanently affixed to the machine in an area no less than one inch by three inches on a readily visible portion of the machine. (Ord. 83-7 § 24, 1983; Ord. 75-4 § 7, 1975).


5.08.200.2  Coin-operated play device – Rate of tax.

Any person renting, leasing or operating any coin-operated play device as defined in SMC 5.08.200.1 within the city shall pay a business license tax equal to five percent of the gross receipts from all such machines within the city but not less than $41.00. (Ord. 84-5 § 18, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 18, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 18, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 7, 1975).


5.08.200.3  Vending machine license – Statement required.

Each applicant for a first or renewal vending machine license shall furnish such information as the collector may require in order to properly calculate the estimated tax for the yearly license. The city may demand an audit of licensee and require him to submit a copy of any tax statement filed with any government entity at such time as may be requested by the collector. (Ord. 75-4 § 7, 1975).


5.08.201  Patio, garage and yard sales – License required.

No person shall conduct a patio, garage and yard sale unless he first obtains the license thereof and pays the fee as required by SMC 5.08.201.7. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.1  Patio, garage and yard sales – Definition.

A "patio, garage and/or yard sale" is defined as a sale of personal property held at a private residence by the owner, owners, tenants or occupants thereof, and is limited to the sale of property owned exclusively by said owner, owners, tenants and/or occupants. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.2  Patio, garage and yard sales – Frequency of sale – Duration of sale.

No patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be conducted by any person nor at any residence more frequently than once each six months, nor shall said sale be conducted for a period in excess of two consecutive days. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.3  Patio, garage and yard sales – Inspection by police department.

All goods, products and merchandise offered for sale at a patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be made available to inspection at the place where the sale is to be conducted by any representative of the police department, and if requested by said representative, the person conducting the sale shall establish his title to the goods, products and merchandise offered for sale. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.4  Patio, garage and yard sales – Advertising.

No sign, billboard, placard or other form of advertisement of the proposed patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be placed upon any public property within the city; no sign, billboard, placard or other form of advertisement shall be placed on the premises where the sale is to be conducted more than two days prior to the day the sale is to commence, and shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the day the sale terminates. No more than two signs, billboards, placards or other form of advertisement shall be placed upon the premises and shall not exceed three square feet in size. Any such sign, billboard, placard or other form of advertisement shall be placed only on the property where the sale is being held. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.5  Patio, garage and yard sales – Information required.

The person conducting the sale at the time he makes application for the license required by SMC 5.08.201 shall furnish to the city license officer the following information:

A.  His full name, residence address and telephone number;

B.  The dates and hours of the proposed sale;

C.  A general description of the type of merchandise proposed to be sold;

D.  A declaration that he is the owner of all the property to be sold, and if requested by the police department, can establish his title to all said property, and that all of said property proposed to be sold is his own personal used property. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.6  Patio, garage and yard sales – Hours of sale.

No patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be commenced prior to 8:00 a.m. and shall conclude each day at or before 6:00 p.m. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.201.7  Patio, garage and yard sales – License fee to be paid.

Every person engaged in conducting a patio, garage and/or yard sale, as defined in SMC 5.08.201.1, shall pay a license tax of $3.00 for each sale conducted. (Ord. 75-4 § 10, 1975).


5.08.202  Personal property rentals.

Any firm that places within the city for lease or rent tangible personal property such as autos, trailers, trucks, computers, copying machines, postage meters, office equipment or other such equipment shall pay a business license tax equal to three percent of the gross receipts from all such tangible personal property with the city, but not less than $29.00. (Ord. 84-5 § 19, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 19, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 19, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 11, 1975).


5.08.203  Flea markets.

Any person or firm wishing to conduct a flea market in the city must apply to the city council for a permit to do so. The council shall grant a permit if it finds from the application that the proposed flea market will be conducted at a location in which the zoning ordinance allows the activity to the extent described in the application, does not present hazardous traffic conditions, and will be conducted in a manner that does not give offense to neighbors or neighboring property by reason of congestion, noise, traffic activity or activity of any kind which would tend to impair the enjoyment of neighboring properties or to depreciate the value of neighboring properties. The council may issue a permit upon such conditions as are reasonable to secure the conduct of the activity in a manner compatible with the enjoyment and value of neighboring properties, to avoid traffic congestion or hazardous traffic conditions, to provide proper ingress and egress for customers of the activity, to require sanitation facilities for use of persons attending the activity, and otherwise as is reasonably required for preservation of public peace, health, safety and welfare. For purposes of this section a flea market is a bazaar-type of sales activity, conducted usually out-of-doors or in large enclosures, wherein there is set aside space for concessions, booths, tables, tents or similar space or shelter in which renters or concessionaires display for sale merchandise of varying kind, but frequently used or secondhand, and normally merchandise of small value.

The business license tax for each flea market is $2.00 for each booth participating, but not less than $25.00. If flea markets are held on school grounds by a school organization, then the maximum fee shall be $29.00. (Ord. 84-5 § 20, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 20, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 20, 1978; Ord. 75-4 § 11, 1975).


5.08.210  Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 SMC or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 421 § 30, 1970).


5.08.220  Bowling alleys.

For the business of operating a bowling establishment a license fee according to the number of alleys shall be as follows: $22.00 per alley each year. (Ord. 86-11 § 18, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 21, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 21, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 21, 1978; Ord. 76-12 § 1, 1976).


5.08.221  Billiards and poolrooms.

For the business of operating a poolroom or billiard room or combination thereof, the license tax is $44.00 a year for the first table and $22.00 a year for each additional table. (Ord. 86-11 § 19, 1986; Ord. 84-5 § 22, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 22, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 21, 1978).


5.08.222  Handbill distribution.

For the business of handbill distribution, the license tax is $1.00 per day per person engaged in distribution if the business headquarters is in the city; if the business headquarters is outside the city the license tax is $6.00 per day per person, with a maximum daily tax of $35.00. (Ord. 84-5 § 23, 1984; Ord. 83-7 § 23, 1983; Ord. 78-13 § 22, 1978).


Chapter 5.12       HANDBILLS

Sections:

5.12.010  Definitions.

5.12.020  Distributing on public or private property.

5.12.030  Placing in vehicles.

5.12.040  Prohibited where property posted.

5.12.050  Name and address of printer and distributor of handbills.

5.12.060  Hours of distribution limited.

5.12.070  Posting on property.

5.12.080  Exemptions.

5.12.090  Penalty for violation.


5.12.010  Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A.  "Handbill" includes any printed or written advertising matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, paper, booklet or any other printed matter or literature:

1.  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing,

2.  Which directs attention to any business or other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting their interest by sales of their products, materials or services or stocks in trade,

3.  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical, or other performance or event held or conducted for private monetary profit or gain for which admission fee is charged,

4.  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and distributed or circulated for advertising purposes at the expense of the advertiser, or for the purpose of advancing the private business or interest of the advertiser; provided, that this definition shall not include a bona fide newspaper as such is hereinafter defined;

B.  "Newspaper" means and includes any newspaper of general circulation which, while containing advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially a newspaper or publication for the dissemination of news;

C.  "Person" includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind;

D.  "Private premises" means and includes any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or vacant, and includes any grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox, belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. (Ord. 277 § 1.00, 1957).


5.12.020  Distributing on public or private property.

It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any public thoroughfare, park, ground or other public place, or upon any private premises within the city; provided, that this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to any person upon such public or private property willing to accept the same. (Ord. 277 § 2.00, 1957).


5.12.030  Placing in vehicles.

It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle; provided, that this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing or transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile willing to receive the same. (Ord. 277 § 3.00, 1957).


5.12.040  Prohibited where property posted.

It is unlawful for any person to deposit, distribute, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill upon any premises where the owner or occupant of the premises has placed a sign in a conspicuous place near the entrance thereof, indicating that no handbills or advertisements are desired. (Ord. 277 § 4.00 1957).


5.12.050  Name and address of printer and distributor of handbills.

It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, scatter, hand out or circulate any handbill in any place or under any circumstances which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof, the name and address of the following:

A.  The person who caused the same to be written, printed, compiled or manufactured;

B.  The person who caused the same to be distributed; provided, however, in the case of a fictitious person, club or group of any kind, in addition to the name of such fictitious person, club or group, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers or agents of the person or the committee acting for the club or group. (Ord. 277 § 5.00, 1957).


5.12.060  Hours of distribution limited.

It is unlawful for any person to distribute any handbills between the hours of 5:00 p.m. of any day and 8:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 277 § 6.00, 1957).


5.12.070  Posting on property.

It is unlawful to post, stick, stamp, paint, place or otherwise affix or cause to be done, any notice, placard, bill, poster, or advertisement to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curbing, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, fence, enclosure or building or upon any telephone, telegraph, electric lighting or railway pole, or motor vehicle within the city without first obtaining the permission of the owner, agent or occupant thereof; provided, that nothing within this section shall prohibit the posting of small death notices. (Ord. 277 § 7.00, 1957).


5.12.080  Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of the United States mail, to bona fide newspapers upon orders of the owner or occupant of property, or to the delivery of any handbill to any person who has requested delivery of the same. (Ord. 277 § 8.00, 1957).


5.12.090  Penalty for violation.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 277 § 10.00, 1957).


Chapter 5.16       TAXICABS AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION CONVEYANCE*

Sections:

5.16.010  Licenses to operate taxicabs or public transportation conveyance.

*For provisions concerning the license tax on the operation of taxicabs, see Chapter 5.08 SMC.


5.16.010  Licenses to operate taxicabs or public transportation conveyance.

A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating any taxicab or public transportation conveyance in the city without having first obtained from the city a license to operate. All persons applying for such a license shall file with the city clerk a verified application which shall set forth:

1.  Name and address of person(s) making application;

2.  If, at the time of making application, such person(s) is actually operating a taxi service in the city, the number of taxicabs owned and operated by the applicant, and the number of other vehicles that may be operated as public conveyances by the applicant;

3.  Such other information as the city council or its designee, the city manager, may require.

B.  Any person or persons approved for operating public conveyances on the streets of the city shall provide evidence of liability and property insurance in amounts and forms as prescribed by the city council through resolution. (Ord. 82-16 § 2, 1982).


Chapter 5.20 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES

Sections:

5.20.010    Purposes and implementation.

5.20.020    Definitions.

5.20.030    Franchise fee for state franchise holders.

5.20.040    PEG channels.

5.20.050    PEG channel facilities fees and payments.

5.20.060    Customer service and protection.

5.20.070    Penalties.

5.20.080    Permits and construction.

5.20.090    Authority to examine business records.

5.20.100    Cablecast policies.


5.20.010 Purposes and implementation.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement regulations for the provision of video services by state franchise holders, in accordance with the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act, California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (“DIVCA”). This chapter applies to video service providers operating within the city pursuant to a valid state franchise. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section have the following meanings:

A. “City” means the city of Sonoma.

B. “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Sonoma, or the city manager’s designee.

C. “Franchise fee” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860 or its successor.

D. “Gross revenues” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860 or its successor.

E. “Holder” has the meaning set forth in subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

F. “Material breach” has the meaning set forth in subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code Section 5900 or its successor.

G. “Network” has the meaning set forth in subdivision (l) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

H. “State franchise” has the meaning set forth in subdivision (p) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

I. “Video service” has the meaning set forth in subdivision (s) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.030 Franchise fee for state franchise holders.

A. The franchise fee established within the city for cable franchises is five percent of gross revenues. Every state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay a franchise fee to the city in the amount of five percent of that state franchise holder’s gross revenues.

B. Each state franchise holder shall remit the franchise fee to the city quarterly, within 45 days after the end of the quarter for that calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee. If the state franchise holder does not pay the franchise fee when due, the state franchise holder shall pay a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. If the state franchise holder has overpaid the franchise fee, it may deduct the overpayment from its next quarterly payment. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.040 PEG channels.

A. State franchise holders shall provide PEG channel capacity as requested by the city and agreed upon between the holder and the PEG channel provider; provided, that no less than one PEG channel is provided at all times in accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 5870(a).

B. All state franchise holders shall comply with the provisions of DIVCA related to PEG channels. Without limiting the foregoing, the PEG channels shall all be carried on the basic service tier. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law and shall provide picture and sound quality and channel accessibility and location equal to, or substantially equal to, that provided by the incumbent cable providers. After the initial designation of PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the local entity unless the change is required by federal law.

C. A state franchise holder shall have that amount of time designated under Public Utilities Code Section 5870(a) to designate the PEG channel capacity from the date that the request to designate capacity is made. Any state franchise holder that believes that the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible shall provide to city, in writing, its reasons therefor and its plan for correcting or solving the infeasibility. City may hold a hearing on the claim of infeasibility and, thereafter, take such action as city deems proper to require the designation and provision of the PEG channels on the state franchise holder’s system. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.050 PEG channel facilities fees and payments.

In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n), commencing on July 1, 2017, state franchise holders must pay one percent of gross revenues to the city to support PEG channel facilities. State franchise holders shall remit PEG fees in the same manner as franchise fees are remitted in accordance with SMC 5.20.030. The PEG fee may be shown as a separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber. Upon the expiration of a holder’s franchise, the fee established under this section shall be deemed reauthorized within the meaning of Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n) prior to the renewal of that holder’s franchise, in order to assure continuing public, educational, and governmental access by the state franchise holder. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.060 Customer service and protection.

A. A state franchise holder shall comply with Government Code Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2, and 53088.2; the FCC customer service and notice standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. Sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603 and 76.1619; and all other applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, including any such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and consumer protection standards under this subsection shall be interpreted and applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the goals of the standards.

B. City shall enforce, in the manner set forth in DIVCA, all customer service and protection standards contained in Public Utilities Code Section 5900, including without limitation those standards set forth in Section 5900(c). (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.070 Penalties.

The following monetary penalties, as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5900, are hereby adopted as the applicable schedule of penalties for any material breach of DIVCA, by a state franchisee, as follows:

A. Five hundred dollars per day for each material breach, not to exceed $1,500 per occurrence of a material breach.

B. If a material breach has occurred and notice has been provided and a fine or penalty has been assessed, any subsequent breach of the same nature within 12 months shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000 per occurrence of the material breach.

C. If a third or further material breach of the same nature occurs within those same 12 months, and notice has been provided and a fine or penalty has been assessed, the penalties shall be increased to a maximum of $2,500 per day for each material breach, not to exceed $7,500 per occurrence of the material breach. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.080 Permits and construction.

A. A state franchise holder is required to obtain an encroachment permit from the city in conformance with Chapter 12.20 SMC before constructing, operating, maintaining or repairing its facilities within the right-of-way, as that term is defined therein.

B. The city shall either approve or deny an encroachment permit application within 60 days of receiving a completed application. An application is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 and following).

C. If the city denies the encroachment permit, it shall provide the applicant with a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. A determination regarding the encroachment permit by the city manager may be appealed. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.090 Authority to examine business records.

A. The city may examine once per year the business records of any state franchise holder relating to gross revenues in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

B. All state franchise holders shall keep and maintain all business records reflecting any gross revenues, regardless of change in ownership, for at least four years after those gross revenues are recognized by the state franchise holder on its books and records pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

C. If the state franchise holder has underpaid the franchise fee established by SMC 5.20.030 by more than five percent, the state franchise holder shall pay the reasonable and actual costs of the examination. If the state franchise has not underpaid the franchise fee established in SMC 5.20.030, the city shall pay the reasonable and actual costs of the examination. If the state franchise holder, however, has underpaid the franchise fee established by SMC 5.20.030 by five percent or less, the state franchise holder and the city shall bear its own costs of the examination. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


5.20.100 Cablecast policies.

The city council may establish by resolution policies and procedures for the provision and operation of public, educational and governmental access (PEG) channels within the city. Each provider of a PEG channel shall act in full compliance at all times with the policies and procedures that are established thereunder. (Ord. 03-2017 § 1, 2017).


Chapter 5.24       MOBILEHOME SPACES NEGOTIATING PROCEDURES

(Repealed by Ord. 97-6)


Chapter 5.28 AMBULANCE SERVICES

Sections:

5.28.010    Purpose of provisions.

5.28.020    Definitions.

5.28.030    Emergency medical committee – Created – Purpose – Appointment.

5.28.040    Ambulance operator’s permit requirement.

5.28.050    Permit limitations.

5.28.060    Application for permit.

5.28.070    Exemptions from permit requirement.

5.28.080    Prohibited activities.

5.28.090    Adoption, amendment or deletion of rules and regulations.

5.28.100    Fees.

5.28.110    Violation – Penalty.


5.28.010 Purpose of provisions.

It is the purpose and intent of the city council of the city to provide for the highest reasonable level of emergency medical care to be available to such persons within the city who may be in need of such care. It is further the intent herein to ensure that such care shall be provided in a timely and professional manner on a continuous basis. (Ord. 90-1 § 1, 1990).


5.28.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Advanced life support” is the provision of medical intensive care nurse (M.I.C.N.) or medical intensive care paramedic (M.I.C.P.) field services, as specified in the California Health and Safety Code, applicable rules and regulations of the Sonoma County Department of Public Health Emergency Medical Services Agency, and the provisions of this chapter.

B. “Ambulance” means any vehicle that is constructed, equipped, and regularly provided or offered to be provided for transportation in the recumbent position of persons suffering from any physical or psychological illness, injury, disability, or infirmity of any type.

C. “Dispatch agency” means publicly operated emergency communications centers, including but not limited to those operated by the city of Sonoma, Sonoma County, and the state of California.

D. “Emergency” means any occurrence or situation which takes place outside of an acute care hospital, involving illness, injury, or disability requiring immediate medical or psychiatric services, wherein the delay in the provision of such services is likely to aggravate and/or endanger personal health or safety.

E. “Emergency medical system” is a coordinated, preplanned cooperative effort by the city of Sonoma, county of Sonoma, Sonoma Valley Hospital, the various law enforcement and fire protection agencies having jurisdiction with the Sonoma Valley, and any emergency medical services provider operating within the scope of this chapter, with the expressed and implied goal of providing a coordinated response to any and all requests for emergency medical services within each participating entity’s jurisdiction.

F. “First responder” is any agency or individual dispatched to the scene of a medical emergency with the intent of providing interim care, not including transport, prior to the arrival of an advanced life support ambulance, and/or assisting an advanced life support ambulance crew in the provision of emergency medical care.

G. “Hearing board” means a review body consisting of two Sonoma Valley fire chiefs, not including the city fire chief, and a Sonoma Valley Hospital emergency room physician.

H. “Operator” means “person” as defined herein.

I. “Paramedic” is an individual certified by the county of Sonoma as a mobile intensive care unit paramedic, appropriately trained and duly authorized to act as a provider of advanced life support services as defined in the Health and Safety Code. For the purpose of this chapter, paramedic shall also include those individuals licensed by the state of California, and certified by the county of Sonoma as a mobile intensive care nurse.

J. “Person” means any individual or entity as defined in SMC 1.04.010. For the purpose of this chapter, “person” shall include all individuals, firms, or principals having a financial interest in an ambulance operating as required herein.

K. “Sonoma Valley,” for the purposes of this chapter, means the area contiguous with the boundaries of the Sonoma Valley Hospital District, generally including all lands north of San Pablo Bay, west of the Napa/Sonoma County line, east of the Sonoma Mountain ridge line, and south of an east-west boundary crossing State Highway 12 near Adobe Canyon Road, north of Kenwood. (Ord. 90-1 § 2, 1990).


5.28.030 Emergency medical committee – Created – Purpose – Appointment.

An emergency medical committee is hereby created for the purpose of recommending and reviewing rules and regulations set forth by this chapter, for reviewing applications for an ambulance operator’s permit, and for reviewing the activities of a permit holder. The city manager shall appoint the members of the emergency medical committee in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to SMC 5.28.090. The Sonoma County emergency medical services coordinator, or their designee, may be appointed as a ex officio member of the committee by the city manager. All committee members except the ex officio member shall be considered voting members. (Ord. 90-1 § 3, 1990).


5.28.040 Ambulance operator’s permit requirement.

No person shall operate an ambulance within the city limits without a valid ambulance operator’s permit, unless specifically exempted in SMC 5.28.070. An ambulance operator’s permit may be issued by the city to a qualified person, upon approval by the city manager of their application. At a minimum, an application for an ambulance operator’s permit shall contain the following:

A. A set of standard operating procedures designed to assure compliance with applicable state, county, and city laws, regulations, and ordinances;

B. A current fee schedule for all services offered;

C. A registry of emergency service providers employed by the operator. The list shall include each employee’s current certification and licensing status, including levels of certification, types of licensing, and expiration dates;

D. A description of the nature and scope of public education and first responder training programs to be provided throughout the term of the permit;

E. Proof of the issuance of performance bonds in the amount established by the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to SMC 5.28.090;

F. Proof of possession of a city business license issued specifically for the operation of an ambulance enterprise, or a letter from the city clerk stating that a business license is not required;

G. The name, address, and telephone number of each person or entity which may have a financial interest in the ambulance operation.

Within 45 days of the receipt of an application for an ambulance operator’s permit, the emergency medical committee shall review and investigate the application. The committee may designate one or more individuals to inspect and test all vehicles, equipment, crew quarters and ambulance storage and staging sites. Inspection and testing of an ambulance shall not include those activities required by Section 2510(b) of the California Vehicle Code, except to verify that the vehicle in question has successfully completed such an inspection within the past 12 months. Upon completion of the investigation, inspection and testing, the committee shall issue a written recommendation to the city manager. The city manager shall, based upon the recommendation of the committee, approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or reject the application.

Upon approval of an application, the city shall issue an ambulance operator’s permit. Ambulance operator’s permits shall remain in effect until midnight on the thirtieth day of June following permit issuance, unless revoked or suspended prior to that date in accordance with this chapter.

Application for permit renewal shall be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of an existing permit. Applications for renewal shall be processed by the city as a new application, except that on-site inspections and testing, and a written report shall not be required of the committee unless requested by the city manager.

The holder of an ambulance operator’s permit shall provide written notice to the city a minimum of 180 days prior to terminating service. (Ord. 90-1 § 4, 1990).


5.28.050 Permit limitations.

A. An ambulance operator’s permit shall be valid during the time period specified on the permit only if all of the following conditions are continuously met:

1. Any changes in the information contained in the permit application package are reported to the city, in writing, within 10 days of the change occurring.

2. Written rate information shall be available to the public during normal business hours.

3. Emergency medical services are provided 24 hours a day, seven days a week in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth by this chapter.

4. Emergency medical services shall be provided to all persons in the service area without regard to race, creed, gender, marital status, or the ability to pay.

5. Emergency medical services shall be continuously offered to all portions of the city.

6. Proof of insurance, of the type and amount required by the city manager, shall be furnished to the city upon issuance of a permit. Such insurance shall be constantly maintained.

B. An ambulance operator’s permit shall not be transferable. (Ord. 90-1 § 5, 1990).


5.28.060 Application for permit.

At any time throughout the term of a permit or at the time of application for renewal of a permit the emergency medical committee may provide a written report regarding the past performance of the ambulance operator. In the event the emergency medical committee recommends denial of an application, upon the request of the applicant, a hearing board shall be convened for the purpose of receiving and reviewing all information submitted by the emergency medical committee and the applicant. Such hearing shall be requested within 10 days, and shall be convened within 30 days of the issuance of a report by the committee. A recommendation from the hearing board shall be forwarded to the city manager within 15 days of the hearing.

The city manager may deny a permit application or revoke a permit upon finding that a permit holder has failed to meet the requirements of applicable federal, state, or county laws and regulations, or any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who has had a permit revoked or denied may reapply after 30 days of the denial or revocation. Any person who has had two permit denials or revocations shall be ineligible for a permit for a period of two years commencing from the second revocation or denial.

Any applicant for an ambulance operator’s permit (AOP) whose application is denied in writing by the city manager may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, designate the name of the appellant, shall describe the nature of the decision being appealed, and shall be signed by the appellant. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 10 days (Sundays and legal holidays excepted) of the date of mailing or service of notice of denial, revocation, or suspension. The council shall act on the appeal within 45 days of filing. (Ord. 90-1 § 6, 1990).


5.28.070 Exemptions from permit requirement.

The requirement for a permit set forth in SMC 5.28.040 shall not apply to the following activities:

A. Operation of an ambulance owned by or operated under contract to the United States Government, when providing service directly to the United States Government or a contractor to any agency thereof;

B. Operation of an ambulance within the city limits which does not normally serve the city, but has been requested by an authorized dispatch agency to provide assistance during periods when multiple requests for emergency medical service have been received, and the assistance is necessary for the timely provision of emergency medical services;

C. Operation of an ambulance during a declared state of emergency, when such operation is in cooperation with the emergency mitigation efforts being conducted by the city;

D. Any ambulance passing through the city when that ambulance’s point of departure and destination are not within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 90-1 § 7, 1990).


5.28.080 Prohibited activities.

The following activities or actions are expressly prohibited:

A. Any failure to disclose or false statement of any material fact in an application for an ambulance operator’s permit;

B. Monitoring or intercepting any other emergency medical provider’s communications for profit or gain;

C. Soliciting information regarding accident or emergency locations by payment of any form of gratuity;

D. Operation of an ambulance service which does not continuously offer at least one suitable equipped and staffed advance life support ambulance for emergency response within the city, as directed by an authorized dispatch agency;

E. Charging for services not performed, billing more than one party for the same service, or billing in excess of the approved rate schedule;

F. Performance of any services by an operator or any employees of the operator, outside of the legally established scope of acceptable practice for any individual’s level of certification;

G. Failure to provide appropriately equipped and staffed advanced life support ambulance(s), available for use within the city, as required by the rules adopted by the city manager pursuant to SMC 5.28.090;

H. Response of an ambulance to an emergency call without proper authorization by the appropriate dispatch agency;

I. Failure to respond to a call for emergency medical service within the response time limitations set forth in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to SMC 5.28.090;

J. Failure to advise the appropriate dispatch agency of any change in status of a permit holder’s ambulances;

K. Falsification, defacement, or obliteration of any license or certification required by this chapter;

L. Violation of any federal, state, county, or city law, regulation, or ordinance. (Ord. 90-1 § 8, 1990).


5.28.090 Adoption, amendment or deletion of rules and regulations.

The city manager is directed to adopt any rules and regulations as necessary in order to assure the provision of timely and appropriate emergency medical care within the corporate limits of the city. The city manager shall consult the emergency medical committee prior to adopting, amending, or deleting any rule or regulation authorized by this chapter.

Public comment shall be accepted for a minimum of 30 days prior to any changes in the rules and regulations. A minimum of one certified copy of the rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall become effective immediately thereafter. The committee may specifically find that it is in the public’s best interest for changes in the rules and regulations to take effect prior to the 30-day public comment period and shall be in full force and effect immediately upon filing with the city clerk. (Ord. 90-1 § 9, 1990).


5.28.100 Fees.

A fee schedule may be set by resolution of the city council to be due upon application for a new permit, permit renewal, or upon a review of the permit in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 90-1 § 10, 1990).


5.28.110 Violation – Penalty.

Any violation of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to SMC 5.28.090 is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this code. (Ord. 90-1 § 12, 1990).


Chapter 5.30 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

5.30.010    Purpose.

5.30.020    Definitions.

5.30.030    Applicability.

5.30.040    Wireless telecommunications facility permit required.

5.30.050    Application for permit.

5.30.055    Notice of hearing.

5.30.060    Design and development standards for all facilities.

5.30.070    Additional design and development standards for facilities outside the public right-of-way.

5.30.080    Additional design and development standards for facilities in the public right-of-way.

5.30.090    Conditions of approval for all facilities.

5.30.100    Additional conditions of approval for facilities in the public right-of-way.

5.30.110    Findings.

5.30.120    Exceptions.

5.30.130    Wireless telecommunications facilities covered under Section 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.

5.30.140    Wireless telecommunications collocation facilities covered under California Government Code Section 65850.6.

5.30.150    Business license.

5.30.160    Emergency deployment.

5.30.170    Operation and maintenance standards.

5.30.180    No dangerous conditions or obstructions allowed.

5.30.190    Permit expiration.

5.30.200    Cessation of use or abandonment.

5.30.210    Revocation.

5.30.220    Removal and restoration, permit expiration, revocation or abandonment.

5.30.230    Effect on other ordinances.

5.30.240    Effect of state or federal law.

5.30.250    Appeals.


5.30.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development, siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless telecommunications facilities in the city of Sonoma. These regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to assess and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while reducing the impacts associated with wireless telecommunications facilities. This chapter provides standards necessary to: (1) preserve and promote harmonious land uses and the public right-of-way in the city; (2) promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources, and the aesthetic quality of the city consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan; (3) provide for the orderly, managed, and efficient development of wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and (4) encourage new and more efficient technology in the provision of wireless telecommunications facilities.

B. This chapter is not intended to, nor shall it be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service provider’s ability to provide personal wireless services; (2) prohibit or effectively prohibit any entity’s ability to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules or regulation for rights-of-way management; (3) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; (4) deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such wireless facilities comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such emissions; (5) prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under federal or state law; or (6) otherwise authorize the city to preempt any applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following defined terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

A. “Accessory equipment” means any equipment associated with the installation of a wireless telecommunications facility, including but not limited to cabling, generators, air conditioning units, electrical panels, equipment shelters, equipment cabinets, equipment buildings, pedestals, meters, vaults, splice boxes, and surface location markers.

B. “Antenna” means that part of a wireless telecommunications facility designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals or electromagnetic waves for the provision of services, including, but not limited to, cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS) and microwave communications. Such devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as panel antennas, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes; omnidirectional antennas; wireless access points (Wi-Fi); and strand-mounted wireless access points. This definition does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes designed for residential or household purposes.

C. “Base station” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(l), as may be amended, which defines that term as a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(9) or any equipment associated with a tower. The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks). The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, supports or houses equipment described in 47 C.F.R. Sections 1.40001(b)(l)(i) through (ii) that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, does not support or house equipment described in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(l)(i) through (ii).

D. “Building mounted” means mounted to the side or facade, but not the roof, of a building or another structure such as a water tank, pump station, church steeple, freestanding sign, or similar structure.

E. “Cellular” means an analog or digital wireless telecommunications technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.

F. “Collocation” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition effectively means “to add” and does not necessarily refer to more than one wireless telecommunication facility installed at a single site.

G. “Eligible facilities request” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(3), as may be amended, which defines that term as any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: (1) collocation of new transmission equipment; (2) removal of transmission equipment; or (3) replacement of transmission equipment.

H. “Eligible support structure” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which defines that term as any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section.

I. “Existing” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which provides that a constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of the FCC’s Section 6409(a) regulations if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

J. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor agency.

K. “Modification” means any change to an existing wireless telecommunications facility that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, modification, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to, a change in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material. Modification does not include repair, replacement, or maintenance if those actions do not involve a change to the existing facility involving any of the following: collocation, expansion, modification, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation.

L. “Monopole” means a structure consisting of a single pole used to support antennas or related equipment and includes a mono pine, monored wood, and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble trees or other objects.

M. “Personal wireless services” means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services.

N. “Personal wireless service facilities” means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as facilities that provide personal wireless services.

O. “Planning director” means the city planning director or the city planning director’s designee.

P. “Pole” means a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete, or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of the Sonoma Municipal Code. “Pole” does not include a city-owned pole with one or more streetlights and related equipment mounted on it that is solely operated by the city.

Q. “Public right-of-way” or “right-of-way” means any public street, public way, public alley or public place, laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, under the jurisdiction of the city.

R. “Reviewing authority” means the person or body who has the authority to review and either grant or deny a wireless telecommunications facility permit pursuant to this chapter.

S. “RF” means radio frequency or electromagnetic waves between 30 kHz and 300 GHz in the electromagnetic spectrum range.

T. “Roof mounted” means mounted directly on the roof of any building or structure, above the eave line of such building or structure.

U. “Section 6409(a)” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as such law may be amended from time to time.

V. “Section 6409(a) approval” means the approval required by Section 6409(a).

W. “Site” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(6), as may be amended, which provides that for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

X. “Substantial change” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(7), as may be amended, which defines that term differently based on the particular wireless facility type (tower or base station) and location (in or outside the public right-of-way). For clarity, this definition organizes the FCC’s criteria and thresholds for a substantial change according to the wireless facility type and location.

1. For towers outside the public rights-of-way, a substantial change occurs when:

a. The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than 10 percent or the height of one additional antenna array not to exceed 20 feet (whichever is greater); or

b. The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than 20 feet from the edge of the wireless tower or the width of the wireless tower at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or

c. The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four; or

d. The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to the site.

2. For towers in the public rights-of-way and for all base stations, a substantial change occurs when:

a. The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than 10 percent or 10 feet (whichever is greater); or

b. The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the wireless tower or base station; or

c. The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground when there are no existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or

d. The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground mounted equipment cabinets that are 10 percent larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or

e. The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

3. In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a substantial change occurs when:

a. The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the existing concealment elements of the support structure as determined by the planning director; or the proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval; provided, however, that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to height, width, equipment cabinets or excavation that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section.

The thresholds for a substantial change outlined above are disjunctive. The failure to meet any one or more of the applicable thresholds means that a substantial change would occur. The thresholds for height increases are cumulative limits. For sites with horizontally separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the originally permitted support structure without regard to any increases in size due to wireless equipment not included in the original design. For sites with vertically separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the permitted site dimensions as they existed on February 22, 2012, the date that Congress passed Section 6409(a).

Y. “Telecommunications tower” or “tower” means a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, freestanding tower or other structure designed and primarily used to support wireless telecommunications facility antennas.

Z. “Transmission equipment” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(8), as may be amended, which defines that term as equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

AA. “Utility pole” means a pole or tower owned by any utility company that is primarily used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.

BB. “Wireless services” means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum.

CC. “Wireless telecommunications facility” or “facility” means any facility constructed, installed, or operated for wireless service. “Wireless telecommunications facility” or “facility” includes, but is not limited to, antennas or other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunications towers or similar structures supporting such equipment, related accessory equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. “Wireless telecommunications facility” or “facility” does not mean any of the following:

1. A facility that qualifies as an amateur station as defined by the FCC, 47 C.F.R. Part 97, of the Commission’s Rules, or its successor regulation.

2. An antenna facility that is subject to the FCC Over-the-Air-Receiving Devices rule, 47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000, or any successor regulation, including, but not limited to, direct-to-home satellite dishes that are less than one meter in diameter, TV antennas used to receive television broadcast signals and wireless cable antennas.

3. Portable radios and devices including, but not limited to, handheld, vehicular, or other portable receivers, transmitters or transceivers, cellular phones, CB radios, emergency services radio, and other similar portable devices as determined by the planning director.

4. Telecommunications facilities owned and operated by any government agency.

5. Telecommunications facilities owned and operated by any emergency medical care provider.

6. Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

7. Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from the Sonoma Municipal Code by federal law or state law. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.030 Applicability.

A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 5.32 SMC, this chapter applies to all wireless telecommunications facilities as follows:

1. All facilities for which applications are submitted after the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of this chapter.

2. All facilities for which applications have been stayed or suspended as of the effective date of this chapter, except as to any provisions which, if applied, would result in any of the conditions set forth within SMC 5.30.010(B).

3. All facilities, notwithstanding the date approved, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation and maintenance, cessation of use and abandonment, removal and restoration of wireless telecommunications facilities and wireless telecommunications collocation facilities and the prohibition of dangerous conditions or obstructions by such facilities; provided, however, that in the event a condition of approval conflicts with a provision of this chapter, the condition of approval shall control unless and until the permit is amended or revoked.

4. Additionally, all facilities, notwithstanding the date of the application, shall be subject to the appeal provisions of this chapter for any determination made by the planning commission on a use permit subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.

B. SMC Titles 5 and 19, including but not limited to this chapter and Tables 2-1 through 2-4 in SMC Title 19, shall not apply to a wireless telecommunications facility on property that is owned by the city.

C. Notwithstanding any provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code to the contrary, provisions governing the installation of a public utility facility or accessory equipment shall not apply to wireless telecommunications facilities. This chapter shall govern all applications for wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with this section. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.040 Wireless telecommunications facility permit required.

A. Use Permit Required. A use permit shall be required to locate or modify any wireless telecommunications facility in any zone within the city, including the public right-of-way, subject to the following exceptions: (1) no wireless telecommunications facility shall be permitted within a residential district, or the plaza retail overlay zone (SMC 19.10.030(C)(4)); (2) any application made under Section 6409(a) shall be subject to the provisions of SMC 5.30.130; (3) no use permit shall be required for any wireless telecommunications facility to be located or modified on property belonging to the city. No wireless telecommunications facility shall be located or modified within the city on any property, including the public right-of-way, without the issuance of a permit as required by this chapter. The use permit procedures in SMC 19.54.040 shall be applicable to use permits under this chapter. Such permit shall be in addition to any other permit required pursuant to the Sonoma Municipal Code, including encroachment permits that may be required under Chapter 12.20 SMC.

B. Nonexclusive Grant. No approval granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use the public right-of-way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. Further, no approval shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.050 Application for permit.

A. Application Content. All applications for a permit required by this chapter and all required submittals must be made in writing by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent on such form as the planning director may prescribe, which shall include the following information, in addition to all other information determined necessary by the planning director as well as all other information required by the city as part of an application for a conditional use permit:

1. Full name and contact information for the facility owner, facility operator, agent (if any), and property owner, and related letter(s) of authorization of facility and/or property owner.

2. The type of facility, including a full written description of the proposed facility, its purpose and specifications.

3. A detailed site and engineering plan of the proposed facility containing the exact proposed location of the facility, created by a qualified licensed engineer and in accordance with requirements set by the planning director.

4. Photographs of facility equipment and an accurate visual impact analysis with photo simulations, including reasonable line-of-sight locations from public streets or other adjacent viewpoints, and a map that shows the photo location of each view angle.

5. Building elevations and roof plan (for building- and/or rooftop-mounted facilities) indicating exact location and dimensions of equipment proposed. For freestanding facilities, indicate surrounding grades, structures, and landscaping from all sides.

6. Proposed landscaping and/or nonvegetative screening (including required safety fencing) plan for all aspects of the facility.

7. Written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort to locate the proposed facility in the least intrusive location and screened to the greatest extent feasible in accordance with the site selection and visual impact criteria of this chapter.

8. If the application is for a facility that will be located within the public right-of-way, the applicant shall certify that it is a telephone corporation or state the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way, and provide a copy of its certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN), if a CPCN has been issued by the California Public Utilities Commission.

9. A written description identifying the geographic service area for the subject installation, accompanied by a plan and maps showing anticipated future installations and modifications for the following two years, in addition to the master plan described by this section.

10. A written report that analyzes acoustic levels for the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and all associated equipment including without limitation all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators in order to demonstrate compliance with Chapter 9.56 SMC (Noise). The acoustic analysis must be prepared and certified by an engineer and include an analysis of the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the noise contours for the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines. In lieu of a written report, the applicant may submit evidence from the equipment manufacturer that the ambient noise emitted from all the proposed equipment will not, both individually and cumulatively, exceed the applicable limits.

11. If the applicant claims it requires an exception to the requirements of this chapter, all information and studies necessary for the city to evaluate that claim.

12. An application and processing fee, or (if already established) an advance reimbursable deposit in a maximum amount to be established by resolution of the city council for the estimated cost of the city, including staff time, a consultant review as set forth in subsection (B) of this section, other legal and third-party services, and all other costs of whatever type or variety, incurred for the processing, review, commenting upon, evaluation, hearing, and consideration of the application. The planning director shall establish a reasonable deposit amount for each application that is no greater than the maximum established by the city council in accordance with this provision. In addition, the applicant shall submit a fully executed cost recovery agreement in the form provided by the city wherein the applicant agrees to replenish the deposited amount in full and fully reimburse the city otherwise where the advance deposit is insufficient to cover all of the city’s costs related to the application. Where the advance deposit is insufficient to pay for the costs incurred by the city, the planning director shall invoice the applicant who shall pay the invoice in full within 10 calendar days after receipt of the invoice. No permit shall be issued to an applicant where that applicant has not timely paid a required fee, provided any required deposit or paid any invoice as required by this code. A “reasonable deposit” under this subsection shall take into consideration the scope and scale of the proposal being made by the application, the city’s prior costs incurred with like or similar applications, and whether one or more exceptions are being requested by the applicant. Any portion of the deposit that is not expended by the city shall be reimbursed to the applicant upon the completion of the application and determination process.

13. An agreement in the form provided by the city that applicant agrees to defend, hold harmless and fully indemnify city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, and volunteers, from any claim, action or proceeding brought against the city or its officers, employees, agents, or attorneys to attack, set aside, void, or annul any such approval of the city; and/or an action taken to provide environmental clearance under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) by its advisory agencies, appeal boards, or city council. This indemnification agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and shall include, but not be limited to, damages, fees and/or costs awarded against the city, if any, and cost of suit, attorney’s fees, and other costs, liabilities and expenses incurred in connection with such proceeding whether incurred by the applicant, the city and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding. The agreement shall also include a provision obligating the applicant to indemnify the city for all of the city’s costs, fees and damages which the city incurs in enforcing the indemnification provisions of this section. Also at the time of submitting an application, the applicant shall agree, as part of the application, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, employees and attorneys for all costs incurred in additional investigation of or study of, or for supplementing, redrafting, revising, or amending any document (such as an EIR, Negative Declaration, Specific Plan, or General Plan amendment) if made necessary by said proceeding and if the applicant desires to pursue securing such approvals and/or clearances, after initiation of the proceeding, which are conditioned on the approval of these documents. In the event that a proceeding described by this section is brought, the city shall promptly notify the applicant of the existence of the proceeding and the city will cooperate fully in the defense of the proceeding. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any proceeding. In the event that the applicant is required to defend the city in connection with any proceeding described in this section, the city shall retain the right to approve: (a) the counsel to so defend the city; (b) all significant decisions concerning the manner in which the defense is conducted; and (c) any and all settlements, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.

14. A master plan which identifies the location of the proposed facility in relation to all existing and potential locations in the city that are reasonably anticipated for construction within two years of submittal of the application. Applicants may not file, and the city shall not accept, applications that are not consistent with the master plan for a period of two years from approval of a wireless facility use permit unless: (a) the applicant demonstrates materially changed conditions which could not have been reasonably anticipated to justify the need for a wireless telecommunications facility site not shown on a master plan submitted to the city within the prior two years; (b) the applicant establishes that the application is needed to prevent the actual or effective prohibition of the provision of telecommunications wireless services under the Telecommunications Act of 1996; or (c) the applicant includes all of the documentation necessary to request an exception under SMC 5.30.120.

15. A siting analysis which identifies a minimum of five other feasible locations within or outside the city which could serve the area intended to be served by the facility, unless the applicant provides compelling technical reasons for fewer than the minimum. The alternative site analysis should include at least one collocation site, if feasible.

16. Any request for exceptions to be made to the provisions of this code pursuant to SMC 5.30.120 shall be submitted at the time of the application. The request shall include an analysis as to the availability and feasibility of other alternatives to the exception(s) that are being requested and a description of the need for the exception and analysis of how the need would be met by the exception being requested.

17. An RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer licensed by the state of California that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any collocated facilities, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts effective radio power (ERP)) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits and show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

18. Every applicant applying for authorization to construct, modify, or remove a wireless communications facility located on private or public property must include with its application a written authorization signed by the property owner.

19. Any other studies or information as determined to be necessary by the planning director in order to consider an application for a wireless telecommunications facility may be required.

20. In addition to any other action otherwise required by law pertaining to the process of a conditional wireless facility permit application that requires planning commission review, the applicant for which such review is being sought shall take all of the following actions:

a. Send written notice to both the owner(s) of real property, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, within 500 feet of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility, and the city planning department of the pendency of the filing of such an application, including with such notice copies of preliminary drawings of the proposed project at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 16 feet. No application for neighborhood review will be accepted as complete unless it contains evidence acceptable to the director that such notice has been sent or such determination would otherwise be in conflict with federal or state law.

b. Hold a community meeting at least two weeks before the date of the planning commission meeting at which the application will be heard, and invite the persons entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (A)(20)(a) of this section to attend such meeting to discuss the proposed application. The community meeting shall be held at a location within the city. One meeting that includes all of the applications submitted on the same day shall be sufficient to satisfy this subsection. The mock-up of the proposed project shall be erected at the subject site before the meeting. The primary location and all alternative sites shall be presented to the community as well as the reasons for the selection of the primary location. Notice of the date, time and place of such meeting shall be sent at least seven days before the meeting and shall be filed with the planning department.

c. If the hearing on the application is continued by the planning commission, the applicant is encouraged, but not required, to hold a further meeting with the persons entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (A)(20)(a) of this section at least one week prior to the continued hearing.

d. If a meeting pursuant to subsection (A)(20)(b) of this section results in any modifications to the project prior to the planning commission hearing on the project, the applicant shall (i) notify the director of the proposed modifications, and (ii) explain to the planning commission at the hearing on the matter any discrepancy between the project as proposed in the notice sent pursuant to subsection (A)(20)(a) of this section and the project as presented to the planning commission.

A community meeting may be required at the discretion of the director for an application for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility under SMC 5.30.140 or an eligible facility permit under SMC 5.30.130.

21. All submittals required for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility under SMC 5.30.140(D).

22. In the event a subsequent state or federal law prohibits the collection of any information described herein, the director is authorized to omit, modify, or add to that request from the city’s application form.

B. Independent Expert.

1. The planning director is authorized to retain on behalf of the city any one or more independent, qualified consultants to review any application for a permit for a wireless telecommunications facility to review the technical aspects of the application, including but not limited to the following matters:

a. The accuracy, adequacy, and completeness of submissions;

b. Compliance with applicable radio frequency emission standards;

c. Whether any requested exception is necessary to avoid actual or effective prohibition of provision of wireless telecommunications services or use of the public right-of-way on a nondiscriminatory basis, which may include a determination as to whether the requested exception would close a significant gap in coverage and is the least intrusive means of doing so;

d. Technical demonstration of the unavailability of alternative sites, facility designs or configurations, and coverage analysis;

e. The applicability, reliability and sufficiency of analyses or methodologies used by the applicant and the validity of conclusions reached or claims made by applicant; and

f. Any other application issue or element that requires expert or specialized knowledge.

2. The applicant must pay for the cost of any review required under this section and for the technical consultant’s testimony in any hearing as requested by the director and must provide a reasonable advance deposit of the estimated cost of such review with the city prior to the commencement of any work. The cost of this review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit and cost recovery agreement pursuant to the application requirements stated within subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.055 Notice of hearing.

Notwithstanding the notice of hearing provisions in SMC 19.88.020, notice of a public hearing before the planning commission or an appeal of a planning commission determination before the city council of a use permit shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and mailed or delivered in accordance with SMC 19.88.020 no less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.060 Design and development standards for all facilities.

A. Basic Requirements. The design and development standards set forth in this section apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities no matter where they are located. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be designed and maintained so as to minimize visual, noise, and other impacts on the surrounding community and shall be planned, designed, located, and erected in accordance with the design and development standards in this section.

B. No Speculative Facilities. A wireless telecommunications facility, wireless telecommunications collocation facility, or a telecommunications tower, which is built on speculation and for which there is no wireless tenant is prohibited within the city.

C. General Guidelines. The applicant shall employ screening and camouflage design techniques in the design and placement of wireless telecommunications facilities in order to ensure that the facility is as visually inconspicuous as possible, to prevent the facility from dominating the surrounding area and to hide the facility from predominant views from surrounding properties, all in a manner that achieves compatibility with the community.

D. Traffic Safety. All facilities shall be designed and located in such a manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety.

E. Antennas. The applicant shall use the least visible antennas possible to accomplish the coverage objectives. Antenna elements shall be flush mounted, to the extent reasonably feasible. All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future collocation by the same or other operators or carriers. Antennas shall be situated as to reduce visual impact without compromising their function. Whip antennas need not be screened.

F. Landscaping. Where appropriate, facilities shall be installed so as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional landscaping shall be planted, irrigated, and maintained where such vegetation is deemed necessary by the city to provide screening or to block the line of sight between facilities and adjacent uses.

G. Signage. Wireless telecommunications facilities and wireless telecommunications collocation facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other signage required by law or permitted by the city.

H. Lighting. No wireless telecommunications facility may be illuminated unless either specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency or in association with the illumination of an athletic field on city or school property. Lightning arresters and beacon lights are not permitted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency. Legally required lightning arresters and beacons shall be included when calculating the height of facilities such as telecommunications towers, lattice towers, and monopoles.

I. Noise.

1. Each wireless telecommunications facility and wireless telecommunications collocation facility shall be operated in such a manner so as to minimize any possible disruption caused by noise.

2. Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

3. At no time shall equipment noise from any facility exceed 65 dbA intermittent or 55 dbA constant (Ldn or CNEL) for installations within the public right-of-way or an exterior noise level of 60 Ldn 50 dbA at the facility’s property line if the facility is located within 100 feet of a residential dwelling unit or in excess of the applicable level established under Chapter 9.56 SMC (Noise) if not located within 100 feet of a residential dwelling.

4. Any equipment, including but not limited to air conditioning units, that may emit noise that would be audible from beyond three feet from the facility in the case of a facility located in the right-of-way, or in the case of other facilities the facility’s property line, shall be enclosed or equipped with noise attenuation devices to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with applicable noise limitations under the Sonoma Municipal Code.

J. Security. Each wireless telecommunications facility and wireless telecommunications collocation facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations, visual blight, or attractive nuisances. The reviewing authority may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism when, because of their location or accessibility, a facility has the potential to become an attractive nuisance.

K. Modification. At the time of modification of a wireless telecommunications facility, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise, and other impacts, including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities.

L. Pole Standards. All poles, and equipment attached or mounted to poles, shall comply with the standards approved by the city engineer for poles and equipment placed within the public right-of-way, in addition to all other applicable requirements of Chapter 12.20 SMC and this chapter. No poles or equipment attached or mounted to poles within a public right-of-way shall be installed without an encroachment permit issued under Chapter 12.20 SMC. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.070 Additional design and development standards for facilities outside the public right-of-way.

A. Basic Requirements. Facilities located outside the public right-of-way are subject to the design and development standards set forth in this section in addition to all design and development standards that apply to all facilities.

B. No Parking Interference. In no event shall the installation of facilities replace or interfere with parking spaces in such a way as to reduce the total number of parking spaces below the number that is required.

C. Roof-Mounted Facilities. Roof-mounted facilities shall be designed and constructed to be fully concealed or screened in a manner compatible with the existing architecture of the building the facility is mounted to in color, texture, and type of material. Screening shall not increase the bulk of the structure nor alter the character of the structure.

D. Facilities Mounted to a Telecommunications Tower. Facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower shall be located in close proximity to existing above-ground utilities, such as electrical towers or utility poles (which are not scheduled for removal or under grounding for at least 18 months after the date of application), light poles, trees of comparable heights, and in areas where they will not detract from the appearance of the city.

1. Facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower, including, but not limited to, the attached antennas, shall be designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to adequately support the proposed facility and meet FCC requirements. The applicant shall provide documentation satisfactory to the planning director establishing compliance with this subsection. In any event, facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower shall not exceed the applicable height limit for structures in the applicable zoning district.

2. Aside from the antenna itself, no additional equipment may be visible. All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility cables, shall be run within the interior of the telecommunications tower and shall be camouflaged or hidden to the fullest extent feasible without jeopardizing the physical integrity of the tower.

3. Monopole installations shall be situated so as to utilize existing natural or manmade features including topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures to provide the greatest amount of visual screening.

4. All antenna components and accessory wireless equipment shall be treated with exterior coatings of a color and texture to match the predominant visual background or existing architectural elements so as to visually blend in with the surrounding development. Subdued colors and nonreflective materials that blend with surrounding materials and colors shall be used.

5. Monopoles shall be no greater in diameter or other cross-sectional dimensions than is necessary for the proper functioning of the facility.

6. If a faux tree is proposed for the monopole installation, it shall be of a type of tree compatible with those existing in the immediate areas of the installation. If no trees exist within the immediate areas, the applicant shall create a landscape setting that integrates the faux tree with added species of a similar height and type. Additional camouflage of the faux tree may be required depending on the type and design of faux tree proposed.

7. Wireless telecommunications facilities requiring permits under this chapter shall not be located within any required yard setback area of the zoning district in which they are located with the exception of possible encroachment of the antenna array into airspace over said setback.

E. Accessory Equipment. All accessory equipment associated with the operation of any wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully screened or camouflaged, and located in a manner to minimize their visibility to the greatest extent possible utilizing the following methods for the type of installation:

1. Accessory equipment for roof-mounted facilities shall be installed inside the building to which it is mounted or underground, if feasible. If not feasible, such accessory equipment may be located on the roof of the building that the facility is mounted on; provided, that both the equipment and screening materials are painted the color of the building, roof, or surroundings. All screening materials for roof-mounted facilities shall be of a quality and design that is architecturally integrated with the design of the building or structure.

2. To preserve community aesthetics, all accessory equipment, excluding antennas, aboveground vents and the smallest possible electrical meter boxes, shall, to the greatest extent possible, be required to be located underground, flush to the finished grade, shall be fully enclosed, and not cross property lines. Equipment may include, but is not limited to, the following: meter pedestals, fiber optic nodes, radio remote units or heads, power filters, cables, cabinets, vaults, junction or power boxes, and gas generators. Wherever possible, electrical meter boxes related to wireless communications facilities shall be appropriately screened, not visible to the general public, and located in less prominent areas on public property and private property. Where it can be demonstrated that undergrounding of equipment is infeasible due to conflict with other utilities the reviewing authority may approve alternative above-grade equipment mounting when adequately screened in accordance with the following: facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower shall be visually screened by locating the equipment either within a nearby building, in an underground vault (with the exception of required electrical panels) or in another type of enclosed structure, which shall comply with the development and design standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located. Such enclosed structure shall be architecturally treated and adequately screened from view by landscape plantings, decorative walls, fencing or other appropriate means, selected so that the resulting screening will be visually integrated with the architecture and landscaping of the surroundings. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.080 Additional design and development standards for facilities in the public right-of-way.

A. Basic Requirements. Facilities located in the public right-of-way are subject to the design and development standards set forth in this section in addition to all design and development standards that apply to all facilities.

B. Right-of-Way Authority. An encroachment permit under Chapter 12.20 SMC must be obtained for any work in the public right-of-way. Only applicants authorized to enter the public right-of-way pursuant to state or federal law or a franchise or other agreement with the city shall be eligible for a permit to install or modify a wireless telecommunications facility in the public right-of-way.

C. Antennas.

1. Utility Poles. The maximum height of any antenna mounted to an existing utility pole shall not exceed 24 inches above the height of an existing utility pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole be less than 18 feet above any drivable road surface. All installations on utility poles shall fully comply with the California Public Utilities Commission general orders, including, but not limited to, General Order 95, as revised.

D. Poles.

1. Only pole-mounted antennas shall be permitted in the right-of-way. All other telecommunications towers are prohibited, and no new poles are permitted that are not replacing an existing pole.

2. Pole Height and Width Limitations.

a. All poles shall be designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed antenna installation and meet FCC requirements. Poles and antennas and similar structures shall be no greater in diameter or other cross-sectional dimensions than is necessary for the proper functioning of the facility.

b. Notwithstanding the above, no facility shall be located on a pole that is less than 26 feet in height and no facility shall exceed 35 feet in height, including, but not limited to the pole and any antenna that protrudes above the pole.

c. Pole-mounted equipment shall not exceed six cubic feet in dimension.

3. If an applicant proposes to replace a pole in order to accommodate the facility, the pole shall match the appearance of the original pole to the extent feasible, unless another design better accomplishes the objectives of this section. Such replacement pole shall not exceed the height of the pole it is replacing by more than seven feet.

4. If an exception is granted for placement of new poles in the right-of-way, new poles shall be designed to resemble existing poles in the right-of-way, including size, height, color, materials and style, with the exception of any existing pole designs that are scheduled to be removed and not replaced, unless another design better accomplishes the objectives of this section. Such new poles that are not replacement poles shall be located no closer than 90 feet to an existing pole.

E. Space Occupied. Facilities shall be designed to occupy the least amount of space in the right-of-way that is technically feasible.

F. Location.

1. Each component part of a facility shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, inconvenience to the public’s use of the right-of-way, or safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists.

2. A facility shall not be located within any portion of the public right-of-way interfering with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, or any other vital public health and safety facility.

3. Each pole-mounted wireless telecommunications facility must be separated by at least 1,500 feet.

4. All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility cables, between the pole and any accessory equipment shall be placed underground, if not infeasible as described within subsection (H) of this section.

5. All new wires needed to service the wireless telecommunications facility must be installed within the width of the existing utility pole so as to not exceed the diameter and height of the existing utility pole.

G. Americans with Disabilities Act Compliance. All facilities shall be built in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

H. Accessory Equipment. To preserve community aesthetics, all accessory equipment (with the exception of the smallest possible electrical meter boxes and any other equipment that may not be so placed) shall be placed within an underground vault whenever there are no physical or site constraints to make an underground vault infeasible, except as may be determined by the reviewing authority. Equipment which may not be placed in an underground vault shall be pole-mounted to the extent feasible. When aboveground is the only feasible location for a particular type of accessory equipment and when such accessory equipment cannot be pole-mounted, such accessory equipment shall be enclosed within a structure, and shall not exceed a height of five feet and a total footprint of 15 square feet, and shall be screened and camouflaged to the fullest extent possible, including the use of landscaping or alternate screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be adequately screened and camouflaged. Infeasibility under this subsection shall not be demonstrated by mere cost to construct an underground vault or place the equipment within the vault.

I. Documentation. The applicant shall provide documentation satisfactory to the planning director establishing compliance with this section. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.090 Conditions of approval for all facilities.

A. In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, upon approval all facilities shall be subject to each of the following conditions of approval, as well as any modification of these conditions or additional conditions of approval deemed necessary by the reviewing authority:

1. Before the permittee submits any application for a building permit or other permits required by the Sonoma Municipal Code, the permittee must incorporate the wireless telecommunication facility permit granted under this chapter, all conditions associated with the wireless telecommunications facility permit and the approved plans and any photo simulations (the “approved plans”) into the project plans. The permittee must construct, install and operate the wireless telecommunications facility in strict compliance with the Approved Plans. The permittee shall submit an as built drawing within 90 days after installation of the facility.

2. Where feasible, as new technology becomes available, the permittee shall:

a. Place aboveground wireless telecommunications facilities below ground, including, but not limited to, accessory equipment that has been mounted to a telecommunications tower or mounted on the ground; and

b. Replace larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities, after receiving all necessary permits and approvals required pursuant to the Sonoma Municipal Code.

3. The permittee shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information on a form to be supplied by the city. The permittee shall notify the city of any changes to the information submitted within seven days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. This information shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a. Identity, including the name, address and 24-hour local or toll-free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator, and the agent or person responsible for the maintenance of the facility.

b. The legal status of the owner of the wireless telecommunications facility, including official identification numbers and FCC certification.

c. Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner if different than the permittee.

4. The permittee shall not place any facilities that will deny access to, or otherwise interfere with, any public utility, easement, or right-of-way located on the site. The permittee shall allow the city reasonable access to, and maintenance of, all utilities and existing public improvements within or adjacent to the site, including, but not limited to, pavement, trees, public utilities, lighting and public signage.

5. At all times, all required notices and signs shall be posted on the site as required by the FCC and California Public Utilities Commission, and as approved by the city. The location and dimensions of a sign bearing the emergency contact name and telephone number shall be posted pursuant to the approved plans.

6. At all times, the permittee shall ensure that the facility complies with the most current regulatory and operational standards including, but not limited to, radio frequency emissions standards adopted by the FCC and antenna height standards adopted by the Federal Aviation Administration.

7. Every five years a technically sufficient written report certified by a qualified radio frequency emissions engineer, certifying that the facility follows the radio frequency emissions guidelines or standards of the FCC, shall be submitted to the planning director. Additionally, if at any time while the permit is in effect the planning director determines there is good cause to believe that the facility may emit radio frequency emissions that are likely to exceed FCC standards, the planning director may require the permittee to submit a report described by this section. Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for revocation of the use permit. The report shall also include an acoustical analysis that demonstrates compliance with the noise requirements herein and with the city’s noise ordinance contained within Chapter 9.56 SMC.

8. Permittee shall pay for and provide a performance bond, which shall be in effect until the facilities are fully and completely removed and the site reasonably returned to its original condition, to cover permittee’s obligations under these conditions of approval and the Sonoma Municipal Code. The bond coverage shall include, but not be limited to, removal of the facility, maintenance obligations and landscaping obligations. The amount of the performance bond shall be set by the planning director in an amount rationally related to the obligations covered by the bond and shall be specified in the conditions of approval.

9. Indemnification shall be made a condition of approval and shall include the following responsibilities: Permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees, and volunteers from and against any and all claims, actions, or proceedings against the city and its elected and appointed council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers to attack, set aside, void or annul, an approval of the city, planning commission or city council concerning this permit and the project. Such indemnification shall include damages, judgments, settlements, penalties, fines, defensive costs or expenses, including, but not limited to, interest, attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, or liability of any kind related to or arising from such claim, action, or proceeding. The city shall promptly notify the permittee of any claim, action, or proceeding. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit city from participating in a defense of any claim, action or proceeding. The city shall have the option of coordinating the defense, including, but not limited to, choosing counsel for the defense at permittee’s expense. The indemnification responsibilities in a condition of approval shall be at least as extensive as that set forth within SMC 5.30.050(A) and shall also be inclusive of claims related to, connected with, or arising out of the construction, maintenance, operation, repair, alteration, or improvement of the wireless telecommunications facility if located within a public right-of-way.

10. All conditions of approval shall be binding as to the applicant and all successors in interest to permittee.

11. A condition setting forth the permit expiration date in accordance with SMC 5.30.190 shall be included in the conditions of approval.

12. A condition setting forth the modification requirement stated within SMC 5.30.060(K). (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.100 Additional conditions of approval for facilities in the public right-of-way.

A. In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, upon approval all facilities in the public right-of-way shall be subject to each of the conditions of approval set forth in SMC 5.30.090, each of the following conditions of approval, and any modification of these conditions or additional conditions of approval deemed necessary by the reviewing authority:

1. The wireless telecommunications facility shall be subject to such conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by the city engineer for the purpose of: (a) protecting the public health, safety, and welfare, (b) preventing interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and (c) preventing damage to the public right-of-way or any property adjacent to it. The city may modify the permit to reflect such conditions, changes or limitations by following the same notice and public hearing procedures as are applicable to the grant of a wireless telecommunications facility permit for similarly located facilities, except the permittee shall be given notice by personal service or by registered or certified mail at the last address provided to the city by the permittee.

2. The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure, improvement or property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement or property. No structure, improvement or property owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate a wireless telecommunications facility unless the city determines that such movement will not adversely affect the city or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the city’s structure, improvement or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit issued for any facility within the public right-of-way, the permittee shall provide the city with documentation establishing to the city’s satisfaction that the permittee has the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement or property within the public right-of-way to be affected by applicant’s facilities.

3. The permittee shall assume full liability for damage or injury caused to any property or person by the facility.

4. The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and expense, any damage including, but not limited to, subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to city streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and systems, or sewer systems and sewer lines that result from any activities performed in connection with the installation or maintenance of a wireless telecommunications facility in the public right-of-way. The permittee shall restore such areas, structures and systems to the condition in which they existed prior to the installation or maintenance that necessitated the repairs. In the event the permittee fails to complete such repair within the number of days stated on a written notice by the planning director, the planning director shall cause such repair to be completed at permittee’s sole cost and expense.

5. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall obtain the planning director’s approval of a tree protection plan prepared by a certified arborist if the installation of the wireless telecommunication facility will be located within the canopy of a street tree, or a protected tree on private property, or within a 10-foot radius of the base of such a tree. Depending on site specific criteria (e.g., location of tree, size, and type of tree, etc.), a radius greater than 10 feet may be required by the planning director.

6. Should any utility company offer electrical service that does not require the use of a meter cabinet, the permittee shall at its sole cost and expense remove the meter cabinet and any related foundation within 30 days of such service being offered and reasonably restore the area to its prior condition.

7. The permittee shall modify, remove, or relocate its facility, or portion thereof, without cost or expense to city, if and when made necessary by:

a. Any public improvement project, including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance, or operation of any underground or aboveground facilities including but not limited to sewers, storm drains, conduits, gas, water, electric or other utility systems, or pipes owned by city or any other public agency;

b. Any abandonment of any street, sidewalk, or other public facility;

c. Any change of grade, alignment or width of any street, sidewalk or other public facility; or

d. A determination by the planning director that the wireless telecommunications facility has become incompatible with public health, safety or welfare or the public’s use of the public right-of-way.

8. Any modification, removal, or relocation of the facility shall be completed within 90 days of written notification by city unless exigencies dictate a shorter period for removal or relocation. Modification or relocation of the facility shall require submittal, review and approval of a permit amendment pursuant to the Sonoma Municipal Code. The permittee shall be entitled, on permittee’s election, to either a pro rata refund of fees paid for the original permit or to a new permit, without additional fee, at a location as close to the original location as the standards set forth in the Sonoma Municipal Code allow. In the event the facility is not modified, removed, or relocated within said period of time, the city may cause the same to be done at the sole cost and expense of permittee. Further, due to exigent circumstances as provided in the Sonoma Municipal Code, the city may modify, remove, or relocate wireless telecommunications facilities without prior notice to permittee provided permittee is notified within a reasonable period thereafter. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.110 Findings.

A. Where a wireless telecommunication facility requires a use permit under this chapter, the reviewing authority shall not approve any application unless, in addition to the findings generally applicable to all use permits, all of the following additional findings are made:

1. The proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

2. The proposed facility has been designed and located to achieve compatibility with the community to the maximum extent reasonably feasible.

3. The applicant has submitted a statement of its willingness to allow other carriers to collocate on the proposed wireless telecommunications facility wherever technically and economically feasible and where collocation would not harm community compatibility.

4. Noise generated by equipment will not be excessive, annoying nor be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not exceed the standards set forth in this chapter.

B. In addition to the findings in subsection (A) of this section, approval of a wireless telecommunications facility permit for a facility that will be located in the public right-of-way may be granted only if the following findings are made by the reviewing authority:

1. The applicant has provided substantial written evidence supporting the applicant’s claim that it has the right to enter the public right-of-way pursuant to state or federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise or other agreement with the city permitting them to use the public right-of-way.

2. The applicant has demonstrated that the facility will not interfere with the use of the public right-of-way, existing subterranean infrastructure, or the city’s plans for modification or use of such location and infrastructure. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.120 Exceptions.

A. Exceptions pertaining to any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, exceptions from findings that would otherwise justify denial, may be granted by the reviewing authority if the reviewing authority makes the finding that:

1. Denial of the facility as proposed would violate federal law, state law, or both; or

2. A provision of this chapter, as applied to applicant, would deprive applicant of its rights under federal law, state law, or both.

B. An applicant may request an exception only at the time of applying for a wireless telecommunications facility permit and not at any time thereafter. The request must include both the specific provision(s) of this chapter from which the exception is sought and the basis of the request. Any request for an exception after the city has deemed an application complete shall be treated as a new application.

C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a use permit shall be required for a facility when an exception is requested.

D. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that denial of the facility as proposed would violate federal law, state law, or both, or that the provisions of this chapter, as applied to applicant, would deprive applicant of its rights under federal law, state law, or both, using the evidentiary standards required by that law at issue. The city shall have the right to hire one or more independent consultants, at the applicant’s expense in accordance with the deposit and cost recovery agreement requirements of SMC 5.30.050, to evaluate the issues raised by the exception request and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence to refute the applicant’s claim. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.130 Wireless telecommunications facilities covered under Section 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.

A. Purpose. Section 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. 112-96, codified in 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), generally requires that state and local governments “may not deny, and shall approve” requests to collocate, remove or replace transmission equipment at an existing tower or base station. Federal Communication Commission regulations interpret this statute and create procedural rules for local review, which generally preempt certain subjective land use regulations, limit permit application content requirements and provide the applicant with a potential “deemed granted” remedy when the state or local government fails to approve or deny the request within 60 days after submittal (accounting for any tolling periods). Moreover, whereas Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-104, codified in 47 U.S.C. Section 332, applies to only “personal wireless service facilities” (e.g., cellular telephone towers and equipment), Section 6409(a) applies to all “wireless” facilities licensed or authorized by the FCC (e.g., cellular, Wi-Fi, satellite, microwave backhaul, etc.).

The overlap between wireless deployments covered under Section 6409(a) and other wireless deployments, combined with the different substantive and procedural rules applicable to such deployments, creates a potential for confusion that harms the public interest in both efficient wireless facilities deployment and carefully planned community development in accordance with local values. A separate permit application and review process specifically designed for compliance with Section 6409(a) contained in a section devoted to Section 6409(a) will mitigate such potential confusion, streamline local review and preserve the city’s land use authority to the maximum extent possible.

B. Applicability. This section applies to all collocations or modifications to an existing wireless tower or base station submitted with a written request for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a).

C. Approval Required. Any request to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted with a written request for a Section 6409(a) approval shall be subject to the planning director’s approval, conditional approval or denial without prejudice pursuant to the standards and procedures contained in this chapter.

D. Other Regulatory Approvals. No collocation or modification approved under any Section 6409(a) approval may occur unless the applicant also obtains all other applicable permits or regulatory approvals from the city and state or federal agencies. Furthermore, any Section 6409(a) approval granted under this chapter shall remain subject to any and all lawful conditions or requirements associated with such other permits or regulatory approvals from the city and state or federal agencies.

E. Application Requirement. The city shall not approve any wireless facility subject to this chapter except upon a duly filed application consistent with this section and any other written rules the city or the planning director may establish from time to time. An application must include the information required by SMC 5.30.050 and the following additional information:

1. A title report prepared within the six months prior to the application filing date in order for the city to verify the property owner’s identity. If the applicant does not own the subject property, the application must include a written authorization signed by the property owner that empowers the applicant to file the application and perform all wireless facility construction, installation, operation and maintenance to the extent described in the application.

2. A written statement that explains in plain factual detail whether and why Section 6409(a) and the related FCC regulations at 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001 et seq. require approval for the specific project. A complete written narrative analysis will state the applicable standard and all the facts that allow the city to conclude the standard has been met. Bare conclusions not factually supported do not constitute a complete written analysis. As part of this written statement the applicant must also include (a) whether and why the support structure qualifies as an existing tower or existing base station; and (b) whether and why the proposed collocation or modification does not cause a substantial change in height, width, excavation, equipment cabinets, concealment or permit compliance.

F. Procedures for a Duly Filed Application. The city shall not review any application unless duly filed in accordance with this section, as follows:

1. Presubmittal Conference. Before application submittal, applicants must schedule and attend a preapplication meeting with the planning director for all proposed modifications submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a). The presubmittal conference is intended to streamline the review process through informal discussion that includes, without limitation, the appropriate project classification, including whether the project qualifies for Section 6409(a); any latent issues in connection with the existing tower or base station; potential concealment issues (if applicable); coordination with other city departments responsible for application review; and application completeness issues. To mitigate unnecessary delays due to application incompleteness, applicants are encouraged (but not required) to bring any draft applications or other materials so that city staff may provide informal feedback about whether such applications or other materials may be incomplete or unacceptable. The planning director may, in the planning director’s discretion, grant a written exemption to the submittal appointment under subsection (F)(2) of this section or for a specific requirement for a complete application to any applicant who (a) schedules, attends and fully participates in any presubmittal conference and (b) shows to the planning director’s satisfaction that such specific requirement duplicates information already provided in other materials to be submitted or is otherwise unnecessary to the city’s review under facts and circumstances in that particular case. Any written exemption will be limited to the project discussed at the presubmittal conference and will not be extended to any other project.

2. Submittal Appointment. All applications must be filed with the city at a prescheduled appointment. Applicants may generally submit one application per appointment, but may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever feasible and not prejudicial to other applicants. Any application received without an appointment, whether delivered in-person or through any other means, will not be considered duly filed unless the applicant received a written exemption from the planning director at a presubmittal conference.

3. Appointment Scheduling Procedures. For any event in the submittal process that requires an appointment, applicants must submit a written request to the planning director. The planning director shall endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment as soon as reasonably feasible and within five business days after a written request is received.

4. Applications Deemed Withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, an application will be automatically deemed withdrawn by the applicant when the applicant fails to tender a substantive response to the city within 90 calendar days after the city deems the application incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The planning director may, in the planning director’s discretion, grant a written extension for up to an additional 30 calendar days when the applicant submits a written request prior to the ninetieth day that shows good cause to grant the extension. Delays due to circumstances outside the applicant’s reasonable control will be considered good cause to grant the extension.

5. Departmental Forms, Rules and Other Regulations. The city council authorizes the planning director to develop and publish permit application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related materials that the planning director finds necessary, appropriate or useful for processing requests for Section 6409(a) approvals. Without further authorization from the city council, the planning director may from time to time update and alter any such permit application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related materials as the planning director deems necessary, appropriate or useful to respond to regulatory, technological or other changes related to this chapter. The city council authorizes the planning director to establish other reasonable rules and regulations, which may include without limitation regular hours for appointments with applicants, as the planning director deems necessary or appropriate to organize, document and manage the application intake process.

G. Administrative Review – Decision Notices. The planning director shall administratively review an application for a Section 6409(a) approval and act on such an application without prior notice or a public hearing. Within five working days after the planning director conditionally approves or denies an application submitted for Section 6409(a) approval or before the FCC time frame for review expires (whichever occurs first), the planning director shall send a written notice to the applicant. In the event that the planning director determines that an application submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) does not qualify for approval, the planning director will send written notice to the applicant that includes the reasons to support the review authority’s decision and states that the application will be automatically denied without prejudice on the sixtieth day after the date the application was filed unless the applicant withdraws the application.

H. Required Findings for Section 6409(a) Approval. The planning director may approve or conditionally approve an application submitted for Section 6409(a) approval when the planning director finds that the proposed project:

1. Involves collocation, removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless tower or base station; and

2. Does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing wireless tower or base station.

I. Criteria for Denial without Prejudice. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, and consistent with all applicable federal laws and regulations, the planning director may deny without prejudice an application submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) when it finds that the proposed project:

1. Does not satisfy the criteria for approval;

2. Violates any legally enforceable standard or permit condition reasonably related to public health and safety then in effect; or

3. Involves the replacement of the entire support structure.

J. Conditional Section 6409(a) Approvals. Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the city’s authority to conditionally approve an application for a Section 6409(a) approval to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.

K. Appeals. Notwithstanding any provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code to the contrary, including but not limited to Chapter 19.84 SMC and any other section of this chapter, an applicant may appeal a decision by the planning director to deny without prejudice a Section 6409(a) application. The appeal must be filed within 10 days from the planning director’s decision. The appeal must state in plain terms the grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The city manager shall serve as the appellate authority for all appeals of all actions of the planning director taken pursuant to this section. The city shall provide notice for an administrative hearing by the city manager. The city manager shall limit its review to whether the project should be approved or denied in accordance with the provisions in subsections (H) and (I) of this section. The decision of the city manager shall be final and not subject to any further administrative appeals.

L. Standard Conditions of Approval. In addition to all other conditions adopted by the planning director, all Section 6409(a) approvals, whether approved by the planning director or deemed approved by the operation of law, shall be automatically subject to the following conditions in this section; provided, however, that the planning director shall have discretion to modify or amend these conditions on a case-by-case basis as may be necessary or appropriate under the circumstances:

1. Approved Plans. Before the permittee submits any application for a building permit or other permits required by the Sonoma Municipal Code, the permittee must incorporate the wireless telecommunications facility permit granted under this section, all conditions associated with the wireless telecommunications facility permit and the approved plans and any photo simulations (the “approved plans”) into the project plans. The permittee must construct, install and operate the wireless telecommunications facility in strict compliance with the approved plans. The permittee shall submit an as built drawing within 90 days after installation of the facility.

2. Permit Term. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) approval constitutes a federally mandated modification to the underlying permit or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base station. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) approval will not extend the permit term, if any, for any conditional use permit, or other underlying prior regulatory authorization. Accordingly, the term for a Section 6409(a) approval shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base station.

3. Accelerated Permit Terms Due to Invalidation. In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any portion of Section 6409(a) or any FCC rule that interprets Section 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate approval for any Section 6409(a) approval, such 6409(a) approvals shall automatically expire one year from the effective date of the judicial order, unless the decision would not authorize accelerated termination of previously approved Section 6409(a) approvals or the planning director grants an extension upon written request from the permittee that shows good cause for the extension, which includes without limitation extreme financial hardship. Notwithstanding anything in the previous sentence to the contrary, the planning director may not grant a permanent exemption or indefinite extension. A permittee shall not be required to remove its improvements approved under the invalidated Section 6409(a) approval when it has applied for a conditional use permit for those improvements before the one-year period ends.

4. No Waiver of Standing. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) approval does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409(a), any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) or any Section 6409(a) approval.

5. Build-Out Period. The Section 6409(a) approval will automatically expire one year from the issuance date unless the permittee obtains all other permits and approvals required to install, construct and operate the approved wireless facility, which includes without limitation any permits or approvals required by any federal, state or local public agencies with jurisdiction over the subject property, the wireless facility or its use. The planning director may grant one written extension to a date certain when the permittee shows good cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension submitted at least 30 days prior to the automatic expiration date in this condition. Any further extensions may be granted by the planning commission.

6. Maintenance Obligations – Vandalism. The permittee shall keep the site, which includes without limitation any and all improvements, equipment, structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean and safe condition in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions in this Section 6409(a) approval. The permittee shall keep the site area free from all litter and debris at all times. The permittee, at no cost to the city, shall remove and remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within 48 hours after the permittee receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or other vandalism occurred.

7. Compliance with Laws. The permittee shall maintain compliance at all times with all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, orders or other rules that carry the force of law (“laws”) applicable to the permittee, the subject property, the wireless facility or any use or activities in connection with the use authorized in this Section 6409(a) approval. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that this obligation is intended to be broadly construed and that no other specific requirements in these conditions are intended to reduce, relieve or otherwise lessen the permittee’s obligations to maintain compliance with all laws.

8. Adverse Impacts on Other Properties. The permittee shall use all reasonable efforts to avoid any and all undue or unnecessary adverse impacts on nearby properties that may arise from the permittee’s construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal or other activities at the site. The permittee shall not perform or cause others to perform any construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal or other work that involves heavy equipment or machines on any day and at any time prohibited under the Sonoma Municipal Code. The restricted work hours in this condition will not prohibit any work required to prevent an actual, immediate harm to property or persons, or any work during an emergency declared by the city. The planning director may issue a stop work order for any work that violates this condition.

9. Noise Complaints. The permittee shall conduct all activities on the site in compliance with the noise standards in the Sonoma Municipal Code. In the event that any person files a noise complaint and the city verifies that such complaint is valid, the permittee must remedy the violation within 10 days after notice from the city, which may include a demonstration that the permittee has amended its operational guidelines in situations where the violation arises from the permittee’s personnel rather than the permittee’s equipment.

10. Inspections – Emergencies. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city or its designee may enter onto the site and inspect the improvements and equipment upon reasonable prior notice to the permittee; provided, however, that the city or its designee may, but will not be obligated to, enter onto the site area without prior notice to support, repair, disable or remove any improvements or equipment in emergencies or when such improvements or equipment threatens actual, imminent harm to property or persons. The permittee will be permitted to supervise the city or its designee while such inspection or emergency access occurs.

11. Contact Information. The permittee shall furnish the city with accurate and up-to-date contact information for a person responsible for the wireless facility, which includes without limitation such person’s full name, title, direct telephone number, facsimile number, mailing address and email address. The permittee shall keep such contact information up to date at all times.

12. Indemnification. The permittee and, if applicable, the property owner upon which the wireless facility is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, officials, employees and volunteers from any and all (a) damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, writs and other actions or proceedings (“claims”) brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials, employees or volunteers to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of this Section 6409(a) approval, and (b) other claims any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, that arise from or in connection with the permittee’s or its agents’, directors’, officers’, employees’, contractors’, subcontractors’, licensees’, or customers’ acts or omissions in connection with this Section 6409(a) approval or the wireless facility. In the event the city becomes aware of any claims, the city will use best efforts to promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city’s defense, and the property owner or permittee (as applicable) shall promptly reimburse city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the permittee’s indemnification obligations under this condition are a material consideration that motivates the city to approve this Section 6409(a) approval, and that such indemnification obligations will survive the expiration or revocation of this Section 6409(a) approval.

13. Performance Bond. Before the city issues any construction permit in connection with the wireless facility, the permittee shall post a performance bond from a surety and in a form acceptable to the city manager in an amount equal to or greater than a written estimate from a qualified contractor with experience in wireless facilities removal. The written estimate must include the cost to remove all equipment and other improvements, which includes without limitation all antennas, radios, batteries, generators, utilities, cabinets, mounts, brackets, hardware, cables, wires, conduits, structures, shelters, towers, poles, footings and foundations, whether above ground or below ground, constructed or installed in connection with the wireless facility. In establishing or adjusting the bond amount required under this condition, and in accordance with California Government Code Section 65964(a), the city manager shall take into consideration information provided by the permittee regarding the cost to remove the wireless facility.

14. Record Retention. The permittee must maintain complete and accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with the wireless facility, which includes without limitation this approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this condition, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the permittee.

15. Compliance Obligations. An applicant or permittee will not be relieved of its obligation to comply with every applicable provision in the Sonoma Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation by reason of any failure by the city to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance by the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.140 Wireless telecommunications collocation facilities covered under California Government Code Section 65850.6.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with an application for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility under California Government Code Section 65850.6, for which a Section 6409(a) approval is not being requested. This section provides the requirements, standards and regulations for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility for which subsequent collocation is a permitted use pursuant to California law. Only those facilities that fully comply with the eligibility requirements set forth in California Government Code Section 65850.6, or its successor provision, and which strictly adhere to the requirements and regulations set forth in this section shall qualify as a wireless telecommunications collocation facility.

B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined as follows:

1. “Collocation facility” means the placement or installation of wireless facilities, including antennas, and related equipment, on, or immediately adjacent to, a wireless telecommunications collocation facility.

2. “Wireless telecommunications facility” means equipment and network components such as towers, utility poles, transmitters, base stations, and emergency power systems that are integral to providing wireless telecommunications services.

3. “Wireless telecommunications collocation facility” means a wireless telecommunications facility that includes collocation facilities.

C. Procedures. An application for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility under California Government Code Section 65850.6 shall be processed in the same manner as an application for Section 6409(a) approval is processed, except that where the process requires justification for the Section 6409(a) approval, the applicant shall instead provide the justification for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility under California Government Code Section 65850.6.

D. Requirements. All requirements, regulations, and standards set forth in this chapter for a wireless telecommunications facility shall apply to a wireless telecommunications collocation facility; provided, however, the following shall also apply to a wireless telecommunications collocation facility:

1. The applicant for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility permit shall describe or depict:

a. The wireless telecommunications collocation facility as it will be initially built; and

b. All collocations at full build-out, including, but not limited to, all antennas, antenna support structures, and accessory equipment.

2. Any collocation shall use screening methods substantially similar to those used on the existing wireless telecommunications facilities unless other optional screening methods are specified in the conditions of approval.

3. A wireless telecommunications collocation facility permit shall not be approved unless an environmental impact report, negative declaration, or mitigated negative declaration was prepared and approved for the wireless telecommunications collocation facility.

E. Permitted Use. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a subsequent collocation on a wireless telecommunications collocation facility shall be a permitted use only if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

1. The wireless telecommunications collocation facility:

a. Was approved after January 1, 2007, by discretionary permit;

b. Was approved subject to an environmental impact report, negative declaration, or mitigated negative declaration; and

c. Otherwise complies with the requirements of California Government Code Section 65850.6(b), or its successor provision, for addition of a collocation facility to a wireless telecommunications collocation facility, including, but not limited to, compliance with all performance and maintenance requirements, regulations and standards in this chapter and the conditions of approval in the wireless telecommunications collocation facility permit; and

2. The collocations were specifically considered when the relevant environmental document was prepared for the wireless telecommunications collocation facility.

3. Before collocation, the applicant seeking collocation shall obtain all other applicable non- discretionary permits, as required pursuant to the Sonoma Municipal Code.

F. New or Amended Permit. Except as otherwise provided above, approval of a new or amended permit shall be required when the facility is modified other than by collocation in accordance with this section, or the proposed collocation:

1. Increases the height of the existing permitted telecommunications tower or otherwise changes the bulk, size, location, or any other physical attributes of the existing permitted wireless telecommunications collocation facility unless specifically permitted under the conditions of approval applicable to such wireless telecommunications collocation facility; or

2. Adds any microwave dish or other antenna not expressly permitted to be included in a collocation facility by the conditions of approval.

G. Appeals. Notwithstanding any provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code to the contrary, including but not limited to Chapter 19.84 SMC and any other section of this chapter, any applicant may appeal a decision by the planning director. The appeal must be filed within 10 days from the planning director’s decision. The appeal must state in plain terms the grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The city manager shall serve as the appellate authority for all appeals of all actions of the planning director taken pursuant to this section. The city shall provide notice for an administrative hearing by the city manager. The city manager shall limit its review to whether the project should be approved or denied in accordance with the provisions in this section. The decision of the city manager shall be final and not subject to any further administrative appeals. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.150 Business license.

A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be a substitute for any business license otherwise required under the Sonoma Municipal Code. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.160 Emergency deployment.

In the event of a declared federal, state, or local emergency, or when otherwise warranted by conditions that the planning director deems to constitute an emergency, the planning director may approve the installation and operation of a temporary wireless telecommunications facility (e.g., a cell on wheels or “COW”), which is subject to such reasonable conditions that the planning director deems necessary. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.170 Operation and maintenance standards.

A. All wireless telecommunications facilities must comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards. All necessary repairs and restoration shall be completed by the permittee, owner, or operator within 48 hours:

1. After discovery of the need by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent; or

2. After permittee, owner, operator, or any designated maintenance agent receives notification from a resident or the planning director.

B. All facilities, including, but not limited to, telecommunication towers, poles, accessory equipment, lighting, fences, walls, shields, cabinets, artificial foliage or camouflage, and the facility site shall be maintained in good condition, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of:

1. General dirt and grease;

2. Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint;

3. Rust and corrosion;

4. Cracks, dents, and discoloration;

5. Missing, discolored, or damaged artificial foliage or other camouflage;

6. Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris;

7. Broken and misshapen structural parts; and

8. Any damage from any cause.

C. All trees, foliage or other landscaping elements approved as part of the facility shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the permittee, owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping. No amendment to any approved landscaping plan may be made until it is submitted to and approved by the planning director.

D. The permittee shall replace its facilities, after obtaining all required permits, if maintenance or repair is not sufficient to return the facility to the condition it was in at the time of installation.

E. Each facility shall be operated and maintained at all times in compliance with applicable federal regulations, including FCC radio frequency emissions standards.

F. Each facility shall be operated and maintained to comply at all times with the noise regulations of this chapter and shall be operated and maintained in a manner that will minimize noise impacts to surrounding residents. Except for emergency repairs, any testing and maintenance activities that will be audible beyond the property line shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, unless alternative hours are approved by the planning director. Backup generators, if permitted, shall only be operated during periods of power outages or for testing.

G. If a flagpole is used for camouflaging a wireless telecommunications facility, flags shall be flown and shall be properly maintained at all times.

H. Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section and the conditions of approval. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.180 No dangerous conditions or obstructions allowed.

No person shall install, use or maintain any wireless telecommunications facility which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers or is reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such facility unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street furniture or other objects permitted at or near said location. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.190 Permit expiration.

A. A permit for any wireless telecommunications facility shall be valid for a period of 10 years, unless the planning commission authorizes a longer period or pursuant to another provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code the permit lapses sooner or is revoked. At the end of such period, the permit shall expire.

B. A permittee may apply for extensions of its permit in increments of no more than 10 years and no sooner than 12 months prior to expiration of the permit.

C. If a permit has not expired at the time an application is made for an extension, the planning director may administratively extend the term of the permit for subsequent 10-year terms upon verification of continued compliance with the findings and conditions of approval under which the application was originally approved, as well as any other applicable provisions of the Sonoma Municipal Code that are in effect at the time the permit extension is granted.

1. At the planning director’s discretion, additional studies and information may be required of the applicant.

2. If the planning director determines that the facility is nonconforming or that additional conditions of approval are necessary to bring the facility into compliance with the provisions of the Sonoma Municipal Code that are then in effect at the time of permit expiration, the planning director shall refer the extension request to the planning commission.

D. The request for an extension shall be decided by the planning commission if the permit expired before the application is made for an extension or if the planning director refers the matter to the planning commission. After notice and a public hearing, the planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the extension. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.200 Cessation of use or abandonment.

A. A wireless telecommunications facility is considered abandoned and shall be promptly removed as provided herein if it ceases to provide wireless telecommunications services for 90 or more consecutive days. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.

B. The operator of a facility shall notify the city in writing of its intent to abandon or cease use of a permitted site or a nonconforming site (including unpermitted sites) within 10 days of ceasing or abandoning use. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the operator of the facility shall provide written notice to the planning director of any discontinuation of operations of 30 days or more.

C. Failure to inform the planning director of cessation or discontinuation of operations of any existing facility as required by this section shall constitute a violation of any approvals and be grounds for:

1. Prosecution;

2. Revocation or modification of the permit;

3. Calling of any bond or other assurance required by this chapter or conditions of approval of the permit;

4. Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the procedures established under the Sonoma Municipal Code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and

5. Any other remedies permitted under the Sonoma Municipal Code. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.210 Revocation.

A. Grounds for Revocation. A permit granted under this chapter may be revoked for noncompliance with any enforceable permit, permit condition or legal provision applicable to the facility.

B. Revocation Procedures.

1. When the planning director finds reason to believe that grounds for permit revocation exist, the planning director shall send written notice by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee at the permittee’s last known address that states the nature of the noncompliance as grounds for permit revocation. The permittee shall have a reasonable time from the date of the notice, but no more than 30 days unless authorized by the planning director, to cure the noncompliance or show that no noncompliance ever occurred.

2. If after notice and opportunity to show that no noncompliance ever occurred or to cure the noncompliance, the permittee fails to cure the noncompliance, the city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether to revoke the permit for uncured noncompliance. The permittee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and may speak and submit written materials to the city council. After the noticed public hearing, the city council may revoke or suspend the permit when it finds that the permittee had notice of the noncompliance and remained in noncompliance with an enforceable permit, permit condition or law applicable to the facility. Written notice of the city council’s determination and the reasons therefor shall be dispatched by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee’s last known address. Upon revocation, the city council may take any legally permissible action or combination of actions necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.220 Removal and restoration, permit expiration, revocation or abandonment.

A. Permittee’s Removal Obligation. Upon the expiration date of the permit, including any extensions, earlier termination or revocation of the permit or abandonment of the facility, the permittee, owner or operator shall remove its wireless telecommunications facility and restore the site to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city. Removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. The facility shall be removed from the property within 30 days, at no cost or expense to the city. If the facility is located on private property, the private property owner shall also be independently responsible for the expense of timely removal and restoration.

B. Failure to Remove. Failure of the permittee, owner, or operator to promptly remove its facility and restore the property within 30 days after expiration, earlier termination, or revocation of the permit, or abandonment of the facility, shall be a violation of the Sonoma Municipal Code, and be grounds for:

1. Prosecution;

2. Calling of any bond or other assurance required by this chapter or conditions of approval of permit;

3. Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the procedures established under the Sonoma Municipal Code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; or

4. Any other remedies permitted under the Sonoma Municipal Code.

C. Summary Removal. In the event the planning director determines that the condition or placement of a wireless telecommunications facility located in the public right-of-way constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of the public right-of-way, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively, “exigent circumstances”), the planning director may cause the facility to be removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing. Written notice of the removal shall be served upon the person who owns the facility within five business days of removal and all property removed shall be preserved for the owner’s pick-up as feasible. If the owner cannot be identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to pick-up the property within 60 days, the facility shall be treated as abandoned property.

D. Removal of Facilities by City. In the event the city removes a facility in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such removal shall be without any liability to the city for any damage to such facility that may result from reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the city may collect such costs from the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with the Sonoma Municipal Code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city has no obligation to store such facility. Neither the permittee nor the owner nor operator shall have any claim if the city destroys any such facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner, or operator after notice, or removed by the city due to exigent circumstances. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.230 Effect on other ordinances.

Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve a person from complying with any other applicable provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code, including but not limited to obtaining any necessary encroachment or building permits. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and other provisions of the Sonoma Municipal Code, this chapter shall control. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.240 Effect of state or federal law.

In the event that state or federal law prohibits discretionary permitting requirements for certain wireless telecommunications facilities, the permits required by this chapter for those facilities shall be deemed to be ministerial permits. For those facilities, in lieu of a conditional use permit, a ministerial permit shall be required prior to installation or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility and all provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any such facility with the exception that the required permit shall be reviewed and administered as a ministerial permit by the planning director rather than as a discretionary permit. Any conditions of approval set forth in this chapter or deemed necessary by the planning director shall be imposed and administered as reasonable time, place and manner rules. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


5.30.250 Appeals.

Except as may be otherwise provided by this chapter, any planning commission determination on the issuance, modification, revocation, or extension of a use permit may be appealed to the city council under, and in accordance with, the provisions of Chapter 19.84 SMC. (Ord. 07-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018).


Chapter 5.32 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY AND ANTENNA CRITERIA

Sections:

5.32.010    Purpose.

5.32.020    Definitions.

5.32.030    General requirements.

5.32.040    Exempt from city review.

5.32.050    Registration required.

5.32.060    Prohibited facilities.

5.32.070    Permits.

5.32.080    Minimum application requirements.

5.32.090    Life of permits.

5.32.100    Co-located and multiple-user facilities.

5.32.110    Structural, design and environmental standards.

5.32.120    NIER exposure.

5.32.130    Enforcement.

5.32.140    Penalty.

5.32.150    Appeal procedures.


5.32.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development and installation of telecommunication and related facilities. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect and promote public health, safety, community welfare and the aesthetic quality of Sonoma as set forth within the goals, objectives and policies of the Sonoma general plan, while at the same time not unduly restricting the development of needed telecommunications facilities and encouraging managed development of telecommunications infrastructure.

It is furthermore intended that the city shall apply these regulations to accomplish the following:

A. Ensure against the creation of visual blight within or along the city’s scenic corridors;

B. Protect the inhabitants of Sonoma from the possible adverse health effects associated with exposure to levels of NIER (nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) in excess of recognized national standards;

C. Ensure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications services and high quality telecommunications infrastructure are provided to serve the community, as well as serve as an important and effective part of Sonoma’s emergency response network; and

D. Simplify and shorten the process for obtaining necessary permits for telecommunication facilities while at the same time protecting the legitimate interests of Sonoma citizens. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Antenna” means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure. Antennas shall include devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beamtype arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna;

B. “Antenna – Building mounted” means any antenna, other than an antenna with its supports resting on the ground, directly attached or affixed to a building, tank, tower, building mounted mast less than 10 feet tall and six inches in diameter, or structure other than a telecommunication tower;

C. “Antenna – Ground mounted” means any antenna with its base placed directly on the ground or a mast less than 10 feet tall and six inches in diameter;

D. “Antenna – Vertical” means a vertical type antenna without horizontal cross-sections greater than one-half inch in diameter;

E. “Inhabited areas” means any residence, any other structure regularly occupied by people, or any outdoor area used by people on a regular basis;

F. “NIER” means nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (i.e., electromagnetic radiation primarily in the visible; infrared, and radio frequency portions of the electromagnetic spectrum);

G. “Public service use or facility” means a use operated or used by a public body or public utility in connection with any of the following services: water, waste water management, public education, parks and recreation, fire and police protection, solid waste management, or utilities;

H. “Quasi-public use” means a use serving the public at large, and operated by a private entity under a franchise or other similar governmental authority designed to promote the interests of the general public or operated by a recognized civic organization for the benefit of the general public;

I. “Readily visible” means an object that stands out as a prominent feature of the landscape when viewed with the naked eye;

J. “Satellite dish” means any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured that is shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals. This definition is meant to include, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs and satellite microwave antennas;

K. “Silhouette” means a representation of the outline of the towers and antenna associated with a telecommunication facility, as seen from an elevation perspective;

L. “Structure ridgeline” means the line along the top of a roof, or along the top of a structure if it has no roof;

M. “Telecommunication facility” means a facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns, and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking area, and other accessory development;

N. “Telecommunication facility – Co-located” means a telecommunication facility comprised of a single telecommunication tower or building supporting one or more antennas, dishes, or similar devices owned or used by more than one public or private entity;

O. “Telecommunication facility – Commercial” means a telecommunication facility that is operated primarily for a business purpose or purposes;

P. “Telecommunication facility – Multiple users” means a telecommunication facility comprised of multiple telecommunication towers or buildings supporting one or more antennas owned or used by more than one public or private entity;

Q. “Telecommunications facility – Noncommercial” means a telecommunication facility that is operated solely for a nonbusiness purpose;

R. “Telecommunications towers” means a mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free-standing tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas. A ground or building mounted mast less than 10 feet tall and six inches in diameter supporting a single antenna shall not be considered a telecommunications tower. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.030 General requirements.

The following requirements shall be met for all telecommunications facilities in any zoning district:

A. Any applicable general plan goals, objectives, programs and policies, specific plan, PUD standards, design guidelines, and the permit requirements of any agencies which have jurisdiction over the project;

B. All the requirements established by the other chapters of the Sonoma Municipal Code and Sonoma zoning ordinance, as amended, which are not in conflict with the requirements contained in this chapter;

C. The Uniform Building Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, and Uniform Fire Code, as amended, where applicable;

D. Any applicable easements or similar restrictions on the subject property;

E. Telecommunication facilities, with the exception of those exempt from city review, shall not be located in any required yard setback area of the zoning district in which it is located with the exception of possible encroachment of the antenna array into airspace over said setback;

F. All setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower or structure closest to the applicable property line or structure;

G. All telecommunication facilities shall comply at all times with all FCC rules, regulations, and standards;

H. All telecommunication facilities shall maintain in place a security program, when determined necessary by and subject to the review and approval of the police chief, that will prevent unauthorized access and vandalism;

I. Satellite dish and parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as possible to reduce visual impact without compromising their function. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.040 Exempt from city review.

The following shall be permitted without city approvals; provided that: (1) the primary use of the property is not a telecommunications facility and that the antenna use is accessory to the primary use of the property; and (2) no more than one support structure in excess of 40 feet for licensed amateur radio operators, or one satellite dish, is allowed on the parcel:

A. A single ground- or building-mounted receive-only radio or television antenna not exceeding 35 feet, including any mast, or a receive-only radio or television satellite dish antenna, not exceeding 36 inches in diameter or exceeding the height of the ridgeline of the primary structure on said parcel, for the sole use of the tenant occupying a residential parcel on which said antenna is located;

B. Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature;

C. All citizens band radio antenna or antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service which existed at the time of the adoption of this ordinance;

D. A ground- or building-mounted citizens band radio antenna, including any mast, or a ground-, building- or tower-mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service, subject to the following requirements:

1. Antennas installed on, or attached to, any existing building or other structure may be installed without a permit of any kind when the height of the antenna and its supporting tower, pole or mast does not exceed a height of 30 feet above the highest part of the building or structure to which it is attached;

2. Antennas installed on, or attached to, any existing building or other structure will be subject to the application for and issuance of a conditional use permit and a building permit when the height of the antenna and its supporting tower, pole or mast exceeds a height of 30 feet above the highest part of the building or structure to which it is attached;

3. Free standing antennas (not supported on or attached to a building) and their supporting towers, poles or masts may be installed without a building permit when the overall height of the antennas and their supporting structures do not exceed a height of 40 feet above the grade level at the site of the installation, excluding vertical antennas;

4. Free standing antennas and their supporting towers, poles or masts may be installed, subject only to the issuance of a building permit, when the overall height of the antennas and their supporting structure exceeds 40 feet and does not exceed a height of 80 feet;

5. Free standing antennas, including vertical antennas, and their supporting towers, poles or masts over 80 feet will be subject to the application for and issuance of a conditional use permit and a building permit.

The engineering data and drawings supplied in a reproduced form by the tower and/or antenna manufacturer that address the intended installation method shall be considered sufficient engineering drawings and studies to meet all applicable building code requirements for issuance of a permit.

Any free standing antenna must comply with all applicable setback ordinances. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.050 Registration required.

A. All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications services for a fee directly to the public, either within the city of Sonoma, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities within the city, shall register with the city pursuant to this article on forms to be provided by the community development director. The purpose of registration under this section is to:

1. Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities with the city;

2. Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter;

3. Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any license fees or charges that may be due the city; and

4. Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws.

B. Information Required. The following registration information shall be required for all applications:

1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates;

2. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;

3. A narrative and map description of registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the city of Sonoma;

4. A description of the telecommunications services that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city; and

5. Such other information as the community development director may reasonably require.

C. Registration Fee. Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by resolution of the city council.

D. Amendment. Each registrant shall inform the city within 60 days of any change of the information set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.060 Prohibited facilities.

No telecommunications facilities that both transmit and receive electromagnetic signals shall be permitted in any residential zone, except for those facilities designated in SMC 5.32.040 to be exempt from city review, unless technical evidence acceptable to the planning commission is submitted showing a clear need for this facility and the infeasibility of co-locating it elsewhere. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.070 Permits.

Except for those facilities designated in SMC 5.32.040 to be exempt from city review or designated in SMC 5.32.060 to be prohibited, telecommunications facilities (including but not limited to equipment cabinets) may be located in all zones in accordance with the following procedures:

A. Conditional Use Permit.

1. Whip antennas which are less than four inches wide, have no reflector, and are no higher from the ground than 35 feet (including pole), shall be permitted on existing poles, including street lamps, subject to the approval of a use permit by the planning commission;

2. Except for proposed facilities on any of the city-owned properties identified in subsection C of this section, any other telecommunications facility (including but not limited to any related facilities) that is readily visible from any public place or residential use immediately adjacent to the proposed location shall be permitted subject to the approval of a use permit by the planning commission. The determination with regard to visibility shall be made by the planning director. Proposed facilities on any of the city-owned properties identified in subsection C of this section shall be subject only to administrative review as described in subsection B of this section.

B. Administrative Review. Any telecommunications facility that both transmits and receives electromagnetic signals (including but not limited to any related facilities), which is not readily visible to the naked eye, from any public place or residential use immediately adjacent to the proposed location, shall be permitted, subject to the approval of a zoning clearance from the planning director. Written notice of any such application shall be provided to all property owners within 100 feet of the proposed site. The determination with regard to visibility shall be made by the planning director.

C. Facilities on City-Owned Property. The city of Sonoma encourages the co-location of telecommunications facilities on the following city-owned properties, subject to administrative review; provided, that the operation of said facilities will not disrupt normal city communications or operations. The city council from time to time may establish standards, by resolution separate from the ordinance codified in this section, relative to the location of telecommunications facilities on city-owned properties.

1. City corporation yard;

2. City police station;

3. City fire station;

4. Well sites.

D. Encroachment. All telecommunications facilities shall obtain an encroachment permit from the city engineer if so required under the terms of Chapter 12.20 SMC.

E. Public Notice and Hearing. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a use permit as required in this chapter. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided and the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 19.88 SMC. In addition to the standard notice requirements, for applications involving the installation of a telecommunications facility on or within 500 feet of properties developed or used for recreation, education and public assembly uses, the applicant shall be responsible for verifying that additional notice has been provided to those uses as deemed necessary by the planning department. Such noticing may include, but is not limited to, on-site signs/posters, distribution of leaflets and/or direct mailings to students, student guardians, athletic teams, club members, congregants, employees or other site users. In addition, the site manager shall be notified for those sites with transient users. For purposes of this section, recreation, education and public assembly uses shall be limited to the following: parks, playgrounds, religious facilities, schools (public and private), clubs, lodges, private meeting halls, community centers, libraries, museums, theaters, auditoriums, recreational facilities, community gardens, outdoor commercial recreation, and indoor amusement/entertainment facilities. (Ord. 08-2009 § 1; Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.080 Minimum application requirements.

A. Submittal Information. For all telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, the community development director shall establish and maintain a list of information that must accompany every application. Said information may include, but shall not be limited to, completed supplemental project information forms, a silhouette illustration of the facility; service area maps, network maps, alternative site analysis, NIER (nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) exposure studies, title reports identifying legal access, security considerations, lists of other nearby telecommunication facilities known to the city, master plan for all related facilities within the city limits of Sonoma and within one-quarter mile therefrom; and facility design alternatives to the proposal and deposits for peer review, if deemed necessary by the director. The community development director may release an applicant from having to provide one or more of the pieces of information on this list upon a finding that in the specific case involved said information is not necessary to process or make a decision on the application being submitted.

B. Visual Analysis. Except for exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, the applicant shall submit a visual analysis, which may include photo montage, field mockup or other techniques, which identifies the potential visual impacts of the proposed facility. Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as well as from private residences. The analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other existing and foreseeable telecommunication facilities in the area, and shall identify and include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological requirements of the proposed telecommunication service. All costs for the visual analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by the applicant.

C. Technical Review. The community development director is explicitly authorized at his/her discretion to employ on behalf of the city an independent technical expert to review any technical materials submitted including, but not limited to, those required under this section and in those cases where a technical demonstration of unavoidable need or unavailability of alternatives is required. The applicant shall pay all the costs of said review, including any administrative costs incurred by the city. Any proprietary information disclosed to the city or the expert hired shall remain confidential and shall not be disclosed to any third party. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.090 Life of permits.

A. Permit Review. A use permit or administrative approval granted pursuant to this chapter authorizing establishment of a telecommunication facility, except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, shall be reviewed every five years. Costs associated with the review process shall be borne by the telecommunication facility owner/provider. Grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit, pursuant to SMC 19.54.040, shall be limited to one of the following findings:

1. The use involved is no longer allowed in the applicable zoning district;

2. The facility fails to comply with the relevant requirements of this chapter as they exist at the time of renewal and the permittee has failed to supply assurances acceptable to the community development director that the facility will be brought into compliance within 120 days;

3. The permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of approval imposed;

4. The facility has not been properly maintained; or

5. The facility has not been upgraded to minimize its impact, including community aesthetics, to the greatest extent permitted by the technology that exists at the time of renewal and is consistent with the provisions of universal service at affordable rates. The grounds for appeal of denial of a renewal shall be limited to a showing that one or more of the situations listed above does in fact exist or that the notice required under SMC 5.32.090(B) was not provided.

B. Expiration. If a use permit or other entitlement for use is not renewed, it shall become null and void upon notice and hearing by the planning commission five years after it is issued or upon cessation of use for more than a year and a day, whichever comes first. Unless a new use permit or entitlement of use is issued, within 120 days thereafter all improvements installed including their foundations down to three feet (three feet below ground surface) shall be removed from the property and the site restored to its natural pre-construction state within 180 days of nonrenewal or abandonment. Any access road installed shall also be removed and the ground returned to its natural condition unless the property owner establishes to the satisfaction of the community development director that these sections of road are necessary to serve some other allowed use of the property that is permitted or is currently present or to provide access to adjoining parcels. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.100 Co-located and multiple-user facilities.

A. Alternatives Analysis. Except for exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, an analysis shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant, subject to the approval of the appropriate decision making authority, which identifies all reasonable, technically feasible, alternative locations and/or facilities which would provide the proposed telecommunication service. The intention of the alternatives analysis is to present alternative strategies which would minimize the number, size, and adverse environmental impacts of facilities necessary to provide the needed services to the city. The analysis shall address the potential for co-location and the potential to locate facilities as close as possible to the intended service area. It shall also explain the rationale for selection of the proposed site in view of the relative merits of any of the feasible alternatives. Approval of the project is subject to the decision making body making a finding that the proposed site results in fewer or less severe environmental impacts than any feasible alternative site. The city may require independent verification of this analysis at the applicant’s expense.

B. Facility and Site Sharing. All co-located and multiple-user telecommunication facilities shall be designed to promote facility and site sharing. Telecommunication towers and necessary appurtenances, including but not limited to parking areas, access roads, utilities and equipment buildings, shall be shared by site users whenever possible.

C. Co-location. All facilities shall make available unused space for co-location of other telecommunication facilities, including space for these entities providing similar, competing services. Co-location is not required if the host facility can demonstrate that the addition of the new service or facilities would impair existing service or cause the host to go off-line for a significant period of time.

D. Interference. Approval for the establishment of facilities improved with an existing microwave band or other public service use or facility, which creates interference or interference is anticipated as a result of said establishment of additional facilities, shall include provisions for the relocation of said existing public use facilities. All costs associated with said relocation shall be borne by the applicant for the additional facilities. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.110 Structural, design and environmental standards.

A. Structural Requirements. A building permit shall be required for the construction, installation, repair or alteration of any support structure for communication equipment, except for the following:

1. Poles, spires, or other support structures with a diameter four inches or less, or a surface area of 16 square feet or less and not exceeding 10 feet in height;

2. Open-frame towers of trussed construction not exceeding 10 feet in height;

3. Poles, open-frame towers and other appurtenances, excluding buildings, constructed or installed by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.

Exemptions from the building permit requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the technical codes or other laws or ordinances of the city of Sonoma.

B. Basic Tower and Building Design. All telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the greatest extent feasible. To this end, all of the following measures shall be implemented:

1. Telecommunication towers shall be constructed out of metal or other nonflammable material, unless specifically conditioned by the city to be otherwise;

2. All ground-mounted telecommunication towers shall be self-supporting monopoles except where satisfactory evidence is submitted to the appropriate decision-making body that a guyed/lattice tower is required;

3. Satellite dishes other than microwave dishes shall be of mesh construction, except where technical evidence acceptable to the appropriate decision-making body is submitted showing that this is infeasible;

4. Telecommunication support facilities (i.e., vaults, equipment rooms, utilities, and equipment enclosures) shall be constructed out of nonreflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only) and shall be placed in underground vaults to the extent possible;

5. Telecommunication support facilities shall be no taller than one story (15 feet) in height, shall be designed to blend with existing architecture in the area or shall be screened from sight by mature landscaping, and shall be located or designed to minimize their visibility; and

6. All buildings, poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas, and other components of each telecommunications facility shall be initially painted and thereafter repainted as necessary with a “flat” paint. The color shall be selected by the appropriate decision-making body.

The city shall have the authority to require special design of the telecommunication facilities where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g., proximity to historic or aesthetically significant structures, views and/or community features).

C. Location. All telecommunication facilities shall be located so as to minimize their visibility and the number of distinct facilities present. To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunications facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040:

1. No telecommunication facility shall be installed at a location where special painting or lighting will be required by the FAA regulations unless technical evidence acceptable to the community development director is submitted showing that this is the only technically feasible location for this facility;

2. No telecommunications tower shall be installed on an exposed ridgeline, a public trail, public park or other outdoor recreation area, or in property designated with a park, agricultural land, hillside, vernal pool or creek/riparian corridor on the Environmental Resources Map in the Sonoma general plan. Notwithstanding this prohibition, building-mounted antennas shall be permitted on existing facilities in these areas, subject to the approval of the community development director, who shall consider the impacts of both the antenna and any related facilities.

3. No telecommunication facility that is readily visible from off-site shall be installed on a site that is not already developed with telecommunication facilities or other public or quasi-public uses, or closer than one-half mile from another readily visible telecommunication facility unless it is a co-located facility or situated on a multiple-user site, unless technical evidence acceptable to the community development director or planning commission, as appropriate, is submitted showing a clear need for this facility and the infeasibility of co-locating it elsewhere; and

4. Proposed telecommunication towers shall be set back at least 20 percent of the tower height from all property lines and at least 100 feet from any public park or outdoor recreation area. Guy wire anchors shall be set back at least 20 feet from any property line. This section shall not apply to building-mounted antennas attached to existing facilities, but it shall apply to any related facilities associated with such antennas.

D. Height. The height of a telecommunication tower shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of said tower to the top of the tower itself or, if higher, to the tip of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. In the case of building-mounted towers the height of the tower includes the height of the portion of the building on which it is mounted. In the case of “crank-up” or other similar towers whose height can be adjusted, the height of the tower shall be the maximum height to which it is capable of being raised.

E. Lighting. All telecommunication facilities shall be unlit except when authorized personnel are actually present at night, and except for exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040.

F. Roads and Parking. Except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, all telecommunication facilities shall be served by the minimum roads and parking areas necessary and shall use existing roads and parking areas whenever possible. Any existing roads and parking areas, if required, shall be upgraded the minimum amount necessary to meet standards specified by the fire chief and public works director.

G. Vegetation Protection and Facility Screening.

1. Except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, all telecommunications facilities shall be installed in such a manner so as to maintain and enhance existing native vegetation and shall include suitable mature landscaping to screen the facility, where necessary. For purposes of this section, “mature landscaping” shall mean trees, shrubs or other vegetation of a size that will provide the appropriate level of visual screening immediately upon installation.

2. No actions shall be taken subsequent to project completion with respect to the vegetation present that would increase the visibility of the facility itself or the access road and power/telecommunication lines serving it. The owner(s)/operator(s) of the facility shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement of all required landscaping.

H. Fire Prevention. All telecommunication facilities shall be designed and operated in such a manner so as to minimize the risk of igniting a fire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunication facilities, when determined necessary by the fire chief, except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040:

1. At least one-hour fire resistant interior surfaces shall be used in the construction of all buildings;

2. Monitored automatic fire extinguishing systems approved by the fire chief shall be installed in all equipment buildings and enclosures;

3. Rapid entry (KNOX) systems shall be installed as required by the fire chief;

4. Type and location of vegetation, screening materials and other materials within 10 feet of the facility and all new structures, including telecommunication towers, shall have review for fire safety purposes by the fire chief. Requirements established by the fire chief shall be followed; and

5. All tree trimmings and trash generated by construction of the facility shall be removed from the property and properly disposed of prior to building permit finalization or commencement of operation, whichever comes first.

I. Environmental Resource Protection. All telecommunication facilities shall be located so as to minimize the effect on environmental resources. To that end, all facilities deemed to constitute a project as defined by CEQA shall be subject to environmental review.

J. Noise and Traffic. All telecommunication facilities shall be constructed and operated in such a manner as to minimize the amount of disruption caused to nearby properties. To that end all the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040:

1. Outdoor noise producing construction activities shall only take place on weekdays (Monday through Friday, nonholiday) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. unless allowed at other times by the planning commission; and

2. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. If the facility is located within 100 feet of a residential dwelling unit, noise attenuation measures shall be included to reduce noise levels at the facility to a maximum exterior noise level of 60 Ldn at the property line and a maximum interior noise level of 45 Ldn. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.

K. Visual compatibility. Facility structures and equipment shall be located, designed and screened to blend with the existing natural or built surroundings, as well as any existing supporting structures, so as to reduce visual impacts to the extent feasible. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.120 NIER exposure.

A. Public Health. No telecommunication facility shall be located or operated in such a manner that it poses, either by itself or in combination with other such facilities, a potential threat to public health. To that end no telecommunication facility or combination of facilities shall produce at any time power densities in any inhabited area that exceed the FCC-adopted standard for human exposure, as amended, or any more restrictive standard subsequently adopted or promulgated by the city, county, the state of California, or the federal government.

B. Initial Compliance with NIER Levels. Initial compliance with this requirement shall be demonstrated for any facility within 400 feet of residential uses or sensitive receptors such as schools, churches, hospitals, etc., and all broadcast radio and television facilities, regardless of adjacent land uses, through submission, at the time of application for the necessary permit or entitlement, of NIER (nonionizing electromagnetic radiation calculations) specifying NIER levels in the inhabited area where the levels produced are projected to be highest. If these calculated NIER levels exceed 80 percent of the NIER standard established by this section, the applicant shall hire a qualified electrical engineer licensed by the state of California to measure NIER levels at said location after the facility is in operation. A report of these measurements and the findings with respect to compliance with the established NIER standard shall be submitted to the community development director. Said facility shall not commence normal operations until it complies with this standard. Proof of said compliance shall be a certification provided by the engineer who prepared the original report. In order to assure the objectivity of the analysis, the city may require, at the applicant’s expense, independent verification of the results of the analysis. Because of their intermittent nature, facilities solely for personal use, such as citizens band radio antenna or antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service, or for the incidental use of a co-located commercial activity, shall be required to comply with applicable FCC rules for NIER emissions, but they shall be routinely exempt from the submission requirements in this section unless otherwise required by the community development director.

C. Ongoing Compliance with NIER Levels. Every telecommunication facility within 400 feet of an inhabited area and all broadcast radio and television facilities shall demonstrate continued compliance with the NIER standard established by this section. Every five years a report listing each transmitter and antenna present at the facility and the effective radiated power radiated shall be submitted to the community development director. If either the equipment or effective radiated power has changed, calculations specifying NIER levels in the inhabited areas where said levels are projected to be highest shall be prepared. NIER calculations shall also be prepared every time the adopted NIER standard changes. If calculated levels in either of these cases exceed 80 percent of the standard established by this section, the operator of the facility shall hire a qualified electrical engineer licensed by the state of California to measure the actual NIER levels produced. A report of these calculations, required measurements, if any, and the author’s/engineer’s findings with respect to compliance with the current NIER standard shall be submitted to the community development director within five years of facility approval and every five years thereafter. In the case of a change in the standard, the required report shall be submitted within 90 days of the date said change becomes effective.

D. Failed Compliance. Failure to supply the required reports or to remain in continued compliance with the NIER standard established by this section shall be grounds for revocation of the use permit or other entitlement. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.130 Enforcement.

A. Standard Agreements Required. Except for exempt facilities as defined in SMC 5.32.040, a maintenance/facility removal agreement signed by the applicant and the property owner shall be submitted to the community development director prior to approval of the use permit or other entitlement for use authorizing the establishment or modification of any telecommunications facility which includes a telecommunication tower, one or more new buildings/equipment enclosures larger in aggregate than 300 square feet, more than three satellite dishes of any size, or a satellite dish larger than four feet in diameter. Said agreement shall bind the applicant and the property owner and their respective successors-in-interest to properly maintain the exterior appearance of and ultimately removal of the facility in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions of approval. It shall further bind them to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the city for all costs incurred to perform any work required of the applicant by this agreement that the applicant fails to perform. It shall also specifically authorize the city and/or its agents to enter onto the property and undertake said work so long as:

1. The community development director has first provided the applicant the following written notices:

a. An initial compliance request identifying the work needed to comply with the agreement and providing the applicant at least 45 calendar days to complete it; and

b. A follow-up notice of default specifying the applicant’s failure to comply with the work within the time period specified and indicating the city’s intent to commence the required work within 10 working days.

2. The applicant has not filed an appeal pursuant to SMC 5.32.150 within 11 working days of the notice required under subsection (A)(1) above. If an appeal is filed, the city shall be authorized to enter the property and perform the necessary work only if the appeal is dismissed or final action on it is taken in favor of the city.

B. Payment Responsibility. All costs incurred by the city to undertake any work required to be performed by the applicant pursuant to the agreement referred to in SMC 5.32.050 including, but not limited to, administrative and job supervision costs, shall be borne solely by the applicant. The applicant shall deposit within 10 working days of written request therefor such costs as the city reasonably estimates or has actually incurred to complete such work. When estimates are employed, additional moneys shall be deposited as needed within 10 working days of demand to cover actual costs. The agreement shall specifically require the applicant to immediately cease operation of the telecommunication facility involved if the applicant fails to pay the moneys demanded within 10 working days. It shall further require that operation remain suspended until such costs are paid in full.

C. Agreement Fees. If the owner of the subject property declines to be a party to the standard agreement required by subsection A of this section, said agreement shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee, as established by resolution of the city council, into a trust fund established to cover expenditures for the removal, screening, enhancement or similar activities relating to the existence of telecommunication facilities within the city.

D. Agreement Stipulations. Standard agreement required by subsection A of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following stipulations agreed to by the applicant:

1. Telecommunication facilities lessors shall be strictly liable for any and all sudden and accidental pollution and gradual pollution resulting from their use within the city of Sonoma. This liability shall include cleanup, intentional injury or damage to persons or property. Additionally, telecommunication facilities lessors shall be responsible for any sanctions, fines, or other monetary costs imposed as a result of the release of pollutants from their operations. Pollutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, include smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals, electromagnetic waves and waste. Waste includes materials to be recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed.

2. The telecommunication facility provider shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city or any of its boards, commissions, agents, officers, and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city, its boards, commission, agents, officers, or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul the approval of the project when such claim or action is brought within the time period provided for in applicable state and/or local statutes. The city shall promptly notify the provider(s) of any such claim, action or proceeding. The city shall have the option of coordinating in the defense. Nothing contained in this stipulation shall prohibit the city from participating in a defense of any claim, action, or proceeding if the city bears its own attorney’s fees and costs, and the city defends the action in good faith. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


5.32.140 Penalty.

A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure compliance with this title. These provisions shall be deemed cumulative and not exclusive.

B. Official action. All departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with the authority to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall adhere to, and require conformance with, this title.

C. Inspection and right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any part of this title, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24 hours’ written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.

D. Abatement. Any use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, painted or maintained contrary to this title is unlawful and a public nuisance subject to the penalties prescribed in SMC 19.90.040. The city council may order the city attorney to commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal of structures and the enjoinment of persons from activities contrary to the provisions of this title.

E. Civil Fine for Violation.

1. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney on behalf of the city in the amount of $5,000, but with a minimum amount of $1,000 for each such violation.

2. If two or more persons are responsible for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the civil penalty set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section.

3. Amounts recovered under this section shall be deposited into a fund carried upon the financial records of the city which shall be used exclusively for the maintenance and/or removal of telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to equipment cabinets, in the city of Sonoma.

F. Criminal Penalty for Violation. A violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding $350.00 for a second violation within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation occurring within one year.

G. Injunctions. In addition to all other actions and remedies, civil or penal, authorized by law, the city attorney is authorized to file an action in court seeking injunctive relief to enjoin a violation of any provision of this chapter or to prevent a threatened violation of any provision of this chapter. The injunctive relief sought in any such action may be prohibitory, mandatory, or both. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996; Ord. 75-5 § 1 (19-3.061 – 19-3.064), 1975).


5.32.150 Appeal procedures.

Any decision or determination made by the planning commission in the administration of this ordinance may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth as follows. Those same procedures shall also apply to decisions or determinations made by the staff of the community development department, except that those appeals shall be made to the planning commission.

A. Standing to Appeal. An appeal may only be made by a person or persons meeting one of the following criteria for standing:

1. The person or persons making the appeal is an applicant for a permit or other approval or action under the provisions of this ordinance;

2. The person or persons making the appeal is an owner or renter of real property within 300 feet of the site subject to the proposed application or other approval or action under the provisions of this ordinance and claims to be adversely and materially affected by said decision or action by the staff of the community development or the planning commission.

B. Timing and Manner of Appeal. All appeals shall be in writing, on the city of Sonoma’s appeal form, and in order to be deemed complete and ready for further processing, shall meet the following criteria:

1. The appeal must be filed with the city of Sonoma community development department within 11 calendar days from the date of the decision in question, unless the eleventh day falls on a weekend or city holiday, in which case the appeal deadline shall be the close of the next business day;

2. The appeal must clearly state:

a. The reasons why the appellant has standing to appeal;

b. The reasons why the decision or determination is illegal, erroneous, or arbitrary and capricious (the appellant should also, where possible, submit documentation in support of their position); and

c. The resulting action requested by the body hearing the appeal.

C. Appeal Hearing. An appeal hearing shall be a public hearing subject to the usual and customary notice procedures of the city. The date for the appeal hearing shall be set on the earliest available regular or special meeting agenda of the applicable hearing body.

D. Appeals by City Officials Prohibited. No city officer or employee, including members of the city council, planning commission or any other city commission or advisory committee appointed by the city council shall make the city a party to an appeal under this ordinance by making an appeal in either a public or private capacity, except when it can be shown that in a purely private capacity, the official or employee is clearly and materially affected by any action taken under this ordinance. (Ord. 96-23 § 1, 1996).


Chapter 5.34 MUSIC VENUE LICENSING

Sections:

5.34.010    Purpose.

5.34.020    Music venue defined.

5.34.030    License requirement.

5.34.040    Applicability.

5.34.050    Application requirements.

5.34.060    Application review, notice and hearing.

5.34.070    Findings, decision.

5.34.080    Conditions of approval.

5.34.090    Change of ownership.

5.34.100    Expiration.

5.34.110    Initial review.

5.34.120    Review and termination.

5.34.130    Term and renewal.

5.34.140    Licenses not transferable.

5.34.150    Fees.


5.34.010 Purpose. 

Music venue licenses are intended to provide uniform and comprehensive regulations to ensure that live music performances are conducted in a manner that is compatible with adjacent land uses. The procedures of this chapter provide for the review of the location, design, configuration, and potential impacts of the music venue to be licensed, to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed activity with surrounding uses and the suitability of the activity to the site. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.020 Music venue defined.

Music Venue. For the purpose of this chapter, a “music venue” shall be defined as follows: a building, building complex, and/or an indoor or outdoor area used to accommodate musical performances, including live music, the presentation of music played on sound equipment operated by the owner or by an employee, an agent or a contractor of the venue commonly known as a “disc jockey” or “DJ,” and karaoke. A music venue may be a stand-alone use or may be associated with another use such as a restaurant. “Nightclubs and bars,” “special event venues,” and “winery accessory uses” as defined and regulated in SMC Title 19 shall not be considered music venues and shall not be regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.030 License requirement.

No person shall operate a music venue within the city limits without a valid music venue license, except on those properties for which a use permit was issued allowing music performances prior to the adoption of this chapter and in accordance with any applicable conditions. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.040 Applicability. 

A music venue license may only be granted within those zoning districts identified in SMC Title 19, Division II, Chapter 19.10 SMC (Zones and Allowable Uses) as allowing music venues, subject to the approval of a license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.050 Application requirements.

An application for a music venue license shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing. In addition to the requirements specified in Chapter 19.52 SMC, the submittal of a management plan shall be required that fully describes the operation of the proposed music venue, including hours of operation, placement of stage areas, proposed amplification (if any), noise buffering, days and hours of music performances, security arrangements, annual reporting to the city in accordance with SMC 5.34.130, and controls for ensuring compliance with this chapter and the SMC and compatibility of the proposed activity with surrounding uses. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.060 Application review, notice and hearing. 

Each music venue license application shall be analyzed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall be circulated for comment to other city departments as necessary. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a music venue license. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings). (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.070 Findings, decision.

Following a public hearing, the planning commission may approve or disapprove an application for a music venue license. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The planning commission may approve a music venue license only if the planning commission first finds that:

A. The proposed music venue license is consistent with the general plan and the development code (SMC Title 19);

B. The nature, scale and operating characteristics of the proposed music venue are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity; and

C. When implemented, the management plan sufficiently assures ongoing compliance with hours of operation, security, noise control, and all other conditions that may be attached to the license. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.080 Conditions of approval. 

In approving a music venue license, the planning commission may adopt any conditions of approval deemed necessary to achieve consistency with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, compliance with the provisions and purposes of this chapter and any applicable provisions of the development code, and the protection of the public health, safety, and/or welfare. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.090 Change of ownership. 

While the approval of a new music license is required under this chapter upon a change in control of the ownership of a music venue or change in control of the ownership of the licensee, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld by the planning commission, as long as the commission makes the following findings, based on substantial evidence in the record:

A. There was no pattern of violations associated with the music venue as operated by the predecessor business, operator, and/or licensee; and

B. No substantial changes are proposed by the proposed, new licensee with respect to: (1) the nature, scale and operating characteristics of the music venue, and (2) the previously approved management plan, unless those changes are necessary to remedy problems or shortcomings of the previous licensee’s management plan and/or operations; and 

C. The proposed new licensee possesses the resources, background and qualifications to comply with the previously approved management plan (as may be amended by the commission) and this chapter; and

D. There is no evidence that the proposed new licensee has violated the material terms and conditions of any permit, license or entitlement relevant to the operation of a music venue and previously granted to the proposed new licensee by any public agency. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.100 Expiration. 

A music venue license shall be exercised (namely, the activity or one of the activities for which the license was granted actually takes place) within six months from the final date of approval or the license shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.110 Initial review.

Once a music venue license has been approved, the planning commission shall review the license within one year of it being exercised for compliance with conditions and a re-evaluation of its compatibility with adjoining uses. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the initial review of a music venue license. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings). Following a public hearing, the planning commission may extend the music venue license or it may terminate the music venue license, based on consideration of the findings set forth in SMC 5.34.120. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. In renewing a music venue license, the planning commission may amend the conditions of approval as deemed necessary to achieve consistency with the general plan, compliance with the provisions and purposes of the this chapter, development code, and the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.120 Review and termination. 

A music venue license may be reviewed and terminated by the planning commission in a public hearing at any time, subject to the notice requirements set forth in Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings). A music venue license may be terminated by the planning commission based on any of the following findings, supported by substantial evidence in the record:

A. The licensee has failed to comply with the conditions of approval attached to the music venue license, the management plan made part of the music venue license or any other regulations applicable to the activity authorized by the music venue license; or

B. The findings set forth in SMC 5.34.070 can no longer be made with respect to the music venue or the manner in which the music venue has been or is being operated, based on specific evidence in the record that demonstrates that the music venue is having significant adverse effects on the health, safety, or welfare of residences and/or businesses in its vicinity; or

C. The licensee made misrepresentations in its application for a music venue license or otherwise failed to disclose thereon facts material to the decision whether or not to grant the music venue license to the licensee. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.130 Term and renewal. 

A music venue license is valid for one year, after which it expires if not renewed prior to the completion of the one-year term. Following the initial planning commission review required under SMC 5.34.110, the annual renewal of a music venue license shall be processed administratively and shall not be subject to a public hearing requirement; provided, that staff finds that the applicant is in compliance with the conditions of approval associated with the license and all other requirements of this chapter. Otherwise, the renewal of the license shall be referred to the planning commission for review, subject to the notice requirements set forth in Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings). Notwithstanding the foregoing, said license shall not expire unless the city has given written notice to the licensee of the date of expiration and the licensee fails to renew the license within 30 days of receipt of said notice. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.140 Licenses not transferable. 

A music venue license is personal to the person or entity to whom or to which it is granted. Only the licensee is permitted to engage in the activities described in the license and those activities may only occur on or at the premises described in the license. A music venue license may not be transferred and is not transferable, except as specifically provided for in SMC 5.34.090 (Change of Ownership). For purposes of this chapter, “transfer” shall also include a change in control of the ownership of any entity to which a music venue license is granted. For purposes of this chapter, “control” shall mean the ownership, directly or indirectly, of at least 25 percent of the voting securities of, or possession of the right to vote, in the ordinary direction of its affairs, of at least 25 percent of the voting interest in, any person or entity. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


5.34.150 Fees. 

Fees for an application for a music venue license and for the renewal of a music venue license shall be as established by the city council, and amended from time to time, through the adoption of a resolution. (Ord. 02-2012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012).


Title 6      (Reserved)


Title 7       HEALTH AND WELFARE

Chapters:

7.02  Annexation

7.04  Public Health Enforcement

7.08  Garbage and Rubbish Disposal

7.12  Anti-Scavenger Ordinance

7.16  Use and Maintenance Standards for Yards

7.20  Use of Public Property

7.24  Smoking Regulations

7.25  Regulating the Manner of Sale of Tobacco Products

7.30  Polystyrene Food Packaging

7.32  Air Conditioning Coolant Recycling

7.40  Permits for Motion Picture and Television Production


Chapter 7.02       ANNEXATION

Sections:

7.02.010  Purpose.

7.02.020  Definitions.

7.02.030  Annexation procedures.

7.02.040  Public services and improvements.

7.02.050  Unsafe building conditions.


7.02.010  Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to insure that the addition of new territory to the corporate limits of the city of Sonoma through the process of annexation is consistent with state law, consistent with the city’s general plan as amended or revised from time to time, is economically feasible for the city relative to the provision of public services, and represents a logical extension of the boundaries of Sonoma. (Ord. 96-7 § 1, 1996).


7.02.020  Definitions.

The following terms and phrases shall be defined as set forth below:

A.  "Annexation" shall mean the process of adding territory to the corporate limits of the city in accordance with applicable state and local regulations.

B.  "City" shall mean the city of Sonoma.

C.  "Irregular city boundaries" shall mean the result of annexations that leave portions of unincorporated territory surrounded or nearly surrounded by territory within the corporate limits of the city.

D.  "Local agency formation commission" or "LAFCO" shall mean the agency responsible for the review and approval of annexations to or detachments from cities or special districts within Sonoma County as provided by state law.

E.  "Prezoning" shall mean the process of placing a city zoning designation on a property requesting annexation to the city. A prezoning designation shall be applied to the property prior to its annexation to the city.

F.  "Public improvements" shall mean the installation, repair, or replacement of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, storm drains, water mains and laterals, sewer mains and laterals, fire hydrants, or similar public facility to the current standards of the city or other responsible agency providing the affected service.

G.  "Public services" shall mean those services provided by the city of Sonoma or other responsible agency for the benefit of its citizens. Public services may include, but are not limited to, the provision of water for domestic use, sewage disposal, police protection, fire protection, emergency medical services, and parks and recreation. (Ord. 96-7 § 1, 1996).


7.02.030  Annexation procedures.

A.  No unincorporated territory shall be eligible for annexation to the city unless:

1.  Said territory lies within the sphere of influence of the city as delineated in the city’s most recently adopted general plan and as adopted by the local agency formation commission (LAFCO); and

2.  That some portion of said territory adjoins the corporate limits of the city.

It is the intent of the city to discourage annexations of unincorporated territory that would create or continue irregular city boundaries by leaving certain unincorporated parcels out of the proposed annexation area. However, this statement of intent should not be construed to prohibit applications for annexation under such circumstances, or to require property owners, who have so stated for the record, to join in any proposed annexation against their will, unless the city council finds and determines that the inclusion of said properties is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community.

B.  Once an unincorporated territory has been determined to be eligible for annexation to the city, the property owner(s) or their authorized representative may make application to the city of Sonoma community development department for a prezoning that is consistent with the land use designation of the city’s most recently adopted general plan. Said prezoning application may also be accompanied by any other applications necessary for any proposed new development or use of the territory, or portion thereof, to be annexed. The application and any associated application fees and supplemental information that may be required shall be in a form and amount determined by resolution of the city council.

C.  Once an application has been deemed complete and ready for processing by the community development department, it shall be placed on an agenda of the city of Sonoma planning commission for public hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the application shall be circulated to other city departments for review and comment. City departments shall, within a designated response time, have the opportunity to identify potential impacts associated with the proposed application and recommend modifications to the application or conditions of approval to be forwarded to the planning commission for its consideration. At the conclusion of the public hearing and based on the evidence and testimony in the record, the planning commission shall either deny the prezoning and the annexation application, or recommend approval or conditional approval of the prezoning and the annexation to the city council. A recommendation of approval or conditional approval shall be based on the following findings (a decision to deny shall be based on the inability to make one or more of these findings):

1.  That the prezoning of the territory is consistent with land use designation of the general plan and with applicable general plan goals and policies;

2.  That the prezoning and proposed annexation represents a logical extension of city boundaries;

3.  That essential public utilities (sewer, water, storm drainage, etc.) are in the vicinity and can be extended to the area to be annexed;

4.  That all applicable public services have the capacity to serve the area to be annexed.

A denial of a prezoning may be appealed to the city council under the provisions contained in Chapter 19.84 SMC.

D.  The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission for approval of the prezoning and the annexation at a duly noticed public hearing. Upon concluding the public hearing and considering the evidence and testimony in the record, the city council shall either approve or deny the prezoning and annexation. Approval of a prezoning shall be done by ordinance.

E.  Following the approval of a prezoning and annexation by the city council, the proposed annexation shall then be considered by the local agency formation commission (LAFCO). Application to LAFCO shall be made in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and the procedures, submittal requirements and fees adopted by LAFCO from time to time. Any remaining actions required by the city to finalize the proposed annexation shall be done in accordance with applicable state law and following the decision of LAFCO. (Ord. 96-7 § 1, 1996).


7.02.040  Public services and improvements.

A.  It is the intent of the city council that annexations to the city must pay for all costs associated with providing applicable city services. To insure that said costs of service provision are adequately covered, the city council shall, after appropriate review and analysis, adopt an annexation fee to be charged at the time application is made to the city for a prezoning and annexation. Following its adoption, the city council shall have the authority to revise the annexation fee from time to time to insure its continued ability to cover the costs of extending services and utilities to newly annexed areas. The city council may also consider fee waivers or adjustments in certain cases where an annexation may be encouraged due to demonstrated benefits to the city.

B.  Annexations that include properties with existing public improvements, including but not necessarily limited to streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, storm drains, or water lines, that are not consistent with current, adopted city public improvement standards at the time of annexation shall be required to bring those improvements up to applicable city standards as a condition of annexation to the city. The timing for completing required public improvements and the means of securing that said improvements are completed in a timely manner in accordance with city standards shall be determined by the city engineer and made a condition of approval of the annexation at the time the annexation and prezoning application is considered by the planning commission. The city council may, upon written request of applicant and prior to a final action to approve the annexation and prezoning, authorize the deferral, modification, or waiver of required public improvements if the city council is able to make one or more of the same findings relative to the application for annexation as are contained in SMC 12.14.050(A) through (C). In the event that city council grants a deferral of public improvements, the affected property owners shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city as provided in SMC 12.14.051. (Ord. 96-7 § 1, 1996).


7.02.050  Unsafe building conditions.

Annexations that include existing structures on the properties to be annexed shall be subject to a building and fire code survey to be performed by the city building official and fire prevention officer, or his/her respective designees, prior to the approval of the annexation by the planning commission. The sole purpose of the survey shall be to identify hazardous building conditions existing at the time of the annexation. The building official and fire prevention officer may recommend, and the city council may adopt, specific conditions intended to address identified deficiencies prior to annexation to the city. (Ord. 96-7 § 1, 1996).


Chapter 7.04       PUBLIC HEALTH ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

7.04.010  Purpose.

7.04.020  Definitions.

7.04.030  Health officer designated.

7.04.040  Permits and fees.

7.04.050  Issuance of permit.

7.04.060  Permit form.

7.04.070  Inspection of work.

7.04.080  Approval required.

7.04.090  Violations – Penalty.


7.04.010  Purpose.

This chapter establishes within the city the enforcement authority and rules pertaining to the enforcement, observation and inspection of public health statutes, orders and other rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health Services and contained in the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.020  Definitions.

The following terms and phrases shall be defined as set forth below:

A.  "Health officer" means the health officer of the county of Sonoma, state of California, or his or her authorized representative.

B.  "Health permit" means a permit issued by the health officer pursuant to this chapter.

C.  "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation or association.

D.  "Structure" is that which is built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.030  Health officer designated.

Pursuant to Section 476 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, the city council consents to and the county health officer shall observe and enforce, in the city, all of the following:

A.  Orders, quarantine regulations and rules prescribed by the State Department of Public Health and other rules and regulations issued under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California;

B.  Statutes relating to public health. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.040  Permits and fees.

Persons subject to the rules prescribed by the State Department of Health and other rules and regulations issued under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California shall be required to obtain permits when required by the health officer and shall pay to the county all reasonable fees necessary to pay for the cost of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.050  Issuance of permit.

Health permits shall be issued only after application to and approval by the health officer. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.060  Permit form.

Applications for health permits shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the health officer and signed by the applicant. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.070  Inspection of work.

All buildings, structures, businesses, premises, property or work subject to the rules prescribed by the State Department of Public Health and other rules and regulations provided in the Health and Safety Code of California and all work for which a health permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the health officer in accordance with and in the manner provided by state law. All work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the health officer. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.080  Approval required.

All work for which a permit is required shall be approved by the health officer prior to use. Final health approval shall be granted following compliance by the applicant with all applicable statutes, orders, quarantines, rules or regulations, and a finding by the health officer that the applicant is in substantial compliance with such laws, rules and regulations and this chapter. (Ord. 93-5 § 2, 1993).


7.04.090  Violations – Penalty.

Any person, corporation or firm who or which violates any provision of any code enacted by the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any lawful order thereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Every such violation shall be deemed a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues. (Ord. 93-5 § 3, 1993).


Chapter 7.08       GARBAGE AND RUBBISH DISPOSAL

Sections:

7.08.010  Public necessity.

7.08.020  Definitions.

7.08.030  Contract for collection of garbage and rubbish.

7.08.040  Removal of garbage or rubbish only by authorized contractor or agent of the city.

7.08.050  Containers for garbage and rubbish.

7.08.060  Location of garbage and rubbish containers.

7.08.070  Collection times and charges.

7.08.080  Special collections of garbage and rubbish.

7.08.090  Payment of collection charges.

7.08.100  Requirements of transporting vehicle for garbage.

7.08.110  Disposal sites.

7.08.111  Unacceptable materials.

7.08.112  Hazardous waste.

7.08.113  Yard waste.

7.08.120  Forfeit of garbage collector’s contract.

7.08.130  Penalty for violation.

7.08.140  Tampering with garbage prohibited.

7.08.150  Accumulations prohibited.

7.08.160  Burning regulations – Burying garbage or rubbish.

7.08.170  Enforcement authority.


7.08.010  Public necessity.

The public necessity, health, safety, and general welfare of the city require that the exclusive right to collect and remove, or cause to be collected and removed, garbage and rubbish, as those terms are hereinafter defined in this chapter, within the city shall be vested in the city, and it is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, to collect or remove garbage or rubbish, as those terms are hereinafter defined, within the city. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.020  Definitions.

Words used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A.  "Garbage" means all putrescible wastes and includes kitchen and table refuse and offal, swill, and every accumulation of animal, vegetable, or other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables and dead animals except fresh animal matter fit and intended for human consumption; and includes also all food remnants, animal and vegetable scraps, refuse and waste likely to become offensive, decay, or decompose, from kitchens, and all household waste that has been prepared for or intended to be used as food, or has resulted from the preparation of food; and all animal and vegetable scraps or refuse, waste, and food remnants subject to decomposition or decay from institutions where foodstuffs intended for human consumption shall be handled commercially, whether or not the same is fit for animal (as distinguished from human) consumption.

B.  "Hazardous waste" is a solid waste which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:

1.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored or disposed of, or otherwise mismanaged; or

2.  Cause or contribute to an increase in mortality, or an increase in irreversible or incapacitating illness.

C.  "Person" means any person, firm or corporation acting as principal, agent or officer, servant or employee for himself or itself, or for any other person, firm, or corporation.

D.  "Rubbish" means and includes all nonputrescible waste matter consisting of glass, paper, wood, plastic, cans, coffee grounds, ashes, and other substances, and unusable, unwanted or discarded material and items resulting from normal residential, community or business activities. The term "rubbish" does not include garbage.

E.  "Solid waste" means any discarded material that is abandoned by being disposed of, burned or incinerated, recycled or considered waste-like. A solid waste can physically be a solid, liquid, semi-solid or container of gaseous material.

F.  "Yard waste" means those vegetative materials generated during the maintenance and upkeep of lawns, gardens, and other landscaped areas. Specific materials include, but are not limited to, leaves, grass clippings, pine needles, hedge and tree trimmings, and other similar vegetative materials. (Ord. 2000-7 § 1, 2000; Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.030  Contract for collection of garbage and rubbish.

A.  For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of SMC 7.08.010, the council shall (unless otherwise provided that the work be done by the city), by resolution, provide for entering into an exclusive contract with any suitable or responsible person for an initial term of years not exceeding 10 years or issuing a permit for short periods not exceeding one year for the exclusive right to collect and remove garbage and rubbish within the city and such person shall be known and designated as the "city garbage collector" and is referred to herein as the collector. Such exclusive contract may be extended or renegotiated by the city council for additional periods not exceeding 10 years each.

B.  Such contract or permit shall provide that the city garbage collector has the right to collect and receive the collection charges and fees established by resolution of the city council for the collection and removal of garbage and rubbish in the city, and not in excess of the rates and charges so established.

C.  Such contract or permit may also provide for the city garbage collector to conduct recycling and yard waste collection programs. The city garbage collector shall have the exclusive right to collect such materials at curbside or from other locations within the public street right-of-way.

D.  Such contract shall be awarded on the basis of competitive bidding to the person submitting the best bid, as determined by the city council; provided, that the successful bidder is determined by the city council to be a reliable person. Before awarding the contract to any person, a bond for faithful performance of the contract shall be furnished by him in such amount as may be fixed by the city council. The contract shall provide for payment of a franchise fee by the collector to the city in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

E.  In case the city council determines that an exclusive permit only shall be issued for a specific period, such permit shall be awarded to some reliable person chosen by the city council who agrees to the terms of the permit and agrees to pay the amount fixed by the council for issuance of the exclusive permit. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.040  Removal of garbage or rubbish only by authorized contractor or agent of the city.

It is unlawful for any person to remove or convey, or cause to be removed or conveyed, any garbage or rubbish in the city upon or along any public street, alley, or other public place, or otherwise dispose of any garbage or rubbish from within the city, other than the city or its duly authorized agent assigned to the work of garbage or rubbish removal, or any person with whom the city has entered into a contract, or to whom a permit has been given for the exclusive collection, removal and disposal of garbage or rubbish, or any employee, agent or servant of such contractor or permittee during such time as such contract or permit is in force. The above prohibition does not apply to contractors or maintenance personnel who are providing construction, landscaping, maintenance, hazardous materials abatement or demolition work on a property and who dispose of rubbish, hazardous waste or yard waste directly generated by such work in their own containers. The above prohibition also does not apply to residents of the city disposing of yard waste, hazardous waste, rubbish or garbage from their own property; provided, that disposal by such residents shall be in their own containers. 

The city garbage collector shall have no right to delegate, assign or subcontract any of its duties or responsibilities under its contract or permit with the city related to the collection of garbage and rubbish. (Ord. 2000-7 § 2, 2000; Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.050  Containers for garbage and rubbish.

It is unlawful for any person to keep or accumulate or permit to be kept or accumulated any garbage or rubbish upon any lot or parcel of land, or upon any public or private street, alley or other right-of-way, or any public place whatsoever, unless the same is in suitable metal or plastic receptacles designed for such purpose. Each such receptacle, except bins, debris boxes and containers for recyclable materials shall have a capacity of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 90 gallons. Garbage containers shall be provided at all times with close-fitting lids or covers, and shall be kept closed at all times except when necessarily opened to permit garbage to be deposited or removed. Receptacles from which garbage and rubbish are collected by the city garbage collector shall be those furnished by the collector except that 20-gallon containers and containers used for yard waste collection shall be furnished by the customer and shall be satisfactory to the collector. The owner or person in control of receptacles shall keep them clean at all times, and free of grease and other adherent materials. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.060  Location of garbage and rubbish containers.

Except in the case of persons physically unable to do so, each receptacle or container, except bins and debris boxes, for collection of garbage and rubbish including recyclable materials and yard waste by the city garbage collector must be placed and maintained at the curb or edge of roadway in a location readily accessible for collection by the garbage collector prior to the time designated for collection. Such receptacles shall be placed at the curb or edge of roadway no earlier than the day prior to the scheduled collection time and must be removed therefrom prior to 12:00 midnight on the day of collection. At all other times, the containers shall be kept and maintained in a location screened from view from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.070  Collection times and charges.

The city council shall fix by resolution the frequency at which the collector shall accomplish collection and the maximum rates which the collector may charge for the various services. The regularly scheduled days and times for collection at various locations in the city shall be determined by the collector subject to approval by the city. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.080  Special collections of garbage and rubbish.

In addition to the rates for collection of garbage and rubbish provided by resolution of the city council, the garbage collector, when requested by the owner, tenant, or occupant of any residential, or business premises to make a special collection of any garbage or rubbish in addition to the collection provided by this chapter, shall be entitled to collect and receive a reasonable fee for such service as established by the collector. In case of any dispute between the collector and a customer regarding such additional fees, the determination of the city manager regarding the amount of such fees shall be final. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.090  Payment of collection charges.

All charges for the collection and removal of garbage and rubbish shall be due and payable to the city garbage collector on the first of the month following such collection and removal except that if the collector provides for billing on other than a monthly basis, payment shall be due and payable on the first of the month following each billing period; however, in no case shall payment become due in less than 15 days after receipt of invoice. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.100  Requirements of transporting vehicle for garbage.

All garbage shall be removed and carried upon the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city in vehicles so that the contents thereof are not offensive. The vehicles shall be so loaded and such precautions shall be taken that none of their contents falls or spills therefrom. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.110  Disposal sites.

The city garbage collector shall dispose of all garbage and rubbish at sites satisfactory to the city and, unless otherwise designated in the contract or permit issued to the collector, such satisfactory sites shall be transfer stations or landfill areas owned and/or operated by the county of Sonoma. Any items or materials designated by the county of Sonoma as unacceptable for disposal at such sites shall not be placed for collection by customers of the city garbage collector and the collector shall not pick up and deliver any such items or materials to the disposal sites. (Ord. 2000-7 § 3, 2000; Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.111  Unacceptable materials.

Bulky items which cannot be readily placed in the containers used for garbage and rubbish as provided in SMC 7.08.050, discarded appliances and furniture shall not be placed for regular collection by customers of the city garbage collector. Customers may request special collections of such items in accordance with SMC 7.08.080. (Ord. 2000-7 § 4, 2000).


7.08.112  Hazardous waste.

Hazardous waste shall not be placed in containers for garbage, rubbish or yard waste for collection by customers of the city garbage collector. Customers may request special collections of hazardous waste from any firm certified or licensed to provide such services. (Ord. 2000-7 § 5, 2000).


7.08.113  Yard waste.

Whenever the city has provided for a yard waste collection program to be conducted by the city garbage collector, no person shall include such yard waste in containers designated for regular collection of garbage and rubbish. Yard waste shall be placed in separate containers approved for that purpose. (Ord. 2000-7 § 6, 2000).


7.08.120  Forfeit of garbage collector’s contract.

Any violation of this chapter by the city garbage collector shall entitle the city to cancel and terminate its contract or permit with the city garbage collector and to relet the contract or issue another permit, and any contract or permit entered into in pursuance of this chapter shall so provide. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.130  Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in SMC 1.12.010; provided, however, that such penalty shall not be imposed upon any person for failure to pay to the city garbage collector the charges fixed by resolution of the city council as provided by this chapter for the removal of garbage or rubbish, but the garbage collector shall be entitled to recover the amount of such charges with interest and costs in a civil action from any person incurring and liable for the same under the provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that if the charges fixed for the collection and removal of garbage or rubbish shall not be paid to the city garbage collector within 10 days after demand for such payment after the same has become due as in this chapter; provided, the city garbage collector shall thereafter be under no obligation to collect or remove any garbage or rubbish from such premises until such charges have been paid in full. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.140  Tampering with garbage prohibited.

No person, other than the owner thereof or persons properly in control thereof, shall tamper or meddle with any garbage or rubbish receptacles, or remove the contents thereof from the location where the same has been lawfully placed by the owner or person properly in control. No person shall deposit garbage or rubbish in a container owned by any other person without the consent of such owner, and no person shall remove any garbage or rubbish from any lot or parcel of land or premises either within or outside the city and deposit the same in rubbish or garbage containers owned or controlled by the city or any public agency. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.150  Accumulations prohibited.

Every person occupying or having charge or control of any place of business where there is any accumulation of garbage shall cause the same to be removed therefrom or be disposed of in a lawful manner as often as reasonably necessary and at least once each calendar week. Every person occupying or having charge or control of other than a place of business where there is any accumulation of garbage shall cause the same to be removed or disposed of in a lawful manner at least once each calendar week. No person shall cause or allow combustible rubbish to accumulate at any place or on any premises under his charge or control for a period in excess of one calendar week, or permit or allow noncombustible rubbish to accumulate for a period in excess of two calendar weeks; provided, however, no rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate in violation of the Uniform Fire Code. If at any time garbage or rubbish accumulates on a property until it becomes a nuisance, the city may seek legal remedies for abating the nuisance at the expense of the owner or person in control of the property. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.160  Burning regulations – Burying garbage or rubbish.

It is unlawful to burn, or cause to be burned, any garbage or rubbish within the city limits. It is unlawful to bury garbage or rubbish any place within the limits of the city, except for garden compost purposes; provided, that the composting of garbage and rubbish will not attract or aid in the breeding of flies, insects, rodents or other animals, or be the source of odor, annoyance to neighboring properties, or otherwise be injurious to public health or a fire hazard. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


7.08.170  Enforcement authority.

The primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall reside with the city manager. (Ord. 96-21 § 2, 1996).


Chapter 7.12       ANTI-SCAVENGER ORDINANCE

Sections:

7.12.010  Definitions.

7.12.020  Permits required.

7.12.030  Criteria and standards.

7.12.031  Ownership of recyclable materials.

7.12.032  Unauthorized collection prohibited.

7.12.033  Destroying, scattering, or collecting recyclable materials without the consent of the resident of the premises or the authorized recycling contractor is prohibited.

7.12.034  Approved recycling container – Ownership and unauthorized removal.

7.12.035  Right of individual to dispose of recyclable material.

7.12.036  Civil action by authorized recycling contractor.

7.12.037  Violations and penalties.


7.12.010  Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A.  A "mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

B.  "Recyclable material" is reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse, hazardous materials, or furniture. Recyclable materials may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code.

C.  A "recycling facility" is a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following:

1.  Collection Facility. A collection facility is a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in SMC 7.12.030. Collection facilities may include the following:

a.  Reverse vending machines(s);

b.  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than 500 square feet, and may include:

i.  A mobile unit, 

ii.  Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet, 

iii.  Kiosk type units which may include permanent structures, 

iv.  Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials;

c.  Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures.

2.  Processing Facility. A processing facility is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:

a.  A light processing facility occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

b.  A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

D.  A "reverse vending machine" is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, including but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically; provided, that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and will pay by weight instead of by container.

E.  "Approved recycling container" means the containers, bag, box, or other container supplied by and/or identified by the city or the authorized recycling contractor or the donor of such recyclable materials as the container into which recyclable materials shall be placed and which shall be located at curbside.

F.  "Authorized recycling contractor" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity authorized under and by virtue of a contract with the city to collect recyclable materials within the city limits.

G.  "Recyclable materials" means materials such as, but not limited to, newspapers, glass, metal and aluminum cans, plastic bottles, corrugated cardboard, and used motor oil which are separate from other garbage or refuse for the purpose of recycling.

H.  "Recycling" means the process of collecting and turning used products into new products by reprocessing or manufacturing them. (Ord. 91-17 § 2, 1991; Ord. 87-10 § 1, 1987).


7.12.020  Permits required.

No person shall permit the placement, construction or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a use permit. Recycling facilities are permitted only in commercial zones. Processing facilities as defined in this chapter are conditionally permitted in industrial zones only. (Ord. 87-10 § 2, 1987).


7.12.030  Criteria and standards.

Those recycling facilities permitted with a conditional use permit shall meet the applicable criteria and standards; provided, that the planning commission or city council may relax such standards or impose stricter standards as an exercise of discretion upon finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this section and the purposes of this title. The criteria and standards for recycling facilities are as follows:

A.  Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machine(s) located within a commercial structure do not require use permits. Reverse vending machines may be permitted in all commercial zones with a use permit; provided, that they comply with the following standards:

1.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial user community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

2.  Shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

3.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use;

4.  Shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height;

5.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

6.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

7.  Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions;

8.  Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

9.  Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use;

10.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn.

B.  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be sited in commercial zones with a use permit; provided they comply with the following conditions:

1.  Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

2.  Shall be no larger than 500 square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers;

3.  Shall be set back at least 10 feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

4.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with permission of the Sonoma County public health official;

5.  Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines;

6.  Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule;

7.  Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present;

8.  Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day;

9.  Shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA;

10.  Facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.;

11.  Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall be at least 30 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use;

12.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers;

13.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinances for any concurrent use by this title or any permit issued pursuant thereto;

14.  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed;

15.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present;

16.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist:

a.  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation,

b.  A parking study shows that existing capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site,

c.  The permit will be reconsidered at the end of 18 months.

A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed as follows:

For a commercial host use:

	Number of Available	Maximum

	Parking Spaces 	Reduction

	0 – 25 	0

	26 – 35 	2

	36 – 49 	3

	50 – 99 	4

	100 +	5

For a community facility host use: A maximum five spaces reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use;

17.  If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration.

C.  Large Collection Facilities.

1.  Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use;

2.  Facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or:

a.  Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping,

b.  At least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for residential use, and 

c.  Meets all applicable noise standards in this chapter;

3.  Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located;

4.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the local fire and/or health official. No storage containers, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

5.  Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

6.  Space will be provided on-site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable material, except where the planning commission determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety;

7.  One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements will be as provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility;

8.  Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA;

9.  If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

10.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

11.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

12.  Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation;

13.  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved through the use permit process. (Ord. 87-10 § 3, 1987).


7.12.031  Ownership of recyclable materials.

Recyclable materials placed at the curbside for collection by an authorized recycling contractor becomes the property of the authorized recycling contractor, subject to the following exceptions and limitations: 

A.  The depositors of the material may retrieve them from their own containers; and

B.  Motor oil shall remain the property of the depositor until collected by an authorized recycling contractor. (Ord. 2000-16 § 1, 2000; Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


7.12.032  Unauthorized collection prohibited.

No person other than an authorized recycling contractor shall remove recyclable material which has been placed at the curbside. Any and each violation hereof from one or more recycling collection locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


7.12.033  Destroying, scattering, or collecting recyclable materials without the consent of the resident of the premises or the authorized recycling contractor is prohibited.

It is unlawful or any person to burn, break, destroy, scatter, scavenge, collect, or take any recyclable materials without the consent of the resident of the premises or the authorized recycling contractor. (Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


7.12.034  Approved recycling container – Ownership and unauthorized removal.

It is unlawful or a person other than (1) the resident of the premises or his/her designee; or (2) the city; or (3) an authorized agent of the city; or (4) the authorized recycling contractor to remove any approved recycling container from the curbside. (Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


7.12.035  Right of individual to dispose of recyclable material.

Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual person, organization, or other entity to donate, sell, or otherwise dispose of recyclable material; provided, that any such disposal is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


7.12.036  Civil action by authorized recycling contractor.

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the authorized recycling contractor to bring a civil action against any person who violates the above described sections of this chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by an authorized recycling contractor. (Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


7.12.037  Violations and penalties.

Violation of any part of this section shall be an infraction or misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 91-17 § 3, 1991).


Chapter 7.16 USE AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR YARDS

Sections:

7.16.010    Use and maintenance of yards and setback areas.


7.16.010 Use and maintenance of yards and setback areas.

Yards (defined as areas on a property not developed with a structure), including driveways and parking areas, and required setback areas shall be used and maintained in accordance with the following standards and requirements:

A. Structures. Yards and required setback areas shall not be occupied by structures other than:

1. Fences, as allowed under Chapter 19.46 SMC.

2. Accessory structures located within setback areas in compliance with SMC 19.50.080, Residential accessory uses and structures.

3. Projections into setbacks allowed by SMC 19.40.110.

4. Structures for which a variance or an exception have been obtained, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.

5. Legal nonconforming structures.

B. Use. The use of yards and required setback areas shall be limited to the following:

1. Permitted uses under the applicable zoning district as set forth in the zoning ordinance.

2. Conditionally permitted uses under the applicable zoning district as set forth in the zoning ordinance for which a conditional use permit has been obtained.

3. Home occupations operated in conformance with SMC 19.50.040.

4. Existing legal nonconforming uses.

C. Storage. Front or street side yards and setbacks shall not be used for the storage of garbage, rubbish, debris, parts, building materials (except in the course of permitted construction), or inoperable motor vehicles, except for screened storage facilities, such as building materials yards, allowed through a use permit in the commercial and mixed-use zones.

D. Maintenance. Front and street side yards and setbacks shall be maintained so as to be free from garbage and debris and accumulations of refuse and yard waste. No yard or setback area shall be maintained in a manner that supports or attracts concentrations of vermin or feral animals. (Ord. 2001-7 § 1, 2001).


Chapter 7.20 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY

Sections:

7.20.010    Camping prohibited where.

7.20.020    Permission withheld.

7.20.030    Penalty for violation of SMC 7.20.010 and 7.20.020.

7.20.040    Prohibited deposits and fire building.

7.20.050    Penalty for violation of SMC 7.20.040.


7.20.010 Camping prohibited where.

No ground, open space, building, hall, structure, or other real property owned by the city or in its possession or control shall be used by any person, persons or group of persons for camping, or for lodging either in the daytime or nighttime, nor shall any such place be used by any person for sleeping on the open ground, with or without bedding, during the hours of darkness, unless such place is specifically designated a campground or other public facility for camping, lodging or sleeping purposes by written order of this council, and then only pursuant to such rules and regulations as promulgated by the city council for the safe and proper conduct of such facilities. (Ord. 06-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 381 § 1, 1967).


7.20.020 Permission withheld.

Except as provided under SMC 7.20.010, the city does withhold permission from any and all persons whomsoever for lodging by such person or persons in any building, structure or place owned by the city or in its possession or control. (Ord. 381 § 2, 1967).


7.20.030 Penalty for violation of SMC 7.20.010 and 7.20.020. 

Any person who violates a provision of SMC 7.20.010 and 7.20.020 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, not exceeding $100.00 and 30 days in the county jail. (Ord. 381 § 3, 1967).


7.20.040 Prohibited deposits and fire building.

Except on the order of the public works director having jurisdiction of the subject matter, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit any gravel, soil or any other material, or to build any fire, on or in the Mountain Cemetery, the public plaza, or public place in the city. (Ord. 483 § 1(J), 1974; Ord. 89 § 1, 1907).


7.20.050 Penalty for violation of SMC 7.20.040. 

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 89 § 6, 1907).


Chapter 7.24 SMOKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

7.24.010    Definitions.

7.24.020    Prohibition of smoking and tobacco product use in enclosed places.

7.24.030    Prohibition of smoking and tobacco product use in unenclosed areas.

7.24.040    Reasonable smoking distance required.

7.24.050    Other requirements and prohibitions.

7.24.060    Penalties and enforcement.

7.24.070    Public education.

7.24.080    Other laws.

7.24.090    Amendments by city council.

Prior legislation: Ords. 92-5 and 92-22.


7.24.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “City” means the city of Sonoma, state of California.

B. “Child care facilities” means any family day care regulated by Sections 1597.30 through 1597.621 of the California Health and Safety Code and any day care center for children regulated by Section 1596.90 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. It does not include foster homes or residential care facilities.

C. “Common area” means every enclosed area and unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence that residents of more than one unit of that multi-unit residence are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls, paths, lobbies, courtyards, elevators, stairs, community rooms, playgrounds, gym facilities, swimming pools, parking garages, parking lots, restrooms, laundry rooms, cooking areas, and eating areas.

D. “Dining area” means any area, including streets and sidewalks, which is available to or customarily used by the general public, and which is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink.

E. “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic and/or battery-operated device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. 

F. “Enclosed area” means an area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has:

1. Any type of overhead cover whether or not that cover includes vents or other openings and at least three walls or other vertical constraint to airflow including, but not limited to, vegetation of any height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings; or

2. Four walls or other vertical constraints to airflow including, but not limited to, vegetation that exceeds six feet in height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings.

G. “Multi-unit residence” means property containing two or more units except the following specifically excluded types of housing:

1. Mobile home park units; 

2. A single-family residence; and

3. Detached or attached in-law or second unit to single-family residence.

H. “Nonprofit entity” means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code Section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association, or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social, or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A government agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this chapter.

I. “Person” means any natural person, cooperative association, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity including a government agency.

J. “Public place” means any place, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement. 

K. “Reasonable distance” means a distance of 25 feet in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited. 

L. “Recreational area” means any area that is publicly or privately owned, controlled or used by the city and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term “recreational area” includes but is not limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, skateboard parks and amusement parks.

M. “Service area” means any publicly or privately owned area, including streets and sidewalks, that is designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service, or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term “service area” includes but is not limited to areas including or adjacent to information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines, or cab stands.

N. “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term “smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic smoking device vapors, marijuana smoke, and crack cocaine smoke. 

O. “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device, or any plant product intended for human inhalation.

P. “Tobacco product” means:

1. Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and

2. Any electronic smoking device.

3. Notwithstanding any provision of subsections (P)(1) and (2) of this section to the contrary, “tobacco product” includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.

Q. “Unenclosed area” means any area that is not an enclosed area.

R. “Unit” means a personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio. “Unit” includes but is not limited to an apartment; a condominium; a townhouse; a room in a long-term health care facility, assisted living facility, or hospital; a hotel or motel room; a room in a single room occupancy (“SRO”) facility; a room in a homeless shelter; a mobile home; a camper vehicle or tent; a single-family home; and an in-law or second unit. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.020 Prohibition of smoking and tobacco product use in enclosed places.

A. Smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited in the enclosed areas of the following places within the city of Sonoma:

1. Public places; and

2. Multi-unit residences and common areas; and

3. Dining areas.

B. Smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited by this chapter in all enclosed areas except as provided below.

1. Inside private vehicles.

2. Inside single-family residences except private residences licensed as child care facilities.

3. In-law or second units attached or detached to single-family residence. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.030 Prohibition of smoking and tobacco product use in unenclosed areas.

A. Smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited in the unenclosed areas of the following places within the city:

1. Recreational areas;

2. Service areas;

3. Public places;

4. Dining areas;

5. Common areas of multi-unit residences; provided, however, that a person with legal control over a common area may designate a portion of the unenclosed area of the common area as a designated smoking area if the area meets all of the following criteria: 

a. The area must be located a reasonable distance from any unit or enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law; by binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of real property; or by designation of a person with legal control over the property. In the case of a nonsmoking area created by agreement or designation, this provision does not apply unless the person designating the smoking area has actual knowledge of, or has been given notice of, the agreement or designation. A person with legal control over a designated smoking area may be obliged to modify, relocate, or eliminate that as laws change, as binding agreements are created, and as nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are established;

b. The area must not include, and must be a reasonable distance from, unenclosed areas primarily used by children and unenclosed areas with improvements that facilitate physical activity including, for example, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, school campuses, and sandboxes;

c. The area must be no more than 10 percent of the total unenclosed area of the multi-unit residence for which it is designated; 

d. The area must have a clearly marked perimeter; 

e. The area must be identified by conspicuous signs;

f. The area must be completely within an unenclosed area; and 

g. The area must not overlap with any enclosed or unenclosed area in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other provisions of this code, state law, or federal law; and

6. Other public places, including but not limited to streets and sidewalks located within the city’s rights-of-way or maintained by the city.

B. Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or nonprofit entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking and tobacco product use on any part of such property, even if smoking or the use of tobacco products is not otherwise prohibited in that area. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.040 Reasonable smoking distance required.

A. Smoking in all unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.

B. Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any unenclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited under SMC 7.24.030.

C. The prohibitions in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall not apply to unenclosed areas of private residential properties that are not multi-unit residences. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.050 Other requirements and prohibitions.

A. No person or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking or the use of tobacco products in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of that person or nonprofit entity and in which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by law.

B. No person or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for example, ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the legal or de facto control of that person or nonprofit entity and in which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a reasonable distance required by this chapter from any area in which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in violation of this subsection shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking or the use of tobacco products in violation of any provision of this chapter.

C. No person shall dispose of used smoking or tobacco product waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking or tobacco product use is prohibited, including within any reasonable distance required by this chapter.

D. A person or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in which smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited by this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous “No Smoking” and “No Use of Tobacco Products” or “Smokefree” and “Tobacco-Free” sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area. The signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in height and shall include the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Signs posted on the exterior of buildings to comply with this section shall include the reasonable distance requirement set forth in SMC 7.24.040. At least one sign with the county phone number to which complaints can be directed must be placed conspicuously in each place in which smoking is prohibited. For purposes of this section, the city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in whole or in part by the city. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking or the use of tobacco products in violation of any other provision of this chapter.

E. No person or nonprofit entity shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter.

F. Each instance of smoking or tobacco product use in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. For violations other than for smoking, each day of a continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.060 Penalties and enforcement. 

A. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

B. Each incident of smoking or use of tobacco products in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to a $100.00 fine or otherwise punishable pursuant to SMC 1.12.010. Other violations of this chapter may, at the discretion of the city manager, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city manager. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter. 

C. Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the city of Sonoma, punishable by a civil fine not less than $250.00 and not exceeding $1,000 per violation.

D. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.

E. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 

F. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.

G. Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public (hereinafter “private enforcer”) may bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, including small claims court, to enforce this chapter against any person who has violated this chapter two or more times. Upon proof of the violations, a court shall grant all appropriate relief, including: (1) awarding damages; and (2) issuing an injunction or a conditional judgment. 

H. Except as otherwise provided, enforcement of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the city. Nothing in this chapter shall create a right of action in any person against the city or its agents to compel public enforcement of this chapter against private parties. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.070 Public education.

The city manager or his or her designee shall coordinate with the county of Sonoma health and human services department to ensure that the citizens and community of Sonoma may participate in the county’s existing tobacco education program. The program will explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this chapter to citizens affected by it, and to guide persons, landlords, employers, and nonprofit entities in their compliance with it. However, lack of such education shall not provide a defense to a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.080 Other laws. 

It is not the intention of this chapter to regulate any conduct where the regulation of such conduct has been preempted by the state of California. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


7.24.090 Amendments by city council.

The Sonoma city council shall have the authority to amend this chapter. (Ord. 15-2016 § 2, 2016).


Chapter 7.25 REGULATING THE MANNER OF SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sections:

7.25.010    Definitions.

7.25.020    Requirements and prohibitions.

7.25.030    Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer license.

7.25.040    Application procedure.

7.25.050    Issuance of license.

7.25.060    License renewal and expiration.

7.25.070    Transfer restrictions.

7.25.080    License conveys a limited, conditional privilege.

7.25.090    Fee for license.

7.25.100    Compliance monitoring.

7.25.110    Suspension or revocation of license.

7.25.120    Tobacco retailing without a valid license.

7.25.130    Additional remedies.

7.25.140    Enforcement.


7.25.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Arm’s length transaction” means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm’s length transaction.

B. “Cigar” means (1) any roll of tobacco wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco; or (2) any paper or wrapper that contains tobacco and is designed for smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. For the purposes of this subsection, “cigar” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco products known or labeled as “cigar,” “cigarillo,” “tiparillo,” “little cigar,” “blunt wrap,” or “cigar wrap.”

C. “City” means the city of Sonoma, state of California.

D. “Department” means city manager, and any agency or person designated by the department to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter.

E. “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.

F. “Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

G. “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a 10 percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

H. “Self-service display” means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

I. “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device, or any plant product intended for human inhalation.

J. “Tobacco paraphernalia” means any item designed for the consumption, use, or preparation of tobacco products.

K. “Tobacco product” means:

1. Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, and snuff;

2. Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah;

3. Notwithstanding any provision of subsections (K)(3)(a) and (b) of this section to the contrary, “tobacco product” includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not include (a) any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose, or (b) flavored tobacco intended to be smoked by means of a pipe (“pipe tobacco”).

L. “Tobacco retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. “Tobacco retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 94-9 § 1, 1994. Formerly 7.25.020).


7.25.020 Requirements and prohibitions.

A. Tobacco Retailer’s License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer’s license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer’s license is a nuisance as a matter of law.

B. Lawful Business Operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a license issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a licensee, or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, or tobacco retailing.

C. Display of License. Each tobacco retailer license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location.

D. Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of 27 years without first examining the photo identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia.

E. Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing.

F. Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited.

G. False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A tobacco retailer without a valid tobacco retailer license or a proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a person whose license has been suspended or revoked:

1. Shall keep all tobacco products out of public view. The public display of tobacco products in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a license under SMC 7.25.120; and

2. Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer’s location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location.

H. Flavored Tobacco Products. No tobacco retailer shall sell a tobacco product containing, as a constituent or additive, an artificial or natural flavor (other than tobacco or menthol) or an herb or spice, including strawberry, grape, orange, clove, cinnamon, pineapple, vanilla, coconut, licorice, cocoa, chocolate, cherry, or coffee, that is a characterizing flavor of the tobacco product or smoke produced by the tobacco product unless (1) the tobacco product consists of a package of cigars that contains at least five cigars or more, or (2) a single cigar for which the retail price exceeds $5.00, or (3) the tobacco product consisting of pipe tobacco, or (4) the package of chewing tobacco or snuff contains at least five units or more.

I. Minimum Pack Size for Cigars. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any of the licensee’s agents or employees to sell, offer for sale, or exchange for any form of consideration:

1. Any single cigar, whether or not packaged for individual sale;

2. Any number of cigars fewer than the number contained in the manufacturer’s original consumer packaging designed for retail sale to a consumer;

3. Any package of cigars containing fewer than five cigars.

4. This section does not apply to the sale or offer for sale of a single cigar for which the retail price exceeds $5.00. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.030 Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer license.

A. Eligible Locations. The following locations are eligible to apply for a tobacco retailer license:

No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing except at the following locations where tobacco products are sold, offered for sale, or exchanged:

1. 482 1st Street East, Sonoma, CA 95476.

2. 19205 Sonoma Hwy., Sonoma, CA 95476.

3. 477 W. Napa St., Sonoma, CA 95476.

4. 465 1st Street West, Suite 100, Sonoma, CA 95476.

5. 540 W. Napa St., Sonoma, CA 95476.

6. 1325 Broadway, Sonoma, CA 95476.

7. 194 W. Napa St., Sonoma, CA 95476.

8. 19181 Sonoma Hwy., Sonoma, CA 95476.

9. 464 1st Street East, Suite H, Sonoma, CA 95476.

10. 19210 Sonoma Hwy., Sonoma, CA 95476.

11. 19249 Sonoma Hwy., Sonoma, CA 95476.

12. 616 Broadway, Sonoma, CA 95476.

13. 573 5th Street West, Sonoma, CA 95476.

14. 925 Broadway, Sonoma, CA 95476.

15. 865 W. Napa St., Sonoma, CA 95476.

B. A tobacco retailer operating lawfully on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that would otherwise be eligible for a tobacco retailer license for any of the above locations for which a license is sought may receive or renew a license for that location so long as: (1) the license is timely obtained and is renewed without lapse or permanent revocation (as opposed to temporary suspension); (2) the tobacco retailer is not closed for business or otherwise suspends tobacco retailing for more than 60 consecutive days; (3) the tobacco retailer does not substantially change the business premises or business operation; and (4) the tobacco retailer retains the right to operate under other applicable laws, including without limitation the zoning ordinance, building codes, or other applicable codes. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.040 Application procedure.

A. Application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct or conducting retail tobacco sales, and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof.

It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer’s license. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to SMC 7.25.110(C). Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law.

All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following information:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a license.

2. The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought.

3. A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the “authorized person and address”) required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized person and address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

4. Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer’s license by the California Board of Equalization.

5. Such other information as the department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section.

B. A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the department in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer’s license within 10 business days of a change.

C. All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the laws’ exemptions. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.050 Issuance of license.

A. Bases for Denial. Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer’s license and the license fee required by this chapter, the department shall issue a license unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists:

1. The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter.

2. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer licenses. However, this subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm’s length transaction.

3. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a license to be issued.

4. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location other than the one listed in SMC 7.25.030, that is unlawful pursuant to this code, including without limitation zoning ordinance and building code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law.

B. Appeal of Denial. Subject to SMC 7.25.110(C), a decision of the department to deny a license is appealable to the city council and any appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 15 days of the department’s denial of the issuance of the license and the applicable appeal fee must be paid. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.060 License renewal and expiration.

A. Renewal of License. A tobacco retailer’s license is invalid if the appropriate license fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one calendar year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer’s license and submit the license fee no later than November 30th of each year, commencing November 30, 2015, and annually thereafter.

B. Expiration of License. A tobacco retailer’s license that is not timely renewed shall expire on December 31st of each year. To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the proprietor must:

1. Submit the license fee and the renewal form; and

2. Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.070 Transfer restrictions.

A. A tobacco retailer’s license may not be transferred from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer’s license is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietor(s).

B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: the new proprietor(s) provide the department with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or are acquiring the location in an arm’s length transaction. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.080 License conveys a limited, conditional privilege.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to any provision of this code including without limitation the zoning ordinance and building codes, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer’s license does not make the retailer a “retail or wholesale tobacco shop” for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.090 Fee for license.

The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer’s license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, for example, issuing a license, administering the license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this chapter. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.100 Compliance monitoring.

A. Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. In addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. The department may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this chapter.

B. The department shall inspect each tobacco retailer at least one time per 12-month period. Nothing in this subsection shall create a right of action in any licensee or other person against the city or its agents.

C. The department shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person’s age (hereinafter “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when:

1. The youth decoy is participating in an inspection supervised by a peace officer, code enforcement official, or the person designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter;

2. The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter; or

3. The youth decoy is participating in an inspection funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the county of Sonoma department of health services or the California Department of Health Services. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.110 Suspension or revocation of license.

A. Suspension or Revocation of License for Violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer’s license shall be suspended or revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, “no contest” or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in SMC 7.25.020.

1. Upon a finding by the department of a first violation of this chapter at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be suspended for 30 days.

2. Upon a finding by the department of a second violation of this chapter at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be suspended for 90 days.

3. Upon a finding by the department of a third violation of this chapter at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be suspended for one year.

4. Upon a finding by the department of four or more violations of this chapter at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be revoked.

B. Appeal of Suspension or Revocation. A decision of the department to suspend or revoke a license is appealable to the city council and any appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 15 days of mailing of the department’s decision and the applicable appeal fee must be paid. If such an appeal is timely made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. An appeal to the city council is not available for a revocation made pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.

C. Revocation of License Wrongly Issued. A tobacco retailer’s license shall be revoked if the city council finds, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under SMC 7.25.050 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The decision by the city council shall be the final decision of the city. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new license application. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.120 Tobacco retailing without a valid license.

A. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the city council finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer’s license, either directly or through the person’s agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailer’s license as follows:

1. After a first violation of this section at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until 30 days have passed from the date of the violation.

2. After a second violation of this section at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until 90 days have passed from the date of the violation.

3. After a third or subsequent violation of this section at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until 60 months have passed from the date of the violation.

B. Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the department or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in SMC 7.25.110(B). Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final.

C. For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this chapter, each of the following constitutes a separate violation of this chapter:

1. Each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or

2. Each individual retail tobacco product and each individual retail item of tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.130 Additional remedies.

A. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

B. Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of 18 years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented.

C. Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the city attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than $250.00 and not exceeding $1,000 per violation.

D. Violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require.

E. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.

F. Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

G. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


7.25.140 Enforcement.

This chapter shall not be enforced by the city until September 1, 2015. (Ord. 04-2015 § 2, 2015).


Chapter 7.30       POLYSTYRENE FOOD PACKAGING

Sections:

7.30.010  Purpose.

7.30.020  Findings.

7.30.030  Definitions.

7.30.040  Violations and penalties.

7.30.050  Interpretation.

7.30.060  Exemptions.


7.30.010  Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to decrease the use and presence of polystyrene products in order to promote the public health, reduce solid waste disposal and litter, protect air quality and the ozone layer, protect wildlife, livestock and the environment. (Ord. 89-6 § 1, 1989).


7.30.020  Findings.

The city council finds:

A.  Current available evidence shows that polystyrene foam food or drink containers create or contribute to significant health and litter problems in the city.

B.  Polystyrene foam or drink containers are an ubiquitous and light-weight source of litter. Because they are not biodegradable, they constitute a significant portion of accumulated litter.

C.  The light weight of polystyrene containers enables them to fly into waterways and livestock enclosures, where they may be ingested, causing illness or death to wildlife and domestic animals or livestock.

D.  Medical evidence suggests that styrene, a toxic chemical, may leach into food or drink from polystyrene foam containers, jeopardizing the public health.

E.  Available evidence shows that chlorofluorocarbons are sometimes used as blowing agents in polystyrene foam manufacture which damage the ozone layer protecting the earth from dangerous ultraviolet radiation and may create lower-level air pollution. While some polystyrene foam manufacturers have begun to use less dangerous blowing agents which are less damaging to the environment, air quality and ozone protection continue to be threatened.

F.  In addition, polystyrene foam food containers present a solid waste management problem. Such containers require solid waste disposal in landfills, which may experience fires. Evidence suggests that uncontrolled incineration of polystyrene foam may release toxic emissions threatening air quality and public health. Complex chemical reactions may occur, releasing potentially harmful emissions or leachates.

G.  The presence of polystyrene foam in waste streams is particularly problematic because there is currently no market for the recycling of the polystyrene foam.

H.  Alternatives to polystyrene foam food or drink containers are readily available in the form of paper or nondisposable packaging.

I.  The collection of polystyrene litter and the disposal of polystyrene waste results in direct costs to the city.

J.  The city council supports a ban on all uses of polystyrene not deemed absolutely critical. Until such bans are in effect responsible action to reduce polystyrene use and alert the public to the potential dangers of these substances must be taken at the local level.

K.  This chapter is consistent with the solid waste management plan of the county of Sonoma, and the legislative intent and findings of the State of California Solid Waste Management and Resource Recovery Act of 1972. (Gov. Code 66700 et seq.) (Ord. 89-6 § 1, 1989).


7.30.030  Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A.  "City premises" means all lands, water, buildings or premises owned by or leased to the city.

B.  "Food packaging" means all bags, sacks, wrappings, containers, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, straws and lids, on or in which any foods or beverages are placed or packaged or are intended to be placed or packaged.

C.  "Person" or "anyone" means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization or group, however organized.

D.  "Polystyrene foam" means any styrene or vinyl chloride monomer or polymer which is blown, molded or extruded into a foam-like material.

E.  "Polystyrene foam food packaging" means any food packaging which contains any polystyrene foam. (Ord. 89-6 § 1, 1989).


7.30.040  Violations and penalties.

Any person who rents city property and while using that property, willfully possesses, gives, receives, lends, offers or exposes for sale, uses, delivers, furnishes, transfers or disposes of any polystyrene foam food packaging is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00. Further, no city employee, councilmember nor commissioner shall use polystyrene products while on city business nor shall any municipal funds be used to purchase polystyrene containers. (Ord. 89-6 § 1, 1989).


7.30.050  Interpretation.

This section is not intended and shall not be construed to apply to any substance or activity which is regulated by federal or state law or to unduly interfere with the achievement of federal or state regulatory activities. It is the intention of the city council that this chapter shall be interpreted to be compatible with federal and state enactments and in furtherance of the public purposes which those enactments express. (Ord. 89-6 § 1, 1989).


7.30.060  Exemptions.

The city council or its city manager may exempt an item or type of packaging from the requirements of this chapter upon a showing that imposing the requirements of this chapter on that item would cause undue hardship. Items of polystyrene foam food packaging required to be purchased under contract, entered into, prior to or within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. The city council or its city manager may exempt an item or type of packaging in the case of a city concessionaire for a period not to exceed six months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 89-6 § 1, 1989).


Chapter 7.32       AIR CONDITIONING COOLANT RECYCLING

Sections:

7.32.010  Definitions.

7.32.020  Recycling of ozone-depleting compounds used as coolants in refrigeration and/or air conditioning units.

7.32.030  Restriction on sale of ozone-depleting compounds used as coolants in refrigeration and/or air conditioning units.

7.32.040  Disposal of refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system.

7.32.050  Exemption.

7.32.060  Enforcement.

7.32.070  Impact – Policy – Deferred enforcement.


7.32.010  Definitions.

A.  "Chlorofluorocarbons" or "CFCs" shall mean the family substances containing carbon, fluorine and chlorine, and having no hydrogen atoms and no double bonds, and which includes, without limitation, CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113, CFC-114, and CFC-115. Examples of products containing or utilizing chlorofluorocarbons are "Freon" used in air conditioning and refrigeration units, degreasers and solvents used in the cleaning of metals and electronic components and rigid and flexible foam used as packaging material and insulating material, and flexible foam used in car seats, bedding and furniture.

B.  "Ozone-depleting compound" shall mean any CFC, the chemical compound of methyl chloroform and carbon tetrachloride or any other chemical compound hereafter designated by the city council by amendment to this chapter, as being an "ozone-depleting compound."

C.  "City" shall mean all territory within the corporate limits of the city of Sonoma, state of California.

D.  "City council" shall mean the city council of the city of Sonoma, state of California.

E.  "Person" shall include any natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, whether acting as a principal, agent, employee or otherwise, and includes any governmental entity or charitable organization.

F.  "Establishment" shall mean any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, common law trust, society or individual engaged in any profession, trade, occupation and any and every kind of calling carried on for profit or otherwise within the city, including any governmental entity or charitable organization. (Ord. 90-11 § 1, 1990).


7.32.020  Recycling of ozone-depleting compounds used as coolants in refrigeration and/or air conditioning units.

All establishments which manufacture, repair, service or maintain any refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system shall adopt and implement a recycling system whereby the ozone-depleting compound used as a coolant in such refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system will not be released into the environment but will be recaptured and recycled in accordance with a recycling system approved by the city council. Such approval shall be evidenced by a certificate issued by the city council. (Ord. 90-11 § 2, 1990).


7.32.030  Restriction on sale of ozone-depleting compounds used as coolants in refrigeration and/or air conditioning units.

No person shall sell ozone-depleting compounds for use as coolant in a refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system to any person who does not possess and provide evidence of a certificate of possession and operation of a recycling system. (Ord. 90-11 § 3, 1990).


7.32.040  Disposal of refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system.

No person shall dispose of or shall cause the disposal of any refrigeration or air conditioning unit or system either in conjunction with the disposal of another product, or in any other manner, without first recapturing and recycling any ozone-depleting compound used as a coolant in said unit or system, or without first ensuring such coolant will be recaptured and recycled in accordance with a recycling program approved by the city council. (Ord. 90-11 § 4, 1990).


7.32.050  Exemption.

Any person upon submittal of an application and payment of the appropriate processing fee, which fee shall be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council, and upon a showing that no technically or economically feasible alternative for such person’s use of any ozone-depleting compound is currently available, may apply for an exemption from any section or subsection of this chapter. The fire chief, supported by findings based upon factors including but not limited to those factors identified below, shall recommend to the city council that the exemption be granted or denied. The city council may either grant or deny the application or remand it for further review. The following factors are among those to be considered in submitting and considering any application for an exemption: (1) the technical, practical and economical viability of the alternative; (2) the health, safety and environmental impact of the alternative; (3) the length of time for which the exemption is sought and the length of time needed before a technically and economically feasible alternative can be implemented; (4) the measures already taken or to be taken by the applicant to minimize and/or eliminate the release of an ozone-depleting compound, including whether and when a reclamation and/or recycling system has been or is to be implemented, as well as the effectiveness of any such system; (5) the hardship which will result to the applicant in the event the exemption is not granted; (6) whether the applicant’s actions are consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 90-11 § 5, 1990).


7.32.060  Enforcement.

A.  Each and every day a violation of this chapter continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense and violation, and each violation shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of this section.

B.  Where a violation has occurred, the fire chief shall cause a notice of violation to be sent to the violator. If the violator disputes the violation, he or she may appeal the notice of violation to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 15 days of service of the notice of violation. If requested by the violator, the fire chief shall schedule a hearing before the city council within 15 days of issuance of the notice of violation. Within 15 days after the hearing, the fire chief shall notify the petitioner of the city council’s decision to either confirm, modify or dismiss the notice of violation.

C.  The first violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction. The second and subsequent violation of the provisions of this ordinance in any one calendar year shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as such.

D.  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by a civil action pursuant to state law and/or by the provisions of this code. (Ord. 90-11 § 6, 1990).


7.32.070  Impact – Policy – Deferred enforcement.

The ordinance codified in this chapter was reviewed in July of 1990 as a policy statement of the city council. The city council recognizes the limited impact which the city council’s adoption of this ordinance would have upon the regional problem of ozone depletion and degradation of air quality. Recognizing those limitations, the city council recognizes this proposed ordinance as a policy statement but defers enforcement until such time as the county of Sonoma adopts an ordinance which is similar in intent as well as content. The city shall then publish a "Notice of Intent to Enforce Ordinance Requiring Recycling of Freon and Other Air Conditioning Coolants in Automobiles" in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city at least 30 days before the effective date of the date of enforcement. (Ord. 90-11 § 8, 1990).


Chapter 7.40       PERMITS FOR MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION

Sections:

7.40.010  Title.

7.40.020  Purpose.

7.40.030  Definitions.

7.40.040  Permit required.

7.40.050  Permit exemptions.

7.40.060  Deadline for filing application.

7.40.070  Application submittal requirements.

7.40.080  Permit approval/denial.

7.40.090  Permit conditions.

7.40.100  Fees.

7.40.110  Change of filming date.

7.40.120  Insurance.

7.40.130  Indemnification and liability.

7.40.140  Duties of permittee.

7.40.150  Appeals.

7.40.160  Penalties.


7.40.010  Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Sonoma film permit ordinance. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.020  Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for rules governing the issuance of permits for filming activities on location within the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that motion picture, television, commercial, and nontheatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the city so long as those activities are consistent with the public health and safety and the protection of property. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).\


7.40.030  Definitions.

A.  "City manager" shall mean the city manager of the city of Sonoma or his/her designee.

B.  "Filming activity" shall mean the filming, video taping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of motion pictures, television programs, commercial and nontheatrical productions.

C.  "News purposes" shall mean a filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on persons or events which are in the news for television and other news services.

D.  "Studio" shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises.

E.  "Film permit" shall mean written authorization from the city manager to conduct the filming activity described in the permit. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.040  Permit required.

It is unlawful to conduct a filming activity as defined in SMC 7.40.030(B) without first obtaining a film permit from the city manager. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.050  Permit exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities:

A.  Film activities conducted for news purposes as defined in SMC 7.40.030(C).

B.  Filming activities conducted in a studio as defined in SMC 7.40.030(D).

C.  Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or court civil or criminal proceeding.

D.  Filming activities determined by the city manager to have little or no impact on residents, businesses or city services. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.060  Deadline for filing application.

A.  Applications for a filming permit must be filed with the city manager’s office at least two weeks in advance of the time that the proposed filming activity is to commence.

B.  Application deadlines may be waived for good cause by the city manager if there is sufficient time remaining to process the application, provide adequate public notice and for the city to prepare for the requested filming activity. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.070  Application submittal requirements.

Permit application shall be on a form furnished by the city manager. Such form shall require the applicant to provide the following:

A.  Name, business address and telephone number of applicant.

B.  Name, business address and telephone number of person in charge on location.

C.  Location(s) and approximate daily call times of the proposed filming activity. The permit shall restrict filming to Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and nonholidays and shall not conflict with scheduled plaza events. No filming shall be allowed from the day before Thanksgiving to January 2nd, nor shall any filming last for more than three consecutive days in one location, without the consent of the city council.

D.  Description  of scenes to be filmed including details of any stunts, action, chase scenes, pyrotechnics, or special effects.

E.  A traffic plan showing any scheduled street closures and how traffic will be routed around the filming activity. Intermittent traffic closures will be limited to not more than five minutes in duration.

F.  Description of all vehicles which will be parked on city streets during filming activities.

G.  A parking plan showing the location of off-street parking to be utilized by the film and support crews.

H.  A publicity plan detailing where and when notices of the filming will be posted, published and mailed by the film company to affected business owners and residents. Notices must be received by business owners and residents, posted at the filming location and published in the Sonoma Index-Tribune at least 48 hours prior to filming.

I.  A statement from the city manager’s designated film liaison for any filming activity in or adjacent to any city commercial or mixed use zone identifying any businesses affected by the filming activity and the means of compensation for any inconvenience or potential loss of revenue. The statement will identify the affected businesses, if any, that do not support the filming activity.

J.  Written proof of permission to film on private property within the city. If such proof is not available at the time the application is submitted, it can be subsequently filed by the applicant prior to the city’s issuance of the film permit.

K.  Such other information as the city manager may require to determine whether to grant a film permit under this chapter. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.080  Permit approval/denial.

A.  The application shall be approved/denied within two business days of receipt of the completed application. The film permit shall be approved by the city manager unless (s)he determines from consideration of the application or other pertinent information that any of the following conditions exist:

1.  The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the proposed permit area.

2.  The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with street maintenance work, or a previously authorized excavation permit.

3.  The proposed permit location is on city-owned property and the filming activity will substantially interfere with municipal functions, or other previously authorized activities on city property.

4.  The filming activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or property.

5.  The filming activity would permanently alter or destroy any existing building, landscaping or public improvement in the city.

6.  The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail.

7.  The particular filming activity would violate federal, state or local law including license/permit requirements.

B.  When the grounds for permit denial can be corrected by imposing reasonable permit conditions, the city manager shall impose such conditions rather than denying the permit. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.090  Permit conditions.

The city manager may condition the issuance of a filming activity permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of filming activities including but not limited to the following:

A.  Requirements for the presence of Sonoma police department, fire department, or public works department employees when required for the particular filming activity at the applicant’s expense.

B.  Requirements concerning posting of no parking signs and placement of other traffic control devices at the applicant’s expense.

C.  Restrictions on the use of gunfire, explosions, and other noise-creating or hazardous devices.

D.  Restrictions on hours of filming activity, in accordance with SMC 7.40.070(C).

E.  Requirements concerning notice to affected property owners of the filming activity.

F.  Requirements as to the temporary nature of any changes to existing storefronts, landscaping, signage or public improvements (i.e., street signs).

G.  Requirements concerning publication of filming dates and locations in the Sonoma Index-Tribune. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.100  Fees.

A.  A permit application processing fee in an amount established by city council resolution shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is filed.

B.  A schedule of fees for city services and use of city property shall be established by city council resolution. The applicant shall prepay such fees prior to issuance of the film permit.

C.  A refundable cash deposit, in an amount determined by the city manager but not more than $10,000, shall be posted with the city to cover any unanticipated costs incurred by the filming activity. Such deposit shall be refunded (minus applicable charges and penalties) within 30 days after the filming activity has concluded. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.110  Change of filming date.

Upon reasonable notice by the permittee in advance of the filming activity, the city manager is authorized to change the date for which the film permit has been issued without requiring a new application, or application fee, provided sufficient notice can be provided to affected business owners, residents and, if necessary, the general public. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.120  Insurance.

A.  The applicant for a film permit must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the filming activity. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as insureds the city of Sonoma, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the filming activity.

Coverage shall be provided by a comprehensive general liability insurance policy in the amount prescribed by city council resolution. The insurance coverage afforded by the policy shall provide at a minimum the equivalent of insurance coverage provided by insurance service office (ISO) comprehensive general liability insurance coverage.

B.  A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the city not less than three business days prior to the filming activity unless the city manager for good cause waives the filing deadline.

C.  Proof of insurance coverage as specified in subsections (A) and (B) of this section must be verified by the city prior to issuance of a film permit by the city manager. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.130  Indemnification and liability.

A.  Prior to the issuance of the film permit, the permit applicant must sign an agreement to reimburse the city of Sonoma for any costs incurred to repair or replace city property which is damaged as the result of the filming activity.

B.  The agreement shall also provide that the permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, or employees from all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the filming activity or issuance of the film permit.

C.  The city shall not be responsible for filming on private property or any fee arrangements between the private party and the filming company. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.140  Duties of permittee.

A.  Each permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit. Failure to comply with all permit terms and conditions is grounds for permit revocation by the city manager.

B.  Each permittee shall clean and restore all city-owned property utilized during the filming activity to the same condition as existed prior to the filming.

C.  The person in charge of the filming activity shall retain a copy of the film permit on location. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.150  Appeals.

The permit applicant may appeal a permit denial, permit condition, or permit revocation or refusal to waive a deadline under this chapter by filing an appeal within five days of the date of the city manager’s decision with the city clerk. The appeal shall be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


7.40.160  Penalties.

The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an infraction which shall be punished by a fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Such violations may also be addressed in a civil action. (Ord. 97-10 § 1, 1997).


Title 8 ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL

Chapters:

8.02    General Provisions

8.04    Administrative Provisions

8.06    Prohibited Conduct

8.08    Keeping of Livestock, Fowl and Other Animals

8.10    Dogs and Cats

8.12    Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs

8.14    Impoundment

8.18    Rabies Control

8.20    Violations


Chapter 8.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

8.02.010    Purpose – Construction.

8.02.020    Relationship to other laws.

8.02.030    Authority to set fees.

8.02.040    Definitions.


8.02.010 Purpose – Construction.

This title is intended to protect, regulate and control animals existing within the city of Sonoma. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.02.020 Relationship to other laws.

This title is not intended to, nor shall it be construed or given effect in a manner that causes it to, apply to any activity which is regulated by federal or state law to the extent that application of this title would conflict with such law or would unduly interfere with the achievement of federal or state regulatory purposes. It is the intention of the city council that this title shall be interpreted to be compatible with federal, county, and state enactments, and in furtherance of the public purposes which those enactments express. Where an activity is a violation of this title and a federal or state enactment, the citation for such violation shall be deemed to be a citation under this title and that enactment, even if not expressly stated in the citation. Nothing in this title is intended to supersede any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.02.030 Authority to set fees.

The city council may by resolution establish a schedule of fees and charges for services performed and licenses issued under this title. The fees and charges so established may recover the reasonable cost of providing such services and issuing such licenses and for the operation of the animal care and control activities. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.02.040 Definitions.

“Animal” means any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian or fish including, but not limited to, dog, cat, horse, goat, sheep and chicken and all animals defined in California Penal Code Section 597.

“Animal care and control” means the Sonoma animal shelter and/or the agency who is responsible for animal care and control.

“Animal care and control officer” means any person authorized by the chief of police to administer or enforce the provisions of this title and applicable state laws and regulations pertaining to animal care and control or rabies control.

“Animal hearing officer” means a person directed by the chief of police to conduct hearings under this title. The animal hearing officer shall not be a presently employed animal care and control officer and shall either volunteer his/her services or be retained for this purpose.

“Animal shelter” means the facility where animals impounded pursuant to this title or voluntarily surrendered by their owners are placed for humane care and keeping.

“Assistance animal” means any guide dog, signal dog, search and rescue dog or dog or other animal described by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Sections 12101 through 12213; 28 C.F.R. Section 36.104) which is specially trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, guiding individuals with impaired sight to obstacles, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items.

“At large” or “run at large” means for an animal to be off-leash or otherwise free from restraint or confinement off the premises of its owner or custodian.

“Commercial kennel” means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs and/or three or more cats over four months of age are kept by the owner or occupant for commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, boarding, breeding, buying, selling, renting, exhibiting or training.

“Cruelty” means the intentional or grossly negligent mistreatment of any animal by any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused to or permitted upon such animal.

“Dangerous animal” means any animal which, because of its behavior, constitutes a danger to persons or property.

“Exotic animal” means any wild animal which the California Fish and Game Commission has declared to be a prohibited wild animal and the importation, transportation, or possession of which is unlawful except under authority of a revocable permit issued by the California Department of Fish and Game.

“Fowl” includes but is not limited to chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, and other birds.

“Health officer” means the Sonoma County public health officer or his designee.

“Hobby kennel” means any lot or premises on which four or more, but not exceeding 10, dogs and/or four or more, but not exceeding 10, cats over four months of age are owned and kept by the owner or occupant for personal, noncommercial purposes, including, but not limited to, hunting, tracking, exhibiting at shows, exhibitions, field trials or other competitions, or enhancing or perpetuating a given breed, other than dogs or cats used in conjunction with an agricultural operation on the lot or premises. No hobby kennel shall sell, display, offer for sale, barter or give away more than one litter of puppies and/or one litters of kittens in any calendar year.

“Household pets” shall mean any household pet customarily kept by humans for companionship including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, hamsters, mice, and turtles.

“Impounded” shall mean for an animal to be taken into custody by animal care and control.

“Kennel” means any commercial kennel or hobby kennel or both, but excludes any kennel maintained and operated by a nonprofit animal shelter or animal rescue organization registered with and licensed by the city.

“Licensed premises” means any lot or premises on which a commercial kennel, hobby kennel, animal shelter or pet shop is maintained or proposed to be maintained by the person owning or occupying such lot or premises.

“Livestock” means any cattle, sheep, or goat, or any horse, mule or other equine, or any llama or other camelidae, or any domestic fowl or rabbit.

“Owner” means any person over 18 years of age owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of, or possession of, any animal. This definition shall not apply to a veterinarian or his/her employees in the regular practice of his/her profession as to any animal in his/her possession while being treated or cared for. This definition shall not apply to any operator of a kennel as to any animal that is being boarded in the regular practice of his/her business.

“Park” means any body of water, land, campsite, recreation area, building, structure, or other real property owned, managed, leased, controlled or operated by the city of Sonoma.

“Person” means and includes any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, business trust, corporation or company.

“Pet shop” means a place or premises where live animals are offered, kept or displayed for purposes of wholesale or retail sale as household pets, livestock or exotic animals.

“Police dog” means any dog under the control of a peace officer in the performance of, or training for, public service.

“Potentially dangerous dog” shall mean any dog, except a police dog actively assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any or all of the following:

1. On two separate occasions engages in behavior, without provocation, within a 12-month period, which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury and/or injury or damage to another animal at a location where such person is acting lawfully;

2. On two separate occasions engages in behavior, without provocation, within a 36-month period, which inflicts injury on another animal or livestock, occurring off the property of the owner of the attacking animal and which does not result in the death of the attacked animal;

3. On any one occasion engages in behavior, without provocation, that inflicts an injury that is less than a severe injury (as that term is defined by this section) on a person while such person is acting lawfully during such occasion.

Exempt from the definition of “potentially dangerous dog” is any dog in a situation in which it is shown that the person or domestic animal suffering injury or damage immediately preceding the injury or damage:

1. Provoked, tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the dog into the behavior alleged;

2. Committed a trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner of the dog;

3. Committed or attempted to commit a crime; or

4. Threatened or committed an unjustified attack or assault against the owner or person in control of the dog.

“Premises” means any property owned or leased by any person.

“Secure enclosure” means a fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and which is suitable to confine a potentially dangerous or vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner of the dog and/or the city pursuant to a potentially dangerous or vicious dog abatement order. The enclosure shall be designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The dog shall be housed pursuant to Penal Code Section 597t.

“Severe injury” means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.

“Veterinarian” means any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in California.

“Veterinary facility” means a clinic or hospital for the provision of inpatient or outpatient medical services to domestic and exotic animals. Animals may be kenneled on site.

“Vicious dog” shall mean any dog, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any or all of the following:

1. On a single occasion engages in behavior, without provocation, that results in a severe injury or death to a person in a place where such person is acting lawfully;

2. On a single occasion engages in behavior, without provocation, on another animal or livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal and that results in the serious or life-threatening injury or death of the other animal or livestock;

3. Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog, as herein defined, which after its owner has been notified of such determination, continues any behavior defined as a dangerous dog behavior or is maintained in violation of the conditions of abatement.

Exempt from the definition of “vicious dog” is any dog in a situation in which it is shown that the person or domestic animal suffering injury or damage had, at the time of the injury or damage:

1. Provoked, tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the dog into the behavior alleged;

2. Committed a trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner of the dog;

3. Committed or attempted to commit a crime; or

4. Threatened or committed an unjustified attack or assault against the owner or person in control of the dog. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.04 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

Sections:

8.04.010    Animal care and control officers – Powers and duties.

8.04.020    Public notice – Hearing by animal hearing officer.

8.04.030    Contents of notice.

8.04.040    Hearing by animal hearing officer – General – Decision.


8.04.010 Animal care and control officers – Powers and duties.

A. The animal care and control officers shall enforce this title and any other provisions of this code, the Sonoma zoning ordinance, and the laws of this state relating to the care, control and keeping of animals and investigate complaints of violations thereof. Animal care and control officers are authorized to issue warnings or citations of the aforesaid ordinance and state laws.

B. The animal care and control officer shall not be deemed to be a police officer, but pursuant to Penal Code Section 830.9 he/she may exercise the powers of arrest of a police officer as specified in Penal Code Section 836 and the power to serve warrants as specified in Penal Code Sections 1523 and 1530 during the course and within the scope of his/her employment.

C. Animal care and control officers shall issue all licenses and permits, and collect all fees and charges as authorized by this chapter, unless otherwise specified by this title.

D. The animal care and control officer shall have the right to enter upon and inspect any premises where an animal is kept or harbored when such entry is necessary to investigate complaints and enforce the provisions of this title or state laws relating to the care, control and treatment of animals, or to save an animal, or to protect the public health, safety and welfare. All entries and inspections shall be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the laws pertaining to search warrants and inspection warrants.

E. A search warrant is not required when the animal care and control officer has probable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of an animal on private property is so hazardous or dangerous to the animal, other animals or the general public as to require immediate inspection and/or impoundment of the animal in order to safeguard the safety of the animal, other animals or the public safety.

F. Animal care and control officers may seize, impound, and humanely destroy any animal when authorized by provisions of this title or the laws of this state relating to the care, control and keeping of animals. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.04.020 Public notice – Hearing by animal hearing officer.

A. When a provision of this title requires notice of a hearing to be given pursuant to this section, notice shall be given in all of the following ways:

1. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered personally at least 10 days prior to the hearing to the applicant, license holder or owner of the animal, as the case may be. The notice of the hearing shall be served either personally or by first class mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the animal owner at his/her last known mailing address and deposited in a facility maintained by the United States Department of Postal Service. The person providing such notice or service shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury that notice or service has been made. In the event that the last known address of the animal owner cannot be ascertained, the hearing officer or animal care and control officer shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury that best efforts were made to provide notice or service to the animal owner. In the case of service by mail, notice or service is complete at the time the notice is deposited in the United States mail.

2. Notice of the hearing shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a public area at the police station, on or near the doors of the meeting room where the hearing will be held. If the hearing is to be held at a location other than the police station, then the notice shall be posted in a public area in the location in which the hearing will be held.

B. The notice shall include the information specified in SMC 8.04.030.

C. In addition to the notice required by this section, notice may also be given in any other manner deemed necessary or desirable. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.04.030 Contents of notice.

When a provision of this title requires notice of a hearing to be given, the notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing, the identity of the animal hearing officer, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the licensed premises, if any, that is the subject of the hearing, and a notice that if the applicant, license holder or owner of the animal, as the case may be, fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing shall proceed in such person’s absence and such absence shall be further considered a waiver by that person of his or her right to present evidence at the hearing. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.04.040 Hearing by animal hearing officer – General – Decision.

Any person sitting as an animal hearing officer shall be familiar with the provisions of this title. If the hearing relates to Chapter 8.12 SMC, Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs, the hearing officer should also have a basic understanding of canine behavior in order to render an informed decision. When a provision of this title requires that a hearing be conducted pursuant to this section, the hearing shall be conducted as follows:

A. At the time and place set for the hearing, the animal hearing officer shall consider the matter at issue. The animal hearing officer shall swear witnesses, hear testimony, and receive relevant sworn statements of witnesses or police incident reports as evidence. The formal rules of evidence need not be applied. Additional procedural rules may be adopted by resolution of the city council. The animal hearing officer may electronically record the hearing and shall preserve all photographs and other documentary evidence introduced at the time of the hearing. A stenographic report shall also record the proceedings if ordered by the animal hearing officer or requested by the owner, with the costs thereof to be borne by the person making the order or request. A copy of the electronic recording or transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to any person upon request and upon payment of the cost of preparation thereof. The animal hearing officer or their designee shall not have had any direct involvement in the matter being heard. The animal hearing officer may decide all issues for or against the applicant, license holder, or owner of the animal, as the case may be, even if such person fails to appear at the hearing.

B. Within 15 days after the hearing is closed, the animal hearing officer shall render a written decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law. The evidentiary standard used to make the decision shall be a preponderance of the evidence. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant, license holder or owner of the animal, as the case may be, and a brief summary of the decision shall be mailed by first class mail to all persons noticed pursuant to SMC 8.04.020. Personal service of said decision will satisfy the requirement.

C. The decision of the animal hearing officer shall determine whether any permit at issue shall be denied or revoked, whether the animal at issue shall be released to its owner or forfeited to a recognized nonprofit specializing in animal care and adoption, or released to another governmental agency pursuant to an agreement as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the animal at issue constitutes a public nuisance as further described in Chapter 8.20 SMC. The animal hearing officer may make the release of an animal to its owner subject to such conditions as the animal hearing officer deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this title and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, the decision of the animal hearing officer shall be final and conclusive.

D. Notwithstanding the preceding, the animal care and control officer may settle any matter scheduled for hearing, including a hearing pursuant to Chapter 8.12 SMC, Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs, at any time prior to the hearing by written agreement with the applicant, license holder, or owner of the animal, as the case may be. In the event of a settlement, the executed agreement shall become the decision of the animal hearing officer and shall be mailed and posted pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.06 PROHIBITED CONDUCT

Sections:

8.06.010    Interference with animal care and control officer – Prohibited.

8.06.020    Removal of animal in custody of animal care and control officer – Prohibited.

8.06.030    Aid in escape of animal sought for custody – Prohibited.

8.06.040    Refusal to present animal for inspection – Prohibited.

8.06.050    Abandonment of dog or cat – Prohibited.

8.06.060    Dogs at large prohibited – Exceptions.

8.06.070    Dogs in park facilities – Exceptions.

8.06.075    Dogs in designated off-leash areas.

8.06.080    Livestock, fowl, and other animals at large prohibited – Exceptions.

8.06.090    Interference with quarantine prohibited.

8.06.100    Animals in city buildings prohibited – Exceptions.

8.06.110    Selling animals without license prohibited.

8.06.120    Maintenance of exotic animals without proof of proper approvals prohibited.

8.06.130    Biting animals – Notification to animal care and control officer.

8.06.140    Barking, howling, and other nuisance.

8.06.150    Animal waste.

8.06.160    Animals in vehicles.

8.06.170    Hitching, fastening, tethering in public places.


8.06.010 Interference with animal care and control officer – Prohibited.

No person shall prevent, obstruct, hinder or interfere with an animal care and control officer in the performance of the officer’s duties under this title or state law. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.020 Removal of animal in custody of animal care and control officer – Prohibited.

No person shall remove or attempt to remove any animal taken into custody by an animal care and control officer without the officer’s authorization. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.030 Aid in escape of animal sought for custody – Prohibited.

No person shall cause or aid in the escape of any animal sought for custody by an animal care and control officer. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.040 Refusal to present animal for inspection – Prohibited.

No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal care and control officer to present an animal for inspection. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.050 Abandonment of dog or cat – Prohibited.

No person shall abandon any dog or cat in or upon any public street or other public place, or upon any private property or premises. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.060 Dogs at large prohibited – Exceptions.

Except as provided by SMC 8.06.070, no person shall cause, permit, or allow any dog to run at large upon any public street or other public place, or upon any private property without the permission of the property owner or premises other than those of the owner or other person in control of such dog, nor shall any person cause, permit, or allow any dog to be upon any public street or other public place unless the dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length. This section does not apply to guide or service dogs while performing their duties for blind, hearing impaired and physically disabled people or police dogs while in the performance of their duties.

Any dog found at large in violation of this section may be impounded. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.070 Dogs in park facilities – Exceptions.

A. Dogs are prohibited in all areas of Plaza Park, the Montini Preserve, and on the Sonoma Overlook Trail, regardless of whether they are restrained by a leash. Dogs are permitted in all other city park facilities, except in children’s playground areas of any city park; provided, that a waste bag dispensary is located within the park facility, and such dog is under the control of a competent person and under restraint by a leash not to exceed six feet in length. As used in this section, Plaza Park shall mean that property used for park purposes surrounded by 1st Street East, 1st Street West, Napa Street, and Spain Street, but excludes the sidewalks nearest the roadway and the area inside the park used for vehicular traffic or parking.

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may prohibit or permit, as the case may be, dogs in certain parks pursuant to an approved special use permit or plaza use permit. (Ord. 08-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.075 Dogs in designated off-leash areas.

A. Notwithstanding anything stated by this chapter, dogs shall be permitted off-leash in any area of a city park facility that has been designated a dog park by the city council.

B. When any dog is within the boundaries of any area designated an off-leash area pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the dog owner or person in possession of the dog shall at all times remain in compliance with the following use regulations:

1. Dogs must wear a visible and current license attached to a collar or harness;

2. Aggressive, violent or attacking dog behavior shall not be permitted; and

3. Dog owners or persons in possession must remain within the designated off-leash area and supervise their dogs at all times. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.080 Livestock, fowl, and other animals at large prohibited – Exceptions.

No person shall cause, permit, or, through failure to exercise due care or control, allow any livestock, fowl, or other animals to run at large upon any public street or other public place, or upon any private property or premises other than those of the owner or other person in control of such livestock, fowl, or animal. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.090 Interference with quarantine prohibited.

No person shall refuse to obey the conditions of any lawfully imposed quarantine or remove, tear, deface, mutilate, obscure or destroy or in any other manner whatsoever interfere with any placard, notice or proclamation declaring such quarantine, placed on or about the premises on which any of the animals so quarantined are located. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.100 Animals in city buildings prohibited – Exceptions.

No owner of any animal shall permit or allow such animal to enter or remain in any city building, except the city animal shelter and any other city building or part thereof designated by the city council. This section shall not apply to totally or partially blind persons, deaf or hearing impaired persons, or other disabled persons using assistance animals, law enforcement officers engaged in police work using dogs to assist them and such other persons as may be authorized by the animal care and control officer. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.110 Selling animals without license prohibited.

No person shall sell, display, offer for sale, barter or give away any animal as a pet, prize, toy, premium or novelty, unless such person is the owner of such animal and such sale, display, offer for sale, barter or gift occurs on the owner’s premises or on the premises where the animal is boarded or kept. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.120 Maintenance of exotic animals without proof of proper approvals prohibited.

No owner of any exotic animal shall maintain such animal without proof of proper federal and state permits, inspections and other required approvals. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.130 Biting animals – Notification to animal care and control officer.

The owner or other person in custody or control of any animal that bites a human being shall immediately notify the animal care and control officer of such bite, giving the name and address of the person bitten, if known to him/her, and shall comply with any quarantine instructions given by the animal care and control officer. Failure to comply with such quarantine instructions is cause for impoundment of the animal for the quarantine period. A violation of this section is an infraction punishable by applicable law. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.140 Barking, howling, and other nuisance.

No owner or person in control of any animal shall permit such animal to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of private residential property by continuous barking or howling.

It is the policy of the city to investigate or enforce this section only as follows:

A. Whenever the animal care and control officer has witnessed or otherwise has reasonable cause to believe this section has been violated, the animal care and control officer may issue a citation.

B. Whenever an alleged violation of this section is made, in writing, to the animal care and control officer by two or more persons residing in separate residences within the same street block or on properties adjoining the animal owner’s property, the animal care and control officer shall investigate and may issue a citation. As used in this subsection, “adjoining” shall mean any property that shares a common property line with the owner’s property, or is divided from the owner’s property by a public or private street, roadway or public right-of-way. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.150 Animal waste.

No owner shall permit any animal to defecate on any public street or other public property without immediately cleaning or removing the excrement to a proper receptacle; or defecate on any private property other than that of its owner without the consent of the owner, lessee or other person in control of the private property. This section does not apply to a disabled person whose disability prevents compliance with this section. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.160 Animals in vehicles. 

No person shall leave any animal confined in an unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperature that may adversely affect the health or well-being of the animal.

A. If an animal is confined in an unattended vehicle in a manner giving an animal care and control officer or peace officer reasonable cause to believe that the health or well-being of the animal is being adversely affected, the officer may enter the vehicle to release the animal(s). The city shall not be liable for any damages resulting from the use of reasonable force to make such entry.

B. Any animal that has been confined in a vehicle in violation of this section may be immediately impounded in accordance with SMC 8.14.050. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.06.170 Hitching, fastening, tethering in public places.

No person shall hitch, fasten or tether any dog or other animal in his possession or under his control at any location or place normally used by pedestrians and the general public, including, but not limited to, street crossings, sidewalks, park paths, public grounds, store entrances and lobbies, and other such places open to the public for sales or services, and pathways frequently used by the public on either public or private property.

A. This section does not apply to assistance animals while in the service of their owners or masters. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.08 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND OTHER ANIMALS

Sections:

8.08.010    Keeping of animals within the city.

8.08.020    Dairies, animal farms and stockyards prohibited.

8.08.025    Excepting certain existing farms –Abandonment.

8.08.030    Condition and care required.

8.08.040    Livestock in streets – Restrictions.


8.08.010 Keeping of animals within the city.

A. The city council has determined that the keeping of animals within the city, unless properly regulated as to location and sanitary conditions and as to certain animals, unless definitely limited in number or entirely prohibited, is detrimental to public health, safety and general welfare.

B. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal within the city except as provided herein, or in accordance with a special use permit or plaza use permit.

C. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause or permit to be kept or maintained honeybees, fowl, rabbits, or livestock, except as provided in this chapter.

D. Any person may keep or maintain household pets; provided, that such person remains in compliance with all applicable provisions of this title.

E. Any animal kept or maintained in the city in violation of this section shall be subject to impoundment or forfeiture in accordance with the provisions of this title or in accordance with other applicable state or federal laws. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.08.020 Dairies, animal farms and stockyards prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or maintain or to permit to be established, operated, or maintained, upon any premises within the city any cow or goat dairy, any stockyards or horse farm, or any hog farm. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.08.025 Excepting certain existing farms – Abandonment.

A. The foregoing prohibition in SMC 8.08.020 of dairies, animal farms or stockyards shall not be retroactive or effective as to the same if actually in operation now and as of July 1, 1951, and provided a permit for such operation and maintenance was issued by the city planning commission. No enlargement of any existing farms so excepted shall be permitted by adding to the number of animals kept upon any premises in connection with the excepted dairies, stock farms or stockyards.

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, any cessation of operations of existing dairies, stock farms or stockyards, coupled with a change in the use of the premises for other purposes for a period of six months, shall be construed to be an abandonment of such original purpose in connection with the premises and thereafter no use of the premises for dairy, stock farm or stockyard shall be permitted. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.08.030 Condition and care required.

A. Fowl. The limitations and minimum standards applicable to the keeping of fowl shall be as set forth in Table 1:

Table 1: Limitations and Standards for the Keeping of Fowl  

	Area of Regulation	Lot Size of 10,000 Square Feet or Greater	Lot Size of Less Than 10,000 Square Feet

	Zoning District:	Prohibited in commercial, mixed use, multifamily and mobile home zoning districts.

	Setback of Henhouse and Pen from Side or Rear Property Line:	10 feet, minimum.

	Allowed Yard Location:	Rear yard.

	Maximum Flock Size:	An additional 16 hens shall be allowed for each additional 10,000 square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of 50.	Up to 16.

	Allowance for Roosters:	The keeping of roosters is prohibited, except that permits for the keeping of roosters issued prior to October 3, 2008, shall remain valid as long as the conditions associated with such permits continue to be met.

	Habitation Requirements:	A henhouse and a pen are both required. The henhouse shall be roofed and shall provide for a minimum of four square feet per hen. The pen shall be fully enclosed, including a roof covering. The henhouse and pen shall be designed, constructed and maintained such that the flock is securely contained.

	Ongoing Maintenance and Care:	The flock shall be contained within a henhouse and pen of an adequate size. The henhouse and pen shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The flock shall be cared for in a humane manner, to include, at minimum, regular feeding and watering, regular cleaning of waste, protection from the elements and predators, and the treatment of disease.

	Protection from Pests:	All enclosures for the keeping of poultry shall be so constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure. All feed and other items associated with the keeping of poultry that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats, mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them.

	Slaughtering:	Slaughtering shall be conducted humanely and only for purposes of home consumption.

B. Rabbits. The limitations and minimum standards applicable to the keeping of rabbits shall be as set forth in Table 2, following:

 

Table 2: Limitations and Standards for the Keeping of Rabbits  

	Area of Regulation	Lot Size of 10,000 Square Feet or Greater	Lot Size of Less Than 10,000 Square Feet

	Zoning District:	Prohibited in commercial, mixed use, and mobile home zoning districts.

	Setback of Pen from Side or Rear Property Line:	10 feet, minimum.

	Allowed Yard Location:	Rear yard.

	Maximum Number:	An additional 8 rabbits shall be allowed for each additional 10,000 square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of 50.	Up to 8.

	Habitation Requirements:	If kept outdoors, a pen is required. The pen shall be roofed and shall provide for a minimum of four square feet per rabbit. The pen shall be fully enclosed, including a roof covering, and shall be designed, constructed and maintained such that the rabbits are securely contained.

	Ongoing Maintenance and Care:	Rabbits kept outdoors shall be contained in a pen of an adequate size. The pen shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Rabbits shall be cared for in a humane manner, to include, at minimum, regular feeding and watering, regular cleaning of waste, protection from the elements and predators, and the treatment of disease.

	Protection from Pests:	All pens or other enclosures for the keeping of rabbits shall be so constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure. All feed and other items associated with the keeping of rabbits that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats, mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them.

	Slaughtering:	Slaughtering shall be conducted humanely and only for purposes of home consumption.

C. Honeybees. The limitations and minimum standards applicable to the keeping of honeybees shall be as set forth in Table 3, following:

Table 3: Limitations and Standards for the Keeping of Honeybees 

	Area of Regulation	2 – 4 Hives	5 – 10 Hives

	Zoning District:	Prohibited in commercial, mixed-use, multifamily and mobile home zoning districts.	Allowed only in the agricultural and public zones.

	Lot Size:	A maximum of two hives shall be allowed on lots of 10,000 square feet or less. A maximum of four hives shall be allowed on lots of greater than 10,000 square feet in area.	Two acres, minimum.

	Setback of Hives from Side or Rear Property Line:	10 feet, minimum.

	Yard Location:	Rear yard.

	Screening and Orientation of Hives:	The beehive entrance shall be directed away from the neighboring property and hives shall be situated behind a fence, hedge or similar screen that is a minimum of six feet in height running parallel to the property line.

	Habitation Requirements:	Hives shall be of adequate size and shall be positioned so that the first 25 feet of the flight path is directed away from on-site or neighboring residences. Hives shall be fully enclosed including a roof covering or weatherproof top, and shall be designed, constructed, and maintained such that the bees can be properly contained.

	Ongoing Maintenance and Care:	It shall be the duty of every person on whose property bees are kept to: (1) maintain bees in a condition that will reasonably prevent swarming and aggressive behavior; (2) provide adequate water for the bees to reasonably prevent them from seeking water on neighboring properties; (3) maintain hive boxes and the area around them in a clean and sanitary condition.

	Protection from Pests:	Hives shall be constructed so as to prevent rats, mice, and other rodents from being harbored underneath or within the walls of the hives or their enclosures. All items associated with the keeping of bees that are likely to attract, or become infested by, rats, mice or rodents shall be protected so as to prevent such rodents from gaining access to, or coming into contact with, them.

D. The keeping of swine shall be prohibited. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.08.040 Livestock in streets – Restrictions.

No person shall drive or herd any animal or animals on or along any public street, roadway or alley. Animals may be ridden or driven in harness or by means of rope, halter or similar device, subject to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code or applicable sections of this code. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.10 DOGS AND CATS1

Sections:

8.10.010    Dog license required.

8.10.020    Permit required to keep more than three dogs or cats.

8.10.030    Responsibility for issuance of license.

8.10.040    License – Vaccination required.

8.10.050    License fee.

8.10.060    License fee – Waiver or reduction of fees.

8.10.070    Securing license tag to collar.

8.10.080    Replacement of lost license tag.


8.10.010 Dog license required.

Except as provided hereinbelow, every person owning a dog over four months of age which is kept within the city shall obtain a license for such dog from the animal care and control officer, and shall pay the annual fee as set by the city council. This license shall be obtained within 30 days after the dog reaches the age of four months or within 30 days of becoming a resident of the city if a license is otherwise required under this chapter. Every dog license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be annual, expiring 12 months following the date of rabies vaccination. The procedure for renewal of a dog license shall be the same as for obtaining an original license. If the owner of any dog fails to make application for the renewal of a dog license prior to its expiration, such owner shall pay a penalty for late renewal, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the city council.

A city license shall not be required:

A. For any dog having a valid license issued by another city or county when its owner has moved to the city of Sonoma in the preceding 12 calendar months; or

B. Any dog owned or in possession of a nonresident of the city which is to be maintained in the city for a period not exceeding 30 days; provided, that such dog has been vaccinated consistent with the requirements of this chapter and its owner presents proof of such vaccination upon demand. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.020 Permit required to keep more than three dogs or cats.

A. No more than three dogs or three cats over the age of four months shall be permitted at a dwelling unit. Dogs or cats in greater numbers may be kept only in kennels lawfully established and maintained in places permitted by the zoning ordinance or in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions, the chief of police may, after investigation of the circumstances, grant a permit to keep one dog or cat in addition to three dogs or three cats over the age of four months if he or she finds that the keeping of such additional dog or cat will not result in violation of other provisions of this title, or amount to a nuisance, or otherwise tend to impair the objectives of this title. This permit may be subject to conditions as deemed appropriate by the chief of police. 

1. Applicants must submit a permit application to the chief of police and may submit additional documents or information in support of their application request.

2. If after investigation the chief of police denies the permit to keep an additional dog or cat, the reasons for denial will be provided in writing to the requesting party, who may appeal that decision. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within seven calendar days after the denial of such permit. The appeal may be in the form of a letter or similar writing, and should contain specific statement of the ground(s) upon which the appeal is made.

3. All permits granted for more than three dogs or cats over the age of four months may be accompanied by such conditions as the chief of police may prescribe and may be revoked by the chief of police upon determination by the chief of a violation of any permit condition after notice and hearing pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.04 SMC.

4. Requests for permits under this section filed after the additional animals in question are already in residence at the premises in question must be accompanied by a fee to be set by city council. In lieu of paying such fee, the owner of the animals may remove the additional animals from the premises or consent to the impoundment of the additional animals at the owner’s expense pending completion of the permitting process. This section does not apply in situations where the owner moved into the city of Sonoma within the preceding 12 calendar months and can show proof that four or more dogs or cats were properly licensed in the jurisdiction in which they previously lived.

5. Any appeal of the decision to deny a permit application or to revoke an existing permit shall be heard by the animal hearing officer. Upon receipt of an appeal, the animal hearing officer shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the notice and hearing provisions of Chapter 8.04 SMC. All determinations of the animal hearing officer shall be final. The filing of appeal shall stay all administration action, except in cases where life or property is endangered. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.030 Responsibility for issuance of license.

Pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 30801) of Division 14 of the Food and Agricultural Code, the animal care and control officer is designated to issue dog licenses under this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.040 License – Vaccination required.

A prerequisite to the issuance of a dog license under this chapter is the presentation of a certificate of vaccination signed by a veterinarian showing one of the following for the dog to be licensed: 

A. That such dog has been vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine and the period of time from the date of vaccination to the date of expiration of the license being issued does not exceed the interval of time prescribed by the State Department of Health for revaccination.

B. That such dog should not be vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine because such vaccination may jeopardize the health of the dog due to infirmity or other disability. Where a certificate of vaccination shows that a dog should not be vaccinated due to infirmity or other disability, the nature of the infirmity or other disability and the estimated date of termination thereof shall be shown on the face of the certificate to the satisfaction of the animal services director or his designee. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.050 License fee.

A. An annual dog license fee set by resolution of the city council shall be imposed upon every dog four months and older which is kept in the city by any person who is the owner as provided in SMC 8.10.010. If a certificate is presented from a licensed veterinarian that the dog has been spayed or neutered, the annual license fee shall be reduced by 50 percent. The license fee is due and payable on the day upon which the dog is four months old, or as otherwise provided in SMC 8.10.010. 

B. If the owner of any dog fails to make application for a dog license within 30 days after receipt of notice from the animal care and control officer to obtain a license, such owner shall pay a penalty for late licensing; the penalty amount shall be established by city council resolution. The penalty shall be paid in addition to the license fee required in this section. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.060 License fee – Waiver or reduction of fees.

A. License fees shall be waived for any guide or service dog in service to a specific disabled person; provided, however, that a license tag is required to be worn by all such dogs to aid in reuniting them should they become lost, strayed or stolen. License fees shall be waived for police dogs owned and used by police department or law enforcement officers exclusively for police work if all other requirements for licensing under this chapter are met.

B. License fees may include a reduced rate for dogs owned by persons 62 years of age or older if all other requirements for licensing under this chapter are met. This section shall apply to the first dog license issued to the applicant.

C. The animal care and control officer shall require such proof of qualification as deemed necessary prior to waiving or reducing the license fee for any dog. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.070 Securing license tag to collar.

The dog owner shall secure the tag to a collar, harness or similar device attached to the dog for which the license tag was issued. The dog owner shall ensure that the dog wears such a license tag at all times in the city, except when the dog is confined to the owner’s property, in a commercial kennel, hobby kennel, or veterinary facility, or the dog is being exhibited at a show, field trial or other competition. The identification tag shall be shown by the owner at any time upon demand by the animal care and control officer. A violation of this section is an infraction punishable as provided by Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.10.080 Replacement of lost license tag.

In case the metallic dog license tag for any dog licensed under this chapter is lost or destroyed, a replacement tag for such dog shall be procured from the animal care and control officer within 30 days after the loss or destruction. Upon receiving proof of loss, made in writing, and upon payment of a replacement fee, which shall be set by resolution of the city council, the animal care and control officer shall issue a replacement tag to the owner. A violation of this section is an infraction punishable as provided by Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).1

For statutory provisions regarding the authority of the city to impose license fees, see California Food and Agricultural Code § 30804 and California Government Code § 38792. 


Chapter 8.12 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS

Sections:

8.12.010    Authority and purpose.

8.12.020    Purpose – Exemptions.

8.12.030    Investigation, hearing, and designation of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs.

8.12.040    Hearing procedure.

8.12.050    Abatement orders and conditions.

8.12.060    Failure to comply with potentially dangerous or vicious dog order.

8.12.070    Transfer and training of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs.

8.12.080    Restrictions on further ownership of dogs.

8.12.090    Keeping a potentially dangerous or vicious dog by minors prohibited.

8.12.100    Enforcement and penalties.


8.12.010 Authority and purpose.

The keeping of a dog defined as potentially dangerous or vicious under this chapter shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The procedure for abatement set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law or under this chapter. Furthermore, this chapter shall not preempt or preclude a person from filing a private lawsuit seeking to abate as a private nuisance any dog that is dangerous. Pursuant to California Food and Agricultural Code Section 31683, the city is granted the authority to adopt its own program for the control of potentially dangerous or vicious dogs. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.020 Purpose – Exemptions.

This chapter does not apply to kennels, humane society or other shelters, the animal shelter, or veterinarians, or to police dogs while utilized by the sheriff, any police department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police work. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.030 Investigation, hearing, and designation of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs.

A. An animal care and control officer shall investigate any reported incident or complaint regarding a potentially dangerous or vicious dog.

B. During the investigation, the animal care and control officer shall compose a report to be permanently retained pursuant to adopted procedures. The animal care and control officer shall make his best efforts to take a photograph of the dog to include with the report.

C. The animal care and control officer shall append to the report the statements of witnesses, victims and the dog owner. Such statements shall be signed under penalty of perjury.

D. If, after conducting an investigation, the animal care and control officer determines that probable cause exists to believe that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the animal care and control officer shall prepare a petition and request an administrative hearing to determine whether the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious.

E. If the animal care and control officer determines that probable cause exists that the dog is a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, the animal care and control officer may impose reasonable conditions to protect the public health, safety and welfare upon the animal owner pending an administrative hearing held in accordance with SMC 8.12.040. These conditions shall be in the form of a provisional abatement order and may include any reasonable conditions, including those contained in SMC 8.12.050. Notice of the provisional abatement order shall be provided by the animal care and control officer pursuant to SMC 8.04.020.

F. Within 30 days of receipt of the provisional abatement order, an administrative hearing pursuant to SMC 8.12.040 shall be held to determine whether the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious. If the dog owner fails to appear at the administrative hearing or waives his/her right to the administrative hearing then the provisional abatement shall remain in effect.

G. Pending a hearing pursuant to SMC 8.12.040, the animal care and control officer shall also immediately impound any dog found to present an imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.040 Hearing procedure.

A. Pursuant to SMC 8.12.030, where the animal care and control officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the animal care and control officer shall file a petition and request an administrative hearing by the animal hearing officer for the purpose of determining whether the dog should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. A complaint from any member of the public furnishing the basis for the animal care and control officer’s probable cause determination shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant and attached to the petition.

B. The animal hearing officer shall notify the owner of the dog that a hearing will be held, at which time the animal care and control officer and the dog owner may present evidence as to whether the dog should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The notice, together with a copy of the petition, shall be provided pursuant to SMC 8.04.020. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than 10 business days or more than 30 business days after service of the notice and petition on the owner of the dog.

C. The animal hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall afford the owner of the animal an opportunity to present evidence as to why the dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The formal rules of evidence need not be applied. The animal hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits or declarations of witnesses; limit the scope of discovery; shorten the time to produce records or witnesses; exclude witnesses from the hearing when not testifying; exclude disorderly or disruptive persons from the hearing; and make other orders necessary to ensure the fair and orderly conduct of the hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public.

D. The proceedings of the hearing may be electronically recorded if ordered by the animal hearing officer or requested by the owner of the dog. A stenographic reporter shall also record the proceedings if ordered by the animal hearing officer or requested by the owner and the cost of such service shall be borne by the requestor. A copy of the electronic recording or transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to any person upon request and upon payment of the cost of preparation thereof.

E. The animal hearing officer may decide all issues for or against the owner of the dog even if the owner fails to appear at the hearing.

F. After the hearing, the animal hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious. The hearing officer may order the abatement of the nuisance created by the potentially dangerous or vicious dog by imposing some or all of the abatement conditions found in SMC 8.12.050 for the continued ownership of the animal. The abatement order shall replace any provisional abatement order issued by an animal care and control officer unless the abatement order is stayed by judicial action or pending judicial review. Within 15 days of the hearing, the determination and abatement order shall be served upon the dog owner pursuant to SMC 8.04.020. The determination order of the animal hearing officer shall be final and appealable in accordance with the provisions of Section 31622 of the Food and Agricultural Code within 10 business days of the date of mailing or personal service of the decision.

G. If, following the hearing, the subject dog is determined by a preponderance of the evidence to be vicious and, if released to the owner, even where reasonable abatement conditions were imposed, would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the hearing officer may order that the dog be humanely euthanized as permitted under California Food and Agricultural Code Section 31645 or its successor provisions. The order shall specify the effective date of euthanasia which shall allow sufficient time for: (1) the notice of the order to be served pursuant to subsection (I) of this section and the 10 business days’ appeal period pursuant to subsection (F) of this section to run prior to euthanasia occurring; and/or (2) to permit the owner time to locate a licensed and insured sanctuary specializing in confining and caring for vicious dogs unable to be safely maintained in society, willing and able to accept ownership, custody and responsibility for the dog with safe transport expenses, if any, to be borne by the owner. If the dog is placed in sanctuary, the order of euthanasia will be suspended, subject to reinstatement if the dog returns to the jurisdiction.

H. A rebuttable presumption that a dog creates a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare exists where:

1. The dog has committed an act resulting in the death of a person, regardless of the circumstances involved;

2. The dog has committed acts on two separate occasions, without provocation, which have resulted in the death of another animal or livestock occurring off the property of the dog’s owner;

3. The dog has committed acts on three separate occasions, without provocation, that result in nonsevere injuries to any one or more persons at a location where such persons are acting lawfully;

4. The dog has attacked on three separate occasions, without provocation, another animal or livestock off the property of the owner of the attacking dog;

5. The owner of a dog previously deemed vicious fails, refuses or is incapable of complying with the terms of an abatement order issued pursuant to this chapter;

6. The animal has been previously found vicious and subsequently exhibits any of the behaviors listed as determinative of potentially dangerous or vicious under SMC 8.02.040;

7. Such remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies at law or in equity and shall not limit or restrict other remedies.

I. Within 10 days of the hearing, notice of the order of humane euthanization shall be served upon the owner pursuant to SMC 8.04.020.

J. An order made by the hearing officer to humanely euthanize an animal shall be final unless an appeal is made to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to Section 31622 of the Food and Agricultural Code. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.050 Abatement orders and conditions.

A. Pursuant to SMC 8.12.040, the owner of a dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious by the hearing officer shall be required to comply with the abatement order of the animal hearing officer which contains any or all of the following conditions:

1. To immediately register the dog that is found to be potentially dangerous or vicious with the animal care and control officer; to comply with the animal care and control officer’s requirements for potentially dangerous or vicious dogs; and to keep such dog properly vaccinated at all times. Should the dog die in any 12-month term, the owner shall notify the animal care and control officer of the death within five working days of the death;

2. To keep the dog securely confined on its premises in a locked enclosure approved by the animal hearing officer or the animal care and control officer from which the dog cannot escape and into which children cannot trespass. Such a kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine a potentially dangerous or vicious dog must be locked with a key or combination lock when such dogs are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house a dangerous animal must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition with access to potable food and water;

3. To keep the dog securely muzzled, restrained by a substantial leash of no longer than six feet in length and under the control of a responsible person 18 years of age or older who is physically capable of restraining the dog when the dog is not contained in a locked, secure enclosure;

4. To have the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian and to present proof to the animal care and control officer;

5. To provide and maintain financial responsibility for injuries to the public by obtaining and showing proof of liability insurance in the form and amount deemed to be acceptable by the animal hearing officer or city attorney in light of all the circumstances. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless 10 days’ written notice is first given to animal services and the city clerk’s office;

6. The posting of a bond or other proof of ability to pay a damage award in the amount of $50,000;

7. To immediately inform any city, county, postmaster or utility company meter readers and anyone else that lawfully comes onto the property of the dog’s dangerousness and to inform animal care and control and/or the chief of police if the dog is moved to another location inside or outside the city limits as provided by this chapter;

8. To display in a prominent place on the premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words “Beware of Dog” in letters at least three inches high;

9. To have a microchip implanted into the dog by a veterinarian or other qualified animal services professional for identification purposes. The identifying information listed on the microchip shall be noted in the licensing files for that dog;

10. To consent and agree to the entry upon the premises by any police officer or animal care and control officer for the purpose of inspecting the dog and/or premises at any time;

11. To make reasonable payment of costs incurred by the city and animal care and control agent in the hearing process, not to exceed $1,000;

12. To take any other steps deemed reasonably necessary to prevent injuries to the public.

13. Euthanization of the animal designated a vicious dog and ordered to be euthanized pursuant to SMC 8.12.040.

B. The owner of the dog shall comply with the conditions imposed by the hearing officer within 30 days of the order. All owners of potentially dangerous or vicious dogs must within 10 days of the effective date of the abatement order provide the animal care and control officer with two photographs (which may be in digital format) of the registered dog clearly showing the color and approximate size of the dog and any distinguishing markings. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.060 Failure to comply with potentially dangerous or vicious dog order.

A. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog deemed potentially dangerous or vicious under this chapter to fail to comply with conditions set forth in an abatement order. Any dog found to be the subject of a violation of an order shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. The animal hearing officer shall notify the dog owner of the city’s options to dispose of the dog for a failure to comply with the conditions contained in the potentially dangerous or vicious dog order. The city’s options for disposal of the potentially dangerous or vicious dog if the owner does not satisfy either of the requirements in subsection (B) of this section shall include: (1) sanctuary as provided by SMC 8.12.040(G); (2) owner’s sale or transfer of ownership of the dog subject to city’s approval; (3) release to a recognized nonprofit agency or other governmental organization as provided by SMC 8.14.100; and, if no other options are available, (4) euthanization.

B. The animal hearing officer shall provide written notice to the owner pursuant to SMC 8.04.020 that the city may avail itself of any of the options set forth by subsection (A) of this section, unless within 14 days from the date of notice:

1. The owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the animal hearing officer that the owner has fully complied with the requirements and conditions set forth in the abatement order; or

2. The owner has filed in a court of competent jurisdiction a petition that seeks to stay the euthanization of the animal and has served a copy of such petition upon the animal hearing officer.

C. If, after 14 days from the date of such notice, the owner has not complied with the provisions of subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section, the hearing officer may, without further notice or process, make an order that includes any one or more of the options set forth by subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.070 Transfer and training of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs.

A. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer ownership or custody or in any other way dispose of a dog deemed potentially dangerous or vicious under this chapter to any person within the city unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the owner of such dog.

B. The owner of a dog that has been deemed potentially dangerous under this chapter may sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of such dog or the offspring thereof to persons who do not reside within the city, provided the owner first notifies the animal hearing officer and the animal care and control officer of the proposed sale or transfer. Such notice shall be given not less than 15 days in advance of the sale or transfer and shall specify the name and address of the recipient person. Upon receipt of such notice, the hearing officer or the animal care and control officer may notify the recipient person and the governmental jurisdiction in which the recipient person is located or resides that the dog in question has been adjudicated as potentially dangerous under this chapter. Failure to comply with these notification provisions shall be grounds for immediate impoundment of the dog by the animal care and control officer.

C. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess, own or control any dog for the purpose of either temporary or permanent care in the city limits that has been deemed by another governmental jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous, dangerous, vicious, or a threat to the safety of human beings or domestic animals. The animal care and control officer may order the person having possession, ownership or control of the dog to remove the dog immediately from the city. Should such person fail to comply with the animal care and control officer’s order, the animal care and control officer may summarily and immediately impound the dog. The owner of the dog shall be liable for the costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the dog including any necessary veterinary fees. Such impounded dog may then be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.080 Restrictions on further ownership of dogs.

The owner of a dog determined to be a vicious dog shall be prohibited from owning, possessing, controlling, or having custody of any dog of the same or similar breed for a period of three years, when it is found, after hearing proceedings conducted pursuant to this chapter, that ownership or possession of a dog by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.090 Keeping a potentially dangerous or vicious dog by minors prohibited.

No minor shall own or at any time have sole custody or control of any dog found to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.12.100 Enforcement and penalties.

A. Unless otherwise specified, any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.

B. The penalties and remedies specified herein shall not be exclusive but shall be cumulative with all other remedies at law or in equity. The city may, in its discretion, elect to pursue any one or more of the penalties or remedies provided for herein or at law or in equity.

C. Notwithstanding the preceding, the animal care and control officer may settle any matter scheduled for a hearing at any time prior to the hearing by written agreement with the applicant, license holder, or owner of the animal, as the case may be. In the event of a settlement, the executed agreement shall become the decision of the animal hearing officer and shall be mailed pursuant to SMC 8.04.020. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.14 IMPOUNDMENT

Sections:

8.14.010    Animals subject to impoundment.

8.14.020    Suspected rabid animals – Examination and impoundment.

8.14.030    Enforcement of Penal Code Section 597.1.

8.14.040    Care of impounded animals.

8.14.050    Procedures for immediate impoundment.

8.14.060    Hearing prior to animal deprivation.

8.14.070    Notification of impoundment.

8.14.080    Duration of impoundment.

8.14.090    Redemption of impounded animal.

8.14.100    Disposition of impounded animals.

8.14.110    No redemption or disposition of impounded animals without proof of proper care.

8.14.120    Absence of liability for redemption or disposition.

8.14.130    Relief from fees during natural calamities.


8.14.010 Animals subject to impoundment.

Any animal which is engaged in an activity or existing in a condition prohibited by this chapter or state law may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.020 Suspected rabid animals – Examination and impoundment.

The animal care and control officer shall seize any animal when there is reason to believe it is infected with rabies, and take that animal to a veterinarian for examination. If the veterinarian concurs that the animal may be infected with rabies, the animal care and control officer shall impound such animal for the period mandated by the laws of this state and shall notify Sonoma County animal regulation, the agency responsible for rabies monitoring in this county. The animal’s owner shall be charged for all costs incurred or fees applicable, with respect to the examination, confinement, or impoundment of the animal. The redemption fees in SMC 8.14.090 do not apply to an animal quarantined for rabies observation. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.030 Enforcement of Penal Code Section 597.1.

California Penal Code Section 597.1 shall be operative and enforced by the chief of police. Seizure and impoundment shall be made pursuant to Section 597.1. If requested, a hearing regarding the impoundment of the subject animal shall be held pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.040 Care of impounded animals.

Every impounded animal shall be inspected for the presence of a license, tattoo, implant or other form of identification at the time of impoundment. The animal care and control officer shall ensure that all impounded animals receive suitable and adequate food, water, shelter, and medical care. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.050 Procedures for immediate impoundment.

The animal care and control officer may immediately seize and impound an animal for violation of this chapter or the laws of this state without providing a pre-impoundment notice of hearing under the following circumstances:

A. The owner and/or possessor of the animal provides consent for the impoundment;

B. The animal is at large;

C. The animal care and control officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the animal may be rabid;

D. The animal care and control officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the dog is a potentially dangerous or vicious dog in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.12 SMC;

E. To protect an animal which is injured, sick, starving or suffering from heat, cold or confinement, which is in need of immediate care;

F. When the animal care and control officer has reasonable grounds to believe that immediate impoundment is necessary to protect the public health or safety of any person or animal;

G. Pending an administrative hearing for a potentially dangerous or vicious dog pursuant to SMC 8.12.040 or pending any judicial proceeding. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.060 Hearing prior to animal deprivation.

Except as provided in Chapter 8.12 SMC or SMC 8.14.050, an animal care and control officer may not seize or impound an animal for any violation of this chapter or state law except with the consent of the owner of the animal, unless a hearing on the impoundment is first held.

If the owner of any animal refuses to consent to the impoundment of such animal, the animal care and control officer may issue a notice setting the time and place for a hearing and commanding such owner to appear before the animal hearing officer at that time. The animal care and control officer shall cause notice of such hearing to be given pursuant to SMC 8.04.020. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to SMC 8.04.040. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.070 Notification of impoundment.

A. When an animal is impounded pursuant to this chapter, except for SMC 8.14.030, the animal care and control officer shall, except as otherwise provided, notify the owner of the animal of the impoundment within 24 hours. The owner of the animal shall be served with notice of the impoundment, either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested, if known. Such notice shall state the following:

1. The animal has been impounded;

2. The date and location of impoundment;

3. A description of the animal;

4. The location of where the animal is being held;

5. The name, address, and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding the redemption of the animal;

6. An indication of the ultimate disposition of the animal if no action is taken to redeem it by the owner within the requisite holding period pursuant to SMC 8.14.080;

7. A summary of the estimated fees to be expected from the impoundment.

B. If the owner of an impounded animal is unknown (a stray), the above notice, in lieu of mailing, shall be posted on a bulletin board in a public area at the police department.

C. When an animal is impounded pursuant to this chapter and the animal is of a type referred to in Food and Agricultural Code Section 17003, the animal care and control officer shall immediately notify the Sonoma County agriculture commissioner and request assistance from the county for care and impoundment of the animal.

D. In addition to the notice required by this section, notice may also be given in any other manner deemed necessary or desirable. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.080 Duration of impoundment.

A. Any impounded dog shall be kept at the city animal shelter for a period of not less than six business days (excluding the day of impoundment) unless redeemed within such period. During that time, the animal care and control officer shall make reasonable attempts to identify and contact the dog’s owner.

B. Any impounded livestock shall be kept at the city animal shelter or such other place as may be approved by the animal care and control officer for a period of not less than 14 days unless redeemed within such period. During that time, the animal care and control officer shall make reasonable attempts to identify and contact the livestock’s owner.

C. Any other impounded animal shall be kept at the city animal shelter or such other place as may be approved by the animal care and control officer for a period of not less than six days, not including the day of impoundment. During that time, the animal care and control officer shall make reasonable attempts to identify and contact the animal’s owner.

D. Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal care and control officer shall be held for not less than six days, not including the day of surrender or deposit, and shall be made available for owner redemption for the entire holding.

E. Kittens (cats less than eight weeks old) or puppies (dogs less than eight weeks old) relinquished by the purported owner, or brought in by any other person with authority to relinquish them, may be released immediately to a recognized nonprofit specializing in animal care and adoption or another governmental organization pursuant to an agreement.

F. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to impoundment pursuant to SMC 8.14.030. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.090 Redemption of impounded animal.

The owner of any impounded animal may, at any time prior to the disposition of the animal, redeem the same upon compliance with this chapter and state law, presentation of proof of ownership satisfactory to the animal care and control officer and payment of a redemption fee, and all other proper fees and charges accrued as provided for by this chapter. If the impounded animal is subject to licensure under this chapter, the owner shall comply with the licensing requirements for the animal prior to its release. Upon such redemption being made, the animal care and control officer shall release the animal. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.100 Disposition of impounded animals.

A. Any impounded animal (with the exception of those described within subsection (B) of this section) which is not redeemed within the impoundment period specified within this chapter shall, wherever possible, be released to a recognized nonprofit agency specializing in animal services and adoption or another governmental organization pursuant to an agreement.

B. Any impounded bovine animal which is not redeemed within the holding period specified in this chapter shall be turned over to the State Bureau of Livestock Identification for disposition by the office. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.110 No redemption or disposition of impounded animals without proof of proper care.

No impounded animal shall be redeemed by its owner, placed for adoption or sold unless the person receiving the animal provides proof satisfactory to the animal care and control officer that the animal will be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this title and state law. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.120 Absence of liability for redemption or disposition.

No liability shall be incurred by the animal care and control officer or the city for the redemption or disposition of any animal made pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.14.130 Relief from fees during natural calamities.

Upon the recommendation of the animal care and control officer and with the approval of the city council, the fees provided for in this chapter may be waived when animals have been impounded because of civic disorganization, disruption, or other conditions of devastation within the city due to fire, flood, earthquake, storm or other natural calamity. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.18 RABIES CONTROL

Sections:

8.18.010    Rabies control to be responsibility of health officer.

8.18.020    Rabies control fee.


8.18.010 Rabies control to be responsibility of health officer.

The health officer shall be responsible for supervising rabies control activities within the city in accordance with Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 121575) of Part 6 of Division 105 of the Health and Safety Code, Subchapter 1 (commencing with Section 2500) of Chapter 4 of Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations, such other laws, rules and regulations relating to rabies control as may be enacted or promulgated by the state, and the policies and procedures established by the board. The animal care and control officer shall cooperate with and assist the health officer in carrying out any measures necessary for rabies control, including, but not limited to, quarantining of animals and complying with directives of the health officer. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.18.020 Rabies control fee.

The owner of any animal which has or is suspected of having rabies shall pay a rabies control fee to cover the costs incurred by the animal care and control officer in effecting quarantine and in performing other associated rabies control activities in connection with such animal. The rabies control fee shall be in addition to any other fee charges imposed by this title. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Chapter 8.20 VIOLATIONS

Sections:

8.20.010    Penalties and remedies.

8.20.020    Separate offense.

8.20.030    Public nuisance – Prohibited.

8.20.040    Notice and service requirements.

8.20.050    Enforcement.

8.20.060    Cost recovery of abatement.


8.20.010 Penalties and remedies.

A. Any violation of this title shall be enforceable as a criminal offense pursuant to Chapter 1.12 SMC. Unless specifically stated otherwise, a violation of any of the provisions in this title shall be deemed a misdemeanor.

B. Any violation of this title shall constitute a public nuisance and be subject to the abatement procedures set forth by Chapter 1.12 SMC or elsewhere in this code.

C. Any violation of this title may be made subject to proceedings under Chapter 1.30 SMC, Administrative Penalties.

D. The penalties and remedies specified herein shall not be exclusive but shall be cumulative with all other remedies at law or in equity. The city may, in its discretion, elect to pursue any one or more of the penalties or remedies provided for herein or at law or in equity. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.20.020 Separate offense.

Every person violating any provision of this title shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues, and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.20.030 Public nuisance – Prohibited.

A. In addition to the grounds deemed a public nuisance by SMC 8.20.010, a public nuisance shall be deemed to exist when an owner of an animal:

1. Has been convicted or found guilty of three violations of this title within a 12-month period of time.

2. Permits unsanitary conditions to exist on the premises where such animal is kept which cause odors, attract flies or vermin, or which are otherwise injurious to the public health or offensive to the senses of adjacent property owners.

3. Keeps or maintains any animal in violation of the zoning code of the city of Sonoma.

B. Whenever an animal care and control officer has reasonable cause to believe that a public nuisance as defined in this section exists, the animal care and control officer may conduct an investigation of the alleged nuisance. Whenever it is alleged in writing by two or more persons residing in separate residences within the same street block or on properties adjoining the animal owner’s property that a public nuisance as defined in this section exists, the animal care and control officer may issue an order to the owner of the animal directing that such nuisance be abated. In the event that the owner does not comply with the abatement order, the animal care and control officer may immediately initiate proceedings for a hearing, as is set forth in Chapter 8.04 SMC. The notice and hearing shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 8.04 SMC. As used in this subsection, “adjoining” shall mean any property that shares a common property line with the owner’s property, or is divided from the owner’s property by a street or roadway.

C. Any person may maintain an action under Civil Code Section 3493 for compliance with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.20.040 Notice and service requirements.

When this title requires the provision of notice or service, the notice or service shall be in writing. If a right may be exercised or an act is to be done and the notice or service of it is required to be given but the time within which the notice or service must be given is not specified, the notice or service shall be given at least 10 days before the time the right must be exercised. The notice or service shall be served either personally or by first class mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the animal owner at his last known mailing address and deposited in a facility maintained by the United States Department of Postal Service. The person providing such notice or service shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury that notice or service has been made. In the event that the last known address of the animal owner cannot be ascertained, the animal hearing officer or animal care and control officer shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury that best efforts were made to provide notice or service to the animal owner. In the case of service by mail, notice or service is complete at the time the notice is deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.20.050 Enforcement.

Any provisions of this title may be enforced by the police department, fire department, the animal care and control officer or any authorized designee of the animal services director. Complaints of any violations of this title which are subject to penalties under this chapter may be presented to the district attorney’s office or to the city attorney for prosecution. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


8.20.060 Cost recovery of abatement.

The costs of abating a public nuisance deemed to exist pursuant to this title may be recovered from the owner of the animal causing the public nuisance. In any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding initiated by the city under this title, the prevailing party may recover attorneys’ fees. Recovery of attorneys’ fees by the prevailing party is limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. The award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party shall in no circumstance exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 05-2012 § 2, 2012).


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS

Chapters:

I. Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government

9.04    Obstructing Fire Department

9.08    Obstructing Municipal Officers

9.12    Public Park and Recreation Areas – Regulations

II. Offenses Against the Person

9.16    Discrimination Based on AIDS or HIV Infections

III. Offenses Against Public Health and Safety

9.20    Repealed

9.21    Fireworks

IV. Offenses Against Public Decency

9.32    Gambling

9.33    Urinating, Expectorating or Defecating in Public Place or View

V. Offenses Against Public Peace

9.36    Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places

9.38    Social Host Liability and Prohibition against Underage Drinking

9.40    Disturbing Meetings

9.44    Loitering

9.48    Obstruction or Interference with Free Passage

9.52    Disturbing the Peace

9.56    Noise

9.60    Leaf Blowers

9.68    Picketing and Besetting

9.69    Launching and Landing Aircraft at Places Other Than Airports

VI. Offenses Against Property

9.70    Graffiti

9.72    Repealed

VII. Consumer Protection

9.80    Mobilehome Park Space Rent Protection

9.82    Mobilehome Park Conversions

9.84    Conversion of Mobilehome Parks to Resident Ownership

VIII. Offenses By or Against Minors

9.88    Minor’s Curfew

IX. Weapons

9.92    Discharging Firearms


Chapter 9.04       OBSTRUCTING FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

9.04.010  Unlawful.

9.04.020  Injuring fire apparatus unlawful.

9.04.030  False fire alarms unlawful.

9.04.040  Repealed.


9.04.010  Unlawful.

No person shall willfully or carelessly permit any vehicle in his control to obstruct the apparatus of the fire department going to a fire. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 9, 1900).


9.04.020  Injuring fire apparatus unlawful.

It is unlawful to willfully injure any engine house, hose, engine, carriage or other apparatus, or drive over any hose of the fire department of the city. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 10, 1900).


9.04.030  False fire alarms unlawful.

No person shall willfully make or cause to be made any false or frivolous alarm of fire. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 11, 1900).


9.04.040  Fire apparatus beyond city limits.

Repealed by Ord. 2001-2. (Ord. 483 § 1(K), 1974; Ord. 68 Art. XV § 15, 1900).


Chapter 9.08       OBSTRUCTING MUNICIPAL OFFICERS

Sections:

9.08.010  Obstruction of police prohibited.


9.08.010  Obstruction of police prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person willfully to resist, delay or obstruct the chief of police or deputy police chief or any police officer of the city in the lawful discharge or attempt to discharge any duty of his office. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 27, 1900).


Chapter 9.12 PUBLIC PARK AND RECREATION AREAS – REGULATIONS

Sections:

9.12.010    Purpose.

9.12.020    Definitions.

9.12.030    Compliance with regulations.

9.12.040    Power of ejection by authorized persons.

9.12.050    Hours.

9.12.060    Care of public property.

9.12.070    Restrooms and washrooms.

9.12.080    Care of trees, shrubbery, lawns.

9.12.081    Use of metal detectors.

9.12.090    Climbing trees or other objects.

9.12.100    Care of wild animals and birds.

9.12.110    Possession of firearms.

9.12.120    Refuse, trash and litter.

9.12.130    Advertising matter.

9.12.140    Motorized vehicles, bicycles and other conveyances.

9.12.141    Repealed.

9.12.145    Sonoma Overlook Trail.

9.12.147    Montini Preserve.

9.12.150    Disorderly conduct.

9.12.160    Enforcement of rules.

9.12.170    Compliance with law.

9.12.180    Repealed.

9.12.190    Abandonment of animals.

9.12.200    Prohibition of fires.

9.12.210    Repealed.

9.12.220    Intoxicated persons.

9.12.230    Horse riding prohibited.

9.12.240    Regulation of specific activities.

9.12.245    Private lessons on city-owned tennis courts prohibited.

9.12.250    Knives prohibited.

9.12.260    Defacing of regulations.

9.12.270    Car wash prohibited.

9.12.280    Use by public and private groups.

9.12.290    Penalty.


9.12.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of the city council in the adoption of these regulations to afford the residents of the city the fullest possible use of recreational facilities within the city. By the adoption of these regulations, the city council proposes to protect the facilities which the residents of the city have established and assure that all will have an equal opportunity to use these facilities. The regulations herein contained shall govern the use of all public parks, recreation areas and facilities. Observance of the regulations herein contained shall be a condition precedent to the use by the public of city-owned public parks, recreation areas and facilities. Nothing herein is intended to interfere with the activities of park maintenance personnel in the performance of their official duties. (Ord. 432 § 1, 1971).


9.12.020 Definitions.

The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city, appointed by the city manager;

B. “Parks” includes all grounds and bodies of water dedicated to public recreation purposes under the control, management or direction of the city council, and includes those portions of the former Northwestern Pacific Railroad right-of-way which have been designated as a bicycle path or paths as well as all other pathways designated for the use of bicycles, and identified by appropriate signs;

C. “Person” includes persons, association, partnership, firm and corporation. (Ord. 79-12 § 1, 1979; Ord. 432 § 2, 1971).


9.12.030 Compliance with regulations.

All persons entering upon land or water owned, managed or controlled by the city may remain on such land or water only so long as they abide by the rules and regulations contained herein or adopted pursuant to regulations of the city council and shall, while on the land or water areas, abide by any instructions and directions of duly authorized employees of the city. (Ord. 432 § 3, 1971).


9.12.040 Power of ejection by authorized persons.

In addition to any other provision for the enforcement of these regulations, the city manager, or his duly authorized representatives, shall have the authority to eject from the parks and recreation areas, any person acting in violation of the rules and regulations. Failure of such person to leave the property or facility managed or belonging to the city for violation of any of these regulations shall be a further violation of these regulations. (Ord. 432 § 4, 1971).


9.12.050 Hours.

It is unlawful for any person to loiter or remain in any park, building, plaza or recreation area at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September and October. It is unlawful for any person to loiter or remain in any park, building, plaza or recreation area at any time between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of November, December, January, February and March.

The city council by motion or resolution and where notice of such hours is posted at the site may allow for exceptions to these hours of usage. These restrictions do not apply to functions or events held under permits issued by the parks and recreation commission. This section does not prohibit pedestrian transit through any park area at any time of the night for the single purpose of reaching a destination beyond the park area. (Ord. 91-8 § 1, 1991; Ord. 86-8 § 4, 1986; Ord. 432 § 5, 1971).


9.12.060 Care of public property.

It is unlawful for any person to mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, fencing, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities, or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. (Ord. 432 § 6, 1971).


9.12.070 Restrooms and washrooms.

It is unlawful for any person to fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. Male persons shall not resort to any restroom and washroom facilities set apart for women, and female persons shall not resort to restroom and washroom facilities set apart for men; provided, that this shall not apply to children accompanied by an adult person. (Ord. 432 § 7, 1971).


9.12.080 Care of trees, shrubbery, lawns.

It is unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree, plant, wood, turf, or grass, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, or attach any rope, wire or other object to any tree or plant. (Ord. 432 § 8, 1971).


9.12.081 Use of metal detectors.

It is unlawful for any person to use a metal detector in any city park or recreation area except that such a device may be used to locate lost items if permission is first obtained from the director of public works or his authorized representative. Such permission shall not include any right to cut or probe the soil with a knife or any other instrument or device. (Ord. 83-1 § 1, 1983).


9.12.090 Climbing trees or other objects.

It is unlawful for any person to climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. (Ord. 432 § 9, 1971).


9.12.100 Care of wild animals and birds.

It is unlawful for any person to hunt, molest, harm, frighten, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird. (Ord. 432 § 10, 1971).


9.12.110 Possession of firearms.

A. It is unlawful for any person, other than peace officers in the discharge of their duties, to use, carry or possess firearms, air rifles, BB guns, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety except as provided in subsections B and C of this section.

B. Bows and arrows may be brought into a park or facility for use at an established range or for participation in a city-planned or approved archery program.

C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a weapon from being carried by any person under a permit issued by the chief of police or other legally authorized person. (Ord. 432 § 11, 1971).


9.12.120 Refuse, trash and litter.

It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash, except in the receptacle provided therefor. (Ord. 432 § 12, 1971).


9.12.130 Advertising matter.

It is unlawful for any person to distribute, circulate, give away, throw or deposit in or on any park and recreation area any handbills, circulars, pamphlets, papers, or advertisements, or post or affix the same to any tree, fence or structure in any park or recreation area except with permission of the parks and recreation commission. The posting of official public notices is excepted and nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the exercise of individual rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States. (Ord. 432 § 13, 1971).


9.12.140 Motorized vehicles, bicycles and other conveyances.

It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive an automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, wagon, motorscooter, bicycle, skateboard or other conveyance in any public park or recreation area, including the City Plaza, on other than roads or paths designated and posted for that purpose. No person shall operate or ride on a bicycle, skateboard or other conveyance propelled by human power in the City Plaza but such a conveyance may be walked or carried into or through the Plaza. No motor vehicles are allowed within the Plaza north of the face of the City Hall during the hours of darkness unless used and parked by persons attending a meeting or business gathering at the City Hall. During special events such as the Vintage Festival, Fourth of July celebration, and during any other event which is sanctioned by permit of the parks and recreation commission, vehicles may be authorized within the Plaza by the commission to the extent it deems reasonable and necessary in connection with the permitted event. (Ord. 89-4 § 2, 1989).


9.12.141 Skate park regulations.

Repealed by Ord. 99-10. (Ord. 98-5 § 1, 1998).


9.12.145 Sonoma Overlook Trail.

In addition to applicable regulations set forth in this chapter and elsewhere in the municipal code, the following restrictions shall apply to the use of the Sonoma Overlook Trail:

A. Notwithstanding SMC 9.12.050, hours of use shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to dusk.

B. Smoking shall be prohibited.

C. The fire chief shall be authorized to close the trail during periods of high fire danger. (Ord. 2001-8 § 1, 2001).


9.12.147 Montini Preserve.

In addition to applicable regulations set forth in this chapter and elsewhere in the municipal code, the following restrictions shall apply to the use of the Montini Preserve:

A. Notwithstanding SMC 9.12.050, hours of use shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to dusk.

B. Smoking shall be prohibited.

C. The fire chief shall be authorized to close the Preserve during periods of high fire danger.

D. The public works director shall be authorized to close all or portions of the Montini Preserve on a temporary basis as needed for maintenance or to implement the grazing plan approved for the Preserve as amended from time to time. (Ord. 08-2014 § 2, 2014).


9.12.150 Disorderly conduct.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace and enjoyment of park and recreation areas. (Ord. 432 § 15, 1971).


9.12.160 Enforcement of rules.

The chief of police and his subordinates shall, in connection with their duties, diligently enforce the provisions hereof and shall have the authority to eject from the park and recreation areas any persons acting in violation of these rules and regulations. (Ord. 432 § 16, 1971).


9.12.170 Compliance with law.

All persons entering upon land or water owned, managed or controlled by the city of Sonoma shall obey all ordinances of the city of Sonoma, the laws of the state of California, and the instructions and directions of duly authorized employees of the city with respect to the use of such public facilities. (Ord. 432 § 17, 1971).


9.12.180 Animals in parks.

Repealed by Ord. 05-2012. (Ord. 432 § 18, 1971).


9.12.190 Abandonment of animals.

Persons shall not leave or deposit dogs, cats or other animals, or fowl, or fish, whether dead or alive, within the boundaries of land or water owned, managed or controlled by the city. (Ord. 432 § 19, 1971).


9.12.200 Prohibition of fires.

No person, other than one acting under authorization, direction or permission of the city manager or his duly authorized subordinate, shall build, light, kindle or maintain any open, or outdoor fire at any place within the boundaries of land or water, owned, managed or controlled by the city, except in areas or facilities specifically built and designated for this purpose. (Ord. 432 § 20, 1971).


9.12.210 Alcoholic beverages.

Repealed by Ord. 08-2004. (Ord. 06-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 92-21 § 1, 1992; Ord. 86-9 § 1, 1986; Ord. 83-11 § 1, 1983; Ord. 432 § 21, 1971).


9.12.220 Intoxicated persons.

No person who is intoxicated, noisy, disorderly, boisterous, or publicly offensive shall be admitted into or permitted to remain within any park and those persons charged with the responsibility of the park shall refuse admittance to any such person and shall eject any such person therefrom. (Ord. 432 § 22, 1971).


9.12.230 Horse riding prohibited.

No person shall ride a horse, pony, mule or animal of any description onto or over land owned, managed or controlled by the city other than upon roads and trails designated for horseback riding in areas set aside from time to time by the city specifically for equestrian activity. Exception to this provision may be granted from time to time by the parks and recreation commission for special events. (Ord. 432 § 23, 1971).


9.12.240 Regulation of specific activities.

No person shall drive, putt or in any other fashion play or practice golf or use golf balls, or fly model airplanes on or over land, or operate model boats or model automobiles, or model craft of any kind or description on land or water owned, managed or controlled by the city, except in areas set aside for these specific activities. (Ord. 432 § 24, 1971).


9.12.245 Private lessons on city-owned tennis courts prohibited.

Private lessons given by a paid instructor shall be prohibited on city tennis courts. A program of tennis lessons, provided by a certified nonprofit organization and available to the general public, may be allowed on city tennis courts subject to the review of the parks and recreation commission and the approval of the city council. (Ord. 91-11 § 1, 1991).


9.12.250 Knives prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to carry in any public park or recreation area any hatchet, ax, machete, brush knife or any other device other than pocketknife, capable of cutting, defacing or mutilating trees or shrubs, without permission of duly authorized representatives of the city. (Ord. 432 § 25, 1971).


9.12.260 Defacing of regulations.

No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice, rules, or regulations for the government of parks, posted or in any manner permanently fixed by order or permission of the city manager or his representatives. (Ord. 432 § 26, 1971).


9.12.270 Car wash prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to wash or repair any motor vehicle within any public park area. (Ord. 432 § 27, 1971).


9.12.280 Use by public and private groups.

The city council, upon recommendation of the parks and recreation commission, shall establish conditions for the issuance of permits to public and private groups for use of any park, park building or park facility. Further, the city council delegates to the parks and recreation commission authority to issue such permits and to establish priorities for the use of any park, park building or park facility. No person shall sell, vend, peddle or distribute any merchandise or property whatever within any park, park building or park facility without prior approval of the parks and recreation commission. Olsen Park and Jean K. T. Carter Park shall be closed to use except by special written permission of the city council, and it shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, use, recreate or remain in any portion thereof at any time between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (Ord. 92-21 § 2, 1992; Ord. 88-7 §§ 1, 2, 1988; Ord. 86-9 § 2, 1986; Ord. 432 § 28, 1971).


9.12.290 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine and/or penalty not to exceed the maximum as prescribed in the California Penal Code. (Ord. 432 § 29, 1971).


Chapter 9.16       DISCRIMINATION BASED ON AIDS OR HIV INFECTIONS

Sections:

9.16.010  Policy.

9.16.020  Prohibited conduct.

9.16.030  Definitions.

9.16.040  Exceptions.

9.16.050  Enforcement.

9.16.060  Limitation of actions.

9.16.070  Waiver not valid.

9.16.080  Application.


9.16.010  Policy.

It is the policy of the city to eliminate discrimination based on the fact that a person has AIDS or a related condition, or HIV infection. In adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city council does not intend to proscribe any activity, the proscription of which would constitute an infringement of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state of California.

Recognizing that existing federal and state enactments proscribe such discrimination in some, but not all, circumstances, the city council finds that such enactments do not occupy the field of such arbitrary discrimination, but that local regulation is both necessary and proper. This chapter is not intended, and shall not be construed to apply to any person or activity which is regulated by federal or state law, to the extent that application of this chapter would conflict with such law or would unduly interfere with the achievement of federal or state regulatory objectives. It is the intention of the city council that this chapter shall be interpreted to be compatible with federal and state enactments, and in furtherance of the public policies which those enactments express. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.020  Prohibited conduct.

A.  Discrimination Prohibited. Discrimination against any person because that person has or is perceived to have AIDS, an HIV condition, or any disease which cannot be casually transmitted, is prohibited.

B.  Retaliation Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against a person who has or who is believed to have:

1.  Opposed any act or practice made unlawful by the ordinance codified in this chapter;

2.  Supported this chapter or its enforcement;

3.  Filed a complaint under this chapter;

4.  Testified, assisted or proceeded in any way in any investigation, proceeding or litigation under this chapter. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.030  Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the words or phrases listed below shall have the following meanings:

"AIDS" means acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

"Business entity" means any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, whether public or private, however organized, which provides goods or services to the public. The existence of membership requirements does not exempt any organization if (1) the only requirement for membership is payment of dues, or (2) membership is restricted only by occupation, gender, age, or similar qualification which includes a substantial number of residents of the city, with or without dues.

"Discrimination" includes but is not limited to the following actions affecting a person based upon the knowledge or perception that the person has an HIV disease or infection:

A.  By an employer: limiting, segregating, classifying or taking any adverse action against an otherwise qualified employee or job applicant;

B.  By an employer: not making reasonable accommodations to the limitations of an otherwise qualified applicant or employee so as to deprive any individual of employment opportunities, or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an employee;

C.  By an employer: to fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual;

D.  By an educational institution: to deny admission, services or use or enjoyment of facilities, or to impose different terms or conditions upon admission, services, or use and enjoyment of services;

E.  By a health care provider or business entity: to exclude from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services, programs or activities of the provider or entity, or to provide such services, programs or activities on less favorable terms;

F.  By any person: doing any of the acts described in this definition of discrimination because a person associates with a person who has or is perceived to have an HIV condition;

G.  In housing: to refuse to rent or lease a rental unit, refuse to negotiate for the rental or lease of a rental unit, evict from a rental unit, or otherwise deny to or withhold a rental unit or services connected therewith from any person, or to rent or lease a rental unit or provide related services on less favorable terms.

"Educational institution" means any corporation, partnership or business entity engaged in training, classes or education of adults or children.

"Employer" means any person regularly employing one or more persons, or any person acting directly or indirectly as the agent of an employer, including an employment agency.

"Health care provider" means any person or facility licensed or certified by the state or any emergency medical transport, prehospital emergency care, dental care and mental health care.

"HIV" means the infectious agent known as human immune virus, human immunodeficiency virus, HTLV-III, LAV or AIDS virus.

"HIV condition" means AIDS, AIDS-related complex, or HIV infection.

"Housing" means use or occupancy of any rental unit, including dwelling units, guest rooms, hotel or motel rooms, suites or dormitories rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes, the land and building appurtenant thereto, and all services, privileges and facilities supplied; in connection with the use or occupancy thereof. This term shall also include mobilehomes whether rent is paid for the mobilehome and the land upon which it is located, or rent is paid for the land alone.

"Otherwise qualified" describes a person with an HIV condition who, with or without reasonable modifications to rules, policies or practices or the provision of auxiliary aids or services, meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of services or participation in programs or activities or for employment or housing.

"Person" includes any individual or legal entity, public or private, located or doing business within city. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.040  Exceptions.

A.  Owner-Occupied Dwellings. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed apply to the rental or leasing of any housing unit in which the owner or lessor or any member of his or her family occupies the same dwelling unit as the prospective tenant.

B.  Employee Benefit Systems. Nothing in this chapter is intended to require an employer to violate the conditions of a bona fide employee benefit program. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an employee benefit program which prohibits or is construed to prohibit the hiring of any person who would otherwise be required to be hired under the provisions of this chapter, or which purports to exclude coverage of HIV conditions either by its express terms or by inclusion of conditions such as sexually transmitted diseases or transfusion-related conditions, is to that extent void as against public policy.

C.  In-Home Employers. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to employment of individuals to perform services in the place of residence of the employer.

D.  Bona Fide Occupational Qualifications. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit selection or rejection based upon a bona fide occupational qualification or the lack thereof. However, in any action brought under this chapter, if a party asserts that an otherwise prohibited practice is justified by a bona fide occupational qualification, that party shall have the burden of proving (a) that the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of bona fide occupational qualification; and (b) that there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the occupational qualification.

E.  Lawful Insurance Practices. Discrimination as defined in this chapter does not include actions taken by insurance companies which are expressly permitted by state or federal law with respect to applicants or covered persons or groups.

F.  Religious Organizations. Discrimination as defined in this chapter does not include bona fide restrictions by religious organizations limiting employment or services to persons of the same religion. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.050  Enforcement.

A.  Any aggrieved person may enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of a civil action for damages, injunction, and such other relief as the court may allow.

B.  Any persons who permit or who propose to commit an act in violation of this chapter may be enjoined therefrom by a court of competent jurisdiction. An action for injunction under this section may be brought by any aggrieved person, by the city attorney, district attorney, or by any person or entity which will fairly and adequately represent the interests of the protected class.

C.  The criminal penalties imposed by the Sonoma Municipal Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.060  Limitation of actions.

Any action or complaint under this chapter must be commenced within two years of the date upon which the alleged discriminatory act occurred. This time period shall not begin to run until the aggrieved person discovers or with reasonable diligence should have discovered the discriminatory act. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.070  Waiver not valid.

Any written or oral agreement to waive any of the provisions of this chapter is against public policy and therefore void. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


9.16.080  Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the incorporated area of the city of Sonoma. (Ord. 91-9, 1991).


Chapter 9.20 INTERFERENCE WITH WATERCOURSES OR SUPPLY

(Repealed by Ord. 97-6)


Chapter 9.21 FIREWORKS

Sections:

9.21.010    Definitions.

9.21.020    Sale, use, or discharge of fireworks prohibited – Exception.


9.21.010 Definitions.

The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Fireworks” means any fireworks as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 12511.

B. “Special effects” means any special effects as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 12532. (Ord. 07-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.21.020 Sale, use, or discharge of fireworks prohibited – Exception.

A. Except for public displays of fireworks and the use of special effects authorized pursuant to this section, it is unlawful for any person to possess, offer or expose for sale, sell at retail, give away or in any manner dispose of any fireworks, or to use, explode, or otherwise discharge any fireworks, within the city of Sonoma.

B. Any person or group desiring to perform a public display of fireworks or use special effects within the city of Sonoma shall first make written application for a permit to the fire chief. Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least 10 days prior to the proposed display or use of special effects. The application shall be considered and acted upon by the fire chief and shall comply with Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations. Any permit for a public display of fireworks or use of special effects may be suspended or revoked at any time by the fire chief. (Ord. 07-2009 § 1, 2009).


Chapter 9.32 GAMBLING

Sections:

9.32.010    Unlawful.

9.32.020    Use of premises.

9.32.030    Participation.

9.32.040    Exemption.

9.32.050    Penalty for violation.


9.32.010 Unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, or employee, or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain within the city any house, room, apartment, stand or place used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place where any game not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state of California is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit, pennants, cigars, candy, merchandise, or other valuable thing or representative of value. (Ord. 316 § 1, 1962).


9.32.020 Use of premises.

It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment, stand or place owned by him or under his charge or control in the city to be used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place for playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on any game not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of California with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit, pennants, cigars, candy, merchandise or other valuable thing or representative of value. (Ord. 316 § 2, 1962).


9.32.030 Participation.

It is unlawful for any person to play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state of California, which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device, for money, checks, chips, credit, pennants, cigars, candy, merchandise or other valuable thing or representative of value in any house, room, apartment, or place described in this chapter. (Ord. 316 § 3, 1962).


9.32.040 Exemption.

Unless otherwise declared unlawful under the laws of the state of California, the following are exempt from the operation of any of the provisions of this chapter:

A. Business Prizes. The giving by an association or licensed store, market, shop, service establishment, or other similar business house of prizes and purses for contests or exhibits;

B. Public Social Games. The carrying on of a game or games at any public social gathering by a recognized church, charitable organization, community service or fraternal organization or benevolent organization; and the prize or prizes of usual or ordinary value given to one or more players at any game played at such public social gathering shall not be deemed a thing of value and prohibited hereby;

C. A cardroom or card game carried on within the clubrooms of any incorporated fraternal or benevolent society, labor union, or charitable organization not open to members of the public but only to members of the particular organization and incidental to the purposes for which the corporation is organized;

D. Card tables and card games of a social nature played thereat, where no money or anything of value passes as a result of the card games;

E. A cardroom or card game carried on for business in compliance with the laws of the state and laws and regulations of the county in any premises located in territory annexed to the city on or before December 31, 1975; provided, that such cardroom or card game had been lawfully in operation for a period of one month or more immediately prior to December 31, 1975. Such cardrooms or card games are subject to the jurisdiction of the city to enact reasonable regulations in respect thereto, to require permits therefor, and to charge reasonable fees. Such regulations and procedures relating to the issue of permits and the fees for permits may be fixed by resolution of the city council, and permit issued on condition that the owner and operator of such card room or game subscribe to contract in writing agreeing to abide by such regulations as a condition for a permit. (Ord. 76-1 § 1, 1976; Ord. 316 § 4, 1962).


9.32.050 Penalty for violation.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 or more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 316 § 5, 1962).


Chapter 9.33       URINATING, EXPECTORATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PLACE OR VIEW

Sections:

9.33.010  Unlawful.

9.33.020  Penalty.


9.33.010  Unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to urinate, expectorate or defecate on any public property, or upon any private property open to the public or in open view from public property. (Ord. 96-12 § 1, 1996).


9.33.020  Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and:

A.  Upon the first violation, there shall be imposed a fine not to exceed $100.00;

B.  Upon the second violation within one year, there shall be imposed a fine not to exceed $200.00;

C.  Upon the third and additional violations within one year, there shall be imposed a fine not to exceed $300.00. (Ord. 96-12 § 2, 1996).


Chapter 9.36 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:

9.36.010    Alcoholic beverage defined.

9.36.020    Consumption of alcoholic beverage in public places.

9.36.030    Exemption.

9.36.040    Possession of open alcoholic beverage containers.

9.36.050    Penalties for offenses.


9.36.010 Alcoholic beverage defined.

For the purposes of this chapter, “alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every other liquid that is fit for beverage purposes and that contains more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. (Ord. 08-2004 § 2, 2004).


9.36.020 Consumption of alcoholic beverage in public places.

It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any of the following places in the area of the city of Sonoma between sunset and 11:30 a.m.:

A. Any public park;

B. Any public street;

C. Any public way or sidewalk; and

D. Any public place defined as follows:

1. Any enclosed area outdoors that is owned or occupied by the city and used for public purposes;

2. Any unenclosed area outdoors, whether such area is publicly or privately owned or occupied, to which the general public has access and to which, by right or by express or implied invitation, the general public may resort for business, pleasure, or other lawful purpose; this category shall include, but shall not be limited to, publicly owned open spaces, such as streets, sidewalks, parks, and open areas which may be either publicly or privately owned, such as entrance ways, alcoves, and parking lots; except those outdoor areas reserved for the business of serving food and beverage to the public;

3. Any privately owned walkway, either enclosed or unenclosed, which is open to the general public and that, among its principal purposes, serves to allow pedestrians to pass through or over the premises without regard to the pedestrian’s destination; and

4. Outdoor parking lots, whether publicly or privately owned, which are adjacent to streets, sidewalks, or other public places open to the general public. (Ord. 08-2004 § 2, 2004).


9.36.030 Exemption.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic beverages may be allowed on public property and public places in conformity with such rules as are adopted by resolution of the city council or permitted by the city of Sonoma and the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. The consumption of alcoholic beverages on public school property is regulated by Business and Professions Code Section 25608 rather than by this section. (Ord. 08-2004 § 2, 2004).


9.36.040 Possession of open alcoholic beverage containers.

It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage, which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, between sunset and 11:30 a.m., on any property subject to SMC 9.36.020 if the consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in such areas. (Ord. 08-2004 § 2, 2004).


9.36.050 Penalties for offenses.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of SMC 9.36.020 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. Any person who violates any of the provisions of SMC 9.36.040 shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (Ord. 08-2004 § 2, 2004).


Chapter 9.38 SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY AND PROHIBITION AGAINST UNDERAGE DRINKING

Sections:

9.38.010    Title.

9.38.020    Legislative findings.

9.38.030    Intent and purpose.

9.38.040    Definitions.

9.38.050    Consumption of alcohol by minor prohibited in public place, place open to public, or place not open to public.

9.38.060    Hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering or event where minors consume alcoholic beverages prohibited.

9.38.070    Exemptions.

9.38.080    Prima facie evidence.

9.38.090    Separate violations for each incident.

9.38.100    Violations – Penalty.

9.38.110    Appeal of administrative penalties.

9.38.120    No mandatory duty of care.


9.38.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “social host liability and prohibition against underage drinking.” (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.020 Legislative findings.

A. Minors may obtain, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages at gatherings held at private residences or other private property, places or premises, including rented commercial premises which are under the control of a person who knows or should know of the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors; yet persons responsible for the occurrence of such gatherings may fail to take reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors at these gatherings.

B. Consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors who are under the legal age to consume alcohol in the state of California is harmful to them and poses an immediate threat to the general public health, safety and welfare, in that it increases the potential for alcohol abuse by minors that may lead to physical altercations and violent crimes including, but not limited to, sexual assaults, accidental injury, neighborhood vandalism, and excessive noise disturbance, all of which may require intervention by local law enforcement.

C. Law enforcement response to gatherings involving consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors diverts essential resources from other service calls in the community and, in some cases, requires extensive resources to manage such incidents. Such resource diversion places the community at increased risk. Law enforcement, fire, and emergency response services are not currently reimbursed for the response costs associated with responding to a call to a property or gathering where minors obtain, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages.

D. The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and are expected to deter the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors by holding persons responsible for such social events responsible for such activity when they knew, or should have known, the illegal conduct and yet fail to stop and/or prevent it. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.030 Intent and purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are:

A. To protect the public health, safety and general welfare;

B. To enforce laws prohibiting the service to, and/or the facilitation of the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors; and

C. To reduce the cost of providing law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response services to premises where alcoholic beverages are served to and/or consumed by a minor, by holding the responsible person, social host and/or landowners responsible for the costs associated with providing such law enforcement and other emergency response services.

D. For these reasons, the city of Sonoma declares that gatherings on private property, places or premises where alcoholic beverages are served to, and/or consumed by, underage persons are a threat to public peace, health, safety, and general welfare, and constitute a public nuisance pursuant to SMC 1.12.010. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.040 Definitions.

The definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

A. “Alcohol” as defined in Section 23003 of the California Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to time, shall apply to this chapter. As of the introduction of this chapter, Section 23003 defined alcohol to mean “ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.”

B. “Alcoholic beverage(s)” as defined by Section 23004 of the California Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to time, shall apply to this chapter. As of the introduction of this chapter, Section 23004 defined alcoholic beverage to include “alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.”

C. “Gathering” is a party or event where a group of two or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.

D. “Family gathering” is a gathering on private property where each minor and/or juvenile present is supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.

E. “Minor” is any person under the age of 21 years. A “minor” may also be a “juvenile” as defined in subsection (F) of this section.

F. “Juvenile” is any person under the age of 18 years.

G. “Property” means any place or premises including a residence, commercial or business premises, such as a hotel or motel room, an assembly hall or meeting room, privately owned vacant lot or agricultural land, whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation where a gathering takes place.

H. “Response costs” are costs associated with the response by law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response providers to a gathering, including but not limited to:

1. Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative cost associated with or attributed to such a response(s);

2. The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;

3. The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment in, responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;

4. Any other allowable costs related to enforcement of SMC 9.38.050 and 9.38.060.

I. “Responsible person” means a person or persons with a right of possession in the property who is aware of the gathering and knew, or should have known, of the consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by a minor or juvenile at the gathering, but need not be present at such a gathering which results in the imposition of response costs pursuant to this chapter. Responsible persons may include, but are not limited to:

1. An owner of the property.

2. A tenant or lessee of the property.

3. The landlord or property manager responsible for the property.

4. The person(s) in charge of the property.

5. The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering.

6. The parent(s) and/or guardian(s) of a juvenile, if the juvenile is a responsible person or social host for a gathering. In such case, the parent(s) and/or guardian(s) of the juvenile shall be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter.

J. “Social host” is a person who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering to take place. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.050 Consumption of alcohol by minor prohibited in public place, place open to public, or place not open to public.

Except as permitted by federal or state law, it is unlawful for any minor to consume, or to have consumed, an alcoholic beverage in any place, public or private, subject to the exemptions stated in SMC 9.38.070. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.060 Hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering or event where minors consume alcoholic beverages prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any responsible person or social host to knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place where one or more minors consumes one or more alcoholic beverages, or any portion thereof, if the responsible person or social host knew or should have known that a minor is consuming, or has consumed, an alcoholic beverage.

B. Any social host shall take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at a gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to:

1. Controlling access to alcoholic beverages;

2. Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages at a gathering;

3. Verifying the age of persons attending a gathering by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards; and

4. Supervising the activities of minors at a gathering.

C. A social host or responsible person shall not be in violation of this section under the circumstances listed below as long as the request or action stated therein is made before any other person makes a complaint about a gathering:

1. The social host or responsible person seeks assistance for any medical emergency occurring at the property;

2. The social host or responsible person requests assistance from law enforcement to remove any person who refuses to abide by the social host or responsible person’s performance of duties imposed by this chapter;

3. The social host or responsible person terminates a gathering because the social host or responsible person has been unable to prevent minors from consuming alcoholic beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.070 Exemptions.

This chapter shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances:

A. Exclusively between a minor and his/her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution; or

B. Family gatherings as defined in SMC 9.38.040. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.080 Prima facie evidence.

Whenever a responsible person and/or social host having control of the property is present at the property at the time that a minor obtains, possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage, it shall be prima facie evidence that the social host or responsible person, regardless of age, knew or reasonably should have known that the minor obtained, possessed, or consumed an alcoholic beverage at the gathering. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.090 Separate violations for each incident.

Each incident in violation of SMC 9.38.050 and 9.38.060 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.100 Violations – Penalty.

A. Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as misdemeanors. At the discretion of the charging officer, city prosecutor, or city attorney, violations of this chapter may also be charged as infractions, a civil action, and/or an administrative notice as outlined in SMC 1.12.010 that may include, but is not limited to, recovery of response costs; except that a violation of SMC 9.38.060(A) by a responsible party shall not be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.

B. Nothing in this chapter in any way limits any other remedy that may be available to the city, or any other penalty that may be imposed by the city, for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.110 Appeal of administrative penalties.

Any person charged with an administrative violation of this chapter pursuant to SMC 1.30.110 who receives notice of imposition of response costs as set forth in SMC 9.38.040 may appeal the imposition of these costs pursuant to SMC 1.30.200. Failure to appeal shall constitute a waiver of any claims regarding the imposition or collection of these costs and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


9.38.120 No mandatory duty of care.

This chapter is not intended to impose, and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes, upon the city, or any officer, employee, agent or representative of the city, a mandatory duty of care toward persons or property within or without the city limits, so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as may otherwise be imposed by law. (Ord. 13-2009 § 1, 2009).


Chapter 9.40 DISTURBING MEETINGS

Sections:

9.40.010    Unlawful.


9.40.010 Unlawful.

No person shall willfully disturb any lawful assemblage or procession of persons by noise, profanity, rude, obnoxious or indecent conduct or in any other manner whatever. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 18, 1900).


Chapter 9.44       LOITERING

Sections:

9.44.010  Unlawful.

9.44.020  Wandering with no means of support.

9.44.030  Obedience to peace officer.


9.44.010  Unlawful.

It is unlawful to camp, lodge or tarry overnight in any vacant lot, or in any place where hay or straw is stored, or in any building, without the permission of the owner or occupant of the premises first being obtained. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 19, 1900).


9.44.020  Wandering with no means of support.

It is unlawful for any person not having any visible means of support to wander about the streets, or loiter around the street corners, or to be in or about saloons, or on the Plaza or Mountain Cemetery. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 19, 1900).


9.44.030  Obedience to peace officer.

It is unlawful to fail, neglect or refuse to disperse or move on, on any street or sidewalk, if directed so to do by a peace officer. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 35, 1900).


Chapter 9.48       OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH FREE PASSAGE

Sections:

9.48.020  Unlawful.

9.48.030  Lying or sitting.

9.48.040  Churches, schools and places of business.

9.48.050  Exceptions as to encroachment permits.

9.48.060  Violations declared misdemeanor – Each day separate offense.


9.48.020  Unlawful.

No person shall stand in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public way open for vehicular or pedestrian travel, or shall otherwise occupy any portion thereof, in such manner as to molest or unreasonably annoy any other person or persons in the vicinity, or so as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free passage of vehicles or persons in public places and places open for the free passage of the public, including the public areas of business buildings, shopping centers and commercial vehicular parking lots. (Ord. 86-8 § 6, 1986; Ord. 408 § 1, 1969).


9.48.030  Lying or sitting.

No person shall sit or lie in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public way in such manner to unreasonably prevent, delay, hinder, obstruct, or interfere with the free passage of any other persons. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons sitting on the curb portion of any sidewalk or street while attending or viewing any lawfully conducted parade; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to persons sitting upon benches or other seating facilities lawfully provided for such purpose. (Ord. 408 § 3, 1969).


9.48.040  Churches, schools and places of business.

No person shall block, impede or obstruct any entrance, exit or approach to any hall, church, school or other public place or to any place of business in such manner to unreasonably prevent, hinder, delay, obstruct or interfere with the free passage of any other person who is entering, occupying or leaving any of the aforesaid places, or who is performing any service, or labor, or who is seeking or obtaining employment, or who is purchasing, selling, using, delivering, transporting, or receiving any goods, wares, merchandise, services, entertainment, accommodation, or articles, or who is attempting or seeking to do any of the foregoing; provided, that nothing contained herein shall apply to lawful picketing. (Ord. 408 § 4, 1969).


9.48.050  Exceptions as to encroachment permits.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to encroachments under permits issued pursuant to ordinances of this city. (Ord. 408 § 5, 1969).


9.48.060  Violations declared misdemeanor – Each day separate offense.

Every violation of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor. Any person, whether principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, nor less than $25.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail of the county of Sonoma for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 408 § 6, 1969).


Chapter 9.52       DISTURBING THE PEACE

Sections:

9.52.010  Offenses designated.

9.52.020  Repealed.


9.52.010  Offenses designated.

It is unlawful on any street, or in any public place:

A.  To be guilty of tumultuous or offensive conduct;

B.  To fight, quarrel or challenge to fight;

C.  To make an indecent exposure of the person. (Ord. 483 § 2(bb, cc), 1974; Ord. 68 Art. XV § 19, 1900).


9.52.020  Frightening horses prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 97-6. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 34, 1900).


Chapter 9.56 NOISE

Sections:

9.56.010    Declaration of policy.

9.56.020    Definitions.

9.56.030    Loud or unusual noises prohibited.

9.56.040    General noise limits.

9.56.050    Standard exceptions to general noise limits.

9.56.060    Exceptions allowed with permit.

9.56.070    Exemptions.

9.56.080    Other limitations.

9.56.090    Additional restrictions.

9.56.095    Signage requirements for landscape contractor vehicles.

9.56.100    Violations, penalties.


9.56.010 Declaration of policy.

It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city of Sonoma, in the exercise of its police power, to protect the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Sonoma from excessive, unnecessary and unreasonable noises from any and all sources in the community. It is the intention of the city council to control the adverse effect of such noise sources on the citizens by prescribing standards prohibiting detrimental levels of noise and by providing a remedy for violations. The provisions of this chapter and the remedies contained in this code shall be cumulative and are not intended to replace any otherwise available remedies for public or private nuisances, nor any other civil or criminal remedies otherwise available. In addition, the regulations contained herein are not intended to substitute for any noise analysis conducted as a part of the city’s environmental review process for discretionary permit approvals, nor is it intended to limit more strict noise control requirements for discretionary permit approvals when stricter measures are found to be necessary in order to maintain noise levels that are not detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:

A. “‘A’-weighted sound level (dBA)” means a decibel scale that approximates the way the human ear responds to various acoustic frequencies. 

B. “Commercial property” means property zoned as “Commercial,” “Gateway Commercial,” or “Winery,” as provided in the city of Sonoma development code.

C. “Constant” noise means a continuous noise produced where there is no noticeable change in the level of the noise source. Examples would include such noises as those associated with air conditioners and pool equipment.

D. “Daytime” for purposes of this chapter means the period between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 

E. “Decibel” means the measurement unit used for the level of sound/noise.

F. “Holidays, city-designated” mean those holidays designated as such by the city of Sonoma, including: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day. 

G. “Intermittent” noise means repetitive noises where there is a distinction between the onset and decay of the sound. Examples would include hammering and dog barking.

H. “Leaf blower” means a machine, powered by a gasoline engine or electric motor, used to blow, displace, or vacuum leaves, dirt, and debris. 

I. “Mixed use property” means property zoned as “Mixed Use” as provided in the city of Sonoma development code.

J. “Multifamily residential structure” means any dwelling structure where two or more dwellings are separated by a common wall, floor, or ceiling, including but not limited to apartments, condominiums and townhouses.

K. “Nighttime” for purposes of this chapter means the period between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.

L. “Noise level” means the maximum constant or intermittent sound level produced by a source or group of sources as measured with a sound level meter using fast response and “A”-weighting. In order to measure a noise level, the controls of the sound level meter should be arranged to the setting appropriate to the type of noise being measured. 

M. “Sound level meter” means a device for measuring sound level in decibel units within the performance specifications in the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4, “Specification for Sound Level Meters.”

N. “Property plane” means a vertical plane including the property line that determines the property boundaries in space.

O. “Public property” means property zoned as “Public” or as “Park” as provided in the city of Sonoma development code, or any public street, right-of-way, or easement.

P. “Residential power equipment” means any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, leaf blower, lawnmower, hedge trimmer, edger, or any other similar tool or device, when used in or on any residential property. 

Q. “Residential property” means property zoned for residential use as provided in the city of Sonoma development code, or properties zoned for mixed use or as where the principal use is residential. (Ord. 01-2016 § 3, 2016; Ord. 02-2011 §§ 1(A), (B), 2011; Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.030 Loud or unusual noises prohibited.

No person shall maintain, emit or make, or cause, suffer or permit to be maintained, emitted or made, any noise or sound produced by human, animal, mechanical or other means, which by reason of its raucous or nerve-wracking nature shall disturb the peace or comfort or be injurious to the health of any person or persons; and such a noise or sound may be deemed in violation of this section regardless of whether it is found to be within the noise limits established elsewhere in this chapter for the location or type of noise or sound. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.040 General noise limits.

Subject to the exceptions and exemptions set forth in SMC 9.56.050 and 9.56.060, the general noise limits set forth in this section shall apply. A summary of the general noise limits set forth in this section is set forth in Table 1. Where two or more noise limits may apply, the more restrictive noise limit shall govern. For purposes of determining sound levels from any source of sound, a sound level measurement shall be made at any point on any receiving private or public property. Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter (Type 1 or 2) set to A-weighting, and “fast” response for intermittent sound. Slow or fast response may be used for constant noise sources. For intermittent sound, the one-second rms maximum level (Lmax) shall be used. For constant sound, the average level (Leq) shall be used.

A. Residential Property Noise Limits.

1. No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any machine, animal or device, or by any other means, a noise level greater than the following, when measured on any residential property:

	a. Daytime:	60 dBA intermittent

	 	50 dBA constant

	b. Nighttime: 	50 dBA intermittent

	 	40 dBA constant

2. No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any machine, animal, or device, or by any other means, a noise level greater than the following, when measured on any mixed use property: 

	a. Daytime:	65 dBA intermittent

	 	55 dBA constant

	b. Nighttime: 	55 dBA intermittent

	 	45 dBA constant

B. Commercial Property Noise Limits. No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any machine, animal, or device, or by any other means, a noise level greater than 65 dBA intermittent or 55 dBA constant, when measured on any commercial property, unless specifically authorized by a use permit.

C. Public Property Noise Limits. No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any machine, animal or device, or by any other means, a noise level, when measured on any public property, that is greater than the most restrictive noise standard applicable under this chapter to any private property adjoining the receiving public property.

 

Table 1 – General Noise Limits 

	Property Type or Zone	Daytime Limits	Nighttime Limits

	Residential	60 dBA Intermittent

50 dBA Intermittent	50 dBA Constant

40 dBA Constant

	Commercial/Mixed Use	65 dBA Intermittent

55 dBA Constant	65 dBA Intermittent

55 dBA Constant

	Public Property	Most restrictive noise limit applicable to adjoining private property

(Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.050 Standard exceptions to general noise limits.

The following standard exceptions to the provisions of SMC 9.56.040 shall be allowed as of right, to the extent and during the hours specified. A summary of the standard exceptions provided in this section is set forth in Table 2. 

A. Construction. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B) of this section, or by the planning commission or city council as part of the development review for the project, on any construction project on property within the city, construction, alteration, demolition, maintenance of construction equipment, deliveries of materials or equipment, or repair activities otherwise allowed under applicable law shall be allowed as follows: (1) between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, (2) between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and (3) between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays and holidays; however, the noise level at any point outside of the property plane of the project shall not exceed 90 dBA. 

For any construction project involving the construction of two or more new residences within the city, or when required by the planning commission or city council as part of their development review for the property, the property owner or occupant shall post a sign at all entrances to the construction site upon commencement of construction for the purpose of informing all contractors and subcontractors, their employees, agents, materialmen and all other persons at the construction site of the basic requirements of this chapter.

1. Said sign(s) shall be posted in a conspicuous place visible from the public right-of-way near the entrance to the job site, at least five feet above ground level, and shall be of a white background, with legible black lettering, which lettering shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in height.

2. Said sign shall read as follows (or as consistent with other hours approved by the planning commission or city council):

CONSTRUCTION HOURS

(includes any and all deliveries)

	MONDAY – FRIDAY	8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

	SATURDAY	9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

	SUNDAY/CITY-DESIGNATED HOLIDAYS	10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

B. Residential Power Equipment. The operation of residential power equipment other than leaf blowers shall be allowed as follows: (1) between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, (2) between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and (3) between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays and holidays. The decibel level generated by residential power equipment, including leaf blowers, shall not exceed 70 dBA measured from 50 feet of the noise source.

C. Leaf Blowers. The operation of leaf blowers shall be governed by Chapter 9.60 SMC.

D. Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting or entertainment events, provided such events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the city relative to the staging of such events.

E. Within the Winery zoning district, the operation of mechanical devices, apparatus, equipment, and vehicles related to the annual grape crush, within the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.

F. The cleaning and maintenance of parking areas and sidewalks within the Commercial, Gateway Commercial and Mixed Use zones, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.

G. Training activities conducted by emergency services personnel between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.

 

Table 2 – Standard Exceptions to General Noise Limits 

	Type of Activity	Maximum Noise Level	Days/Hours Permitted

	Construction and operation of residential power equipment (except for leaf blowers)	70 dBA, as measured from 50 feet of the noise source	Monday – Friday: 8:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m.

Saturday: 9:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m.

Sunday, city-designated holidays: 10:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m.

	Leaf blowers	70 dBA, as measured from 50 feet of the noise source	In all areas of the city, gas-powered leaf blowers are prohibited.

In all areas of the city, electrically-powered leaf blowers are prohibited except from Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except on city-designated holidays.

	Outdoor events (with permit or license)	As restricted by permit	As restricted by permit

	Crush activities	N.A.	Monday – Sunday: 7:00 a.m. – 11:00 p.m.

	Maintenance and cleaning within Commercial and Mixed Use zones	N.A.	Monday – Friday: 7:00 a.m. – 11:00 p.m.

	Training activities conducted by emergency services personnel	N.A.	Monday – Friday: 7:00 a.m. – 11:00 p.m.

(Ord. 01-2016 §§ 2, 4, 2016; Ord. 02-2011 §§ 1(C) – (F), 2011; Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.060 Exceptions allowed with permit.

A. In addition to the standard exceptions permitted pursuant to SMC 9.56.050, the city planner or his designee may grant a permit allowing an exception from any or all provisions of this chapter where the applicant can show that a diligent investigation of available noise abatement techniques indicates that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would be impractical or unreasonable. Any such permit shall be issued with appropriate conditions to minimize the public detriment caused by the permitted exceptions. Any such permit shall be of such duration as approved by the city planner or his designee, up to a maximum period of three months, but shall be renewable upon a showing of good cause, and shall be conditioned by a schedule for compliance and details of methods thereof in appropriate cases. In the discretion of the city planner or his designee, an exception permit may be issued and reissued for successive short periods of time in order to allow monitoring of the adverse noise impacts of the excepted activity, and additional conditions may be imposed upon reissuance of the permit, if the city planner or his designee determines that such additional conditions are necessary to mitigate noise impacts from the excepted activity to a level he deems acceptable under all the circumstances. 

B. Any application for an exception permit under this section shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution of the city council.

C. Any person aggrieved with the decision of the city planner or his designee may appeal to the city council, by writing filed with the city clerk within 10 business days after the date of such decision, however, such appeal shall not stay the effective date of the permit. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.070 Exemptions.

The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A. Warning devices which are required by law to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community;

B. Emergency vehicle responses and all necessary equipment utilized for the purpose of responding to an emergency, or necessary to restore, preserve, protect or save lives or property from imminent danger of loss or harm;

C. Aviation, railroad, and public transit operations;

D. The operation of any municipal or public utility vehicles; 

E. Uses established through any applicable discretionary review process containing specific noise conditions of approval and/or mitigation measures;

F. Work on capital improvements or repairs and maintenance on public property by employees or contractors of the city; 

G. The maintenance of public parks and playing fields, including school grounds;

H. Vehicle noise subject to regulation under the California Vehicle Code;

I. Emergency repair work performed by, or at the request of, a property owner on his or her private property, where the delay required to obtain an exception permit under this chapter would result in substantial damage, personal injuries, or property loss to the owner; provided, that such emergency work shall be subject to such reasonable conditions as may be imposed by authorized city employees to mitigate the noise level of the activity;

J. Athletic and recreational events and other activities performed on public parks, property owned by the school district, and other properties zoned as “Public”;

K. Refuse collection conducted by the city’s franchised waste collection service. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.080 Other limitations.

A. Limitations on the Idling of Commercial Vehicles. When parked within 100 feet of a residential zoning district, a driver of a commercial vehicle shall not cause or allow an engine to idle for more than five consecutive minutes, except as necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo within a period not to exceed 30 minutes.

B. Public Rights-of-Way. The direction of any amplified, transmitted or recorded sound toward a public right-of-way from a business adjacent to such right-of-way is prohibited. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.090 Additional restrictions.

Additional restrictions on noise, including limits on hours of operation, noise-making activities, and maximum decibel levels, may be imposed by the planning commission or the city council through approval of a use permit or tentative map. Any such restrictions shall be fully enforceable as a provision of this chapter. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


9.56.095 Signage requirements for landscape contractor vehicles.

When in service, vehicles used for commercial landscape maintenance shall be identified as such by a sign affixed to the vehicle indicating the name and telephone number of the contracting service, with a minimum letter height of one inch. (Ord. 02-2011 § 1(G), 2011).


9.56.100 Violations, penalties.

Any violation of this chapter may be enforced either as an infraction or as a misdemeanor, or by any remedy available to the city under this code, or under state law. (Ord. 03-2006 § 2, 2006).


Chapter 9.60 LEAF BLOWERS

Sections:

9.60.010    Title.

9.60.015    Declaration of nuisance.

9.60.020    Definitions.

9.60.030    Use restricted.

9.60.040    Exemptions.

9.60.050    Violations, penalties.


9.60.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “city of Sonoma leaf blower ordinance” and may be so cited. (Ord. 01-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.60.015 Declaration of nuisance.

A violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and, among other remedies available to the city, may be abated as provided in this code. (Ord. 01-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.60.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the terms in this section shall have the following meaning:

A. “Holidays, city-designated” mean those holidays designated as such by the city of Sonoma, including: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day.

B. “Leaf blower” means a machine, powered by a gasoline engine or electric motor, used to blow, displace, or vacuum leaves, dirt, and/or debris.

1. “Electrically-powered leaf blower” means any leaf blower, leaf vacuum or other leaf gathering device powered by electric means, including but not limited to battery-powered leaf blowers and cordless rechargeable leaf blowers.

2. “Gas-powered leaf blower” means any leaf blower, leaf vacuum or other leaf-gathering device directly powered by an internal combustion or rotary engine using gasoline, alcohol or other liquid or gaseous fluid. Lawn mowers, lawn edgers and electrically-powered leaf blowers are not included in this definition. (Ord. 01-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.60.030 Use restricted.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision in the Sonoma Municipal Code to the contrary, in, on or upon any and all properties and areas within the city’s corporate boundaries:

1. It is unlawful for any property owner (including the city) or tenant or any employee, agent or contractor working for a property owner or tenant to operate or authorize the operation of a gas-powered leaf blower at any time for any purpose.

B. Notwithstanding any other provision in the Sonoma Municipal Code to the contrary, in, on or upon any and all properties and areas within the city’s corporate boundaries: 

1. It is unlawful for any property owner (including the city) or tenant or any employee, agent or contractor working for a property owner or tenant to operate or authorize the operation of any electrically-powered leaf blowers at any time for any purpose except as follows:

a. It shall be lawful to operate and/or authorize the operation of electrically-powered leaf blowers during the following days and hours: Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except on city-designated holidays.

2. The operation of leaf blowers shall comply with noise limits set by SMC 9.56.050.

C. No leaf blower shall be operated in a manner that directs dust and debris onto any neighboring parcel or public street. (Ord. 01-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.60.040 Exemptions. 

The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A. Emergency vehicles and all necessary equipment, including leaf blowers, utilized by emergency responders for the purpose of responding to an emergency, or necessary to restore, preserve, protect or save lives or property from imminent danger of loss or harm. (Ord. 01-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.60.050 Violations, penalties. 

A. Any violation of this chapter may be enforced either as an infraction or as a misdemeanor, or by any remedy available to the city under this code, or under state law. 

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary, for a first violation of SMC 9.60.030, the violator shall be provided a written cease and desist warning along with a copy of this chapter. 

1. Upon a second violation of SMC 9.60.030 at the same location or by the same person, should the city determine to enforce said section pursuant to Chapter 1.30 SMC, a fine or penalty shall be imposed equal to the amount set forth in the council resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 1.12.010(D) for a first violation. Upon a third violation of SMC 9.60.030 at the same location or by the same person, should the city determine to enforce said section pursuant to Chapter 1.30 SMC, a fine or penalty shall be imposed equal to the amount set forth in the council resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 1.12.010(D) for a second violation, and so on for each succeeding violation of SMC 9.60.030.

2. Upon a second violation of SMC 9.60.030 at the same location or by the same person, should the city determine to enforce said section pursuant to SMC 1.12.010(A), a fine shall be imposed equal to the amount set forth at SMC 1.12.010(A)(1). Upon a third violation of SMC 9.60.030 at the same location or by the same person within one year, should the city determine to enforce said section pursuant to SMC 1.12.010(A), a fine shall be imposed equal to the amount set forth in SMC 1.12.010(A)(2), and so on for each succeeding violation of SMC 9.60.030 within one year.

C. This chapter may be enforced by any city of Sonoma employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code or city ordinance. (Ord. 01-2016 § 1, 2016).


Chapter 9.68 PICKETING AND BESETTING

Sections:

9.68.010    Inducing others to quit employment.

9.68.020    Inducing others to refrain from patronizing.

9.68.030    Assembling to coerce others to quit employment.

9.68.040    Assembling to coerce others from patronizing.

9.68.050    Profane language prohibited.

9.68.060    Processions prohibited.

9.68.070    Penalty for violation.


9.68.010 Inducing others to quit employment.

It is unlawful for any person to watch, beset, or picket the premises of another where any person is employed, or any approach thereto, or any place where such employee lodges or resides, or any approach thereto, for the purpose of inducing any such employee, by compulsion, threats, coercion, intimidation, or by any act of violence, or by putting such employee in fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment. (Ord. 191 § 1, 1937).


9.68.020 Inducing others to refrain from patronizing.

It is unlawful for any person to watch, beset, or picket the premises of another, or any approach thereto, for the purpose of inducing others to refrain from entering such premises, or from patronizing, transacting business with or negotiating with the owner or occupant of such premises. (Ord. 191 § 2, 1937).


9.68.030 Assembling to coerce others to quit employment.

It is unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one or more persons, to assemble, congregate, or meet together in the vicinity of any premises where other persons are employees or upon the streets, approaches or places adjacent thereto for the purpose of inducing any such employee, by compulsion, threats, coercion, intimidation or by any act of violence, or by putting such employee in fear, to quit his or her employment therein or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment therein. (Ord. 191 § 3, 1937).


9.68.040 Assembling to coerce others from patronizing.

It is unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one or more persons, to assemble, congregate, or meet together in the vicinity of the premises of another, or upon the streets, approaches, or places adjacent thereto, for the purpose of inducing others to refrain from entering such premises or from patronizing, transacting business with, or negotiating with the owner or occupant of such premises. (Ord. 191 § 4, 1937).


9.68.050 Profane language prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to utter to, or within the hearing of another, any derogatory, profane, indecent, opprobrious epithets or language, or to use any gestures, or to make demonstrations of any kind for the purpose of inducing any person, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence, or fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment, or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with, or transacting business with any other person. (Ord. 191 § 5, 1937).


9.68.060 Processions prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to form, or to aid in forming, or to ride in any parade or procession of two or more motor vehicles formed or moving along any public street or highway for the purpose of inducing any person by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, or fear, from entering into, or carrying on his employment, upon or about any place of business, packing shed, dwelling, or any other premises or place of employment. (Ord. 191 § 6, 1937).


9.68.070 Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 191 § 8, 1937).


Chapter 9.69       LAUNCHING AND LANDING AIRCRAFT AT PLACES OTHER THAN AIRPORTS

Sections:

9.69.010  Declared hazard.

9.69.020  Prohibited – Exception.

9.69.030  Parachute landings.

9.69.040  Violation – Penalty.


9.69.010  Declared hazard.

The city council finds that the launching, take-off or landing of any airplane, helicopter, balloon, rocket, or other machine or device designed for propulsion into or navigation within air space which is subject to federal law or regulation pertaining to air navigation, in any place within the city limits not zoned or specifically set apart for use as an airport or launching or landing pad under the zoning ordinance or other governmental regulations for the control and safety of such place, is a hazard to the safety of people living, working and traveling within the city limits and an annoyance to persons who live in and otherwise occupy property within the city. This chapter does not extend to any toy, model aircraft, toy balloon, or other device not designed for carrying persons or cargo into air space. (Ord. 81-2 § 1(a), 1981).


9.69.020  Prohibited – Exception.

Except for emergency landings reasonably calculated to preserve life or property in the case of airborne craft or instrumentalities in distress situations, no person shall land an airplane, helicopter, balloon or any other craft or instrumentality described in SMC 9.69.010 at any place within the limits of the city not specifically designed by governmental authority as an airport, heliport, launching or landing pad, or similar place specifically designed for the activity in question. (Ord. 81-2 § 1(b), 1981).


9.69.030  Parachute landings.

No person shall intentionally land within the city limits by parachute, except in emergency in the escape from disabled or distressed aircraft, or except in a place specifically designated for such activity, or pursuant to special permit issued under the authority of law. (Ord. 81-2 § 1(c), 1981).


9.69.040  Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter intentionally is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in SMC 1.12.010. (Ord. 81-2 § 1(d), 1981).


Chapter 9.70       GRAFFITI

Sections:

9.70.010  Purpose.

9.70.020  Graffiti definition.

9.70.030  Graffiti prohibition.

9.70.040  Notice.

9.70.050  Service of notice.

9.70.060  Reimbursement of cost of labor and material.

9.70.070  Removal by city.

9.70.080  Liability for city’s cost of abatement.

9.70.090  Abatement of graffiti as a public nuisance.


9.70.010  Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and private property and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the city. The increase of graffiti on both public and private buildings, structures, and places is creating a condition of blight within the city, which results in a deterioration of property and business values for adjacent and surrounding properties all to the detriment of the city. The city council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance which must be abated so as to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.020  Graffiti definition.

For the purpose of this chapter, "graffiti" shall mean the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, dye, or other similar indelible substances or adhesive materials on public and/or private buildings, structures and places. Structures include but are not limited to public utility cabinets, vaults, poles, fences, walls and trees. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.030  Graffiti prohibition.

A.  No person shall place graffiti upon any publicly or privately owned permanent or mobile structure located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city. Violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor.

B.  No person owning or otherwise in control of any real or personal property within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent or mobile structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property for a period in excess of that described in this chapter for notice and removal of graffiti. Violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.040  Notice.

Whenever the chief of police or his or her designee determines that graffiti exists on any permanent structure in the city, which graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property, he or she shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have five days after the receipt of the notice to remove the graffiti, or the graffiti will be subject to abatement by the city. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.050  Service of notice.

The notice to abate graffiti shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner’s name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the county of Sonoma. In addition, if there is a commercial tenant using the premises, the notice shall also be served on said tenant. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the following manners:

A.  By personal service on the owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of the property.

B.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. In addition, where the property is occupied, a copy of the notice shall be delivered to the occupant. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.060  Reimbursement of cost of labor and material.

In the event the property owner complies with the notice by the designated date or such continued date, as the chief of police or his or her designated representative approves, then the city shall reimburse the property owner his, her, or its cost of labor and materials up to a maximum amount established by resolution for each incident of graffiti on the property if such reimbursement is requested. Receipts for labor and materials used must accompany the claim request. The city shall not reimburse the property owner where the chief of police finds that the owner has persuaded, allowed, or encouraged the graffiti problem. Evidence thereof shall include such things as: the owner has permitted the property to remain unoccupied, has allowed uses conducive to the graffiti problem, or has failed to take reasonable security measures. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.070  Removal by city.

Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice to abate by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the chief of police or his or her designated representative approves, the chief of police is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any coating used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.080  Liability for city’s cost of abatement.

Where the graffiti has been abated by the city due to the refusal or failure of the owner to do so, the owner shall reimburse the city for the actual cost of the removal of the graffiti. The costs to be reimbursed include labor, material, preparation of specifications and contracts, and inspection. The cost of such abatement as determined by the city council may become a special assessment and lien against the property, which assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


9.70.090  Abatement of graffiti as a public nuisance.

As an alternate to summary abatement, the city may cause the graffiti to be abated pursuant to Chapter 14.30 SMC relating to abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 04-2005 § 1, 2005).


Chapter 9.72 INJURY TO TREES AND PLANTS

(Repealed by Ord. 97-6)


Chapter 9.80 MOBILEHOME PARK SPACE RENT PROTECTION*

Sections:

9.80.010    Findings and purpose.

9.80.020    Definitions.

9.80.030    Applicability of chapter.

9.80.035    Exemptions from this chapter.

9.80.040    Base rent.

9.80.045    Automatic annual rental increases.

9.80.050    Allowable rent following the expiration of an exempt lease.

9.80.060    Full and partial vacancy decontrol – Establishment of new base rent.

9.80.070    Fair return standard.

9.80.075    Legal expenses and settlement proposals.

9.80.080    Procedures for review of fair return petitions.

9.80.090    Preapproved temporary rental increases for specified capital improvements.

9.80.100    Rent reductions for service reductions.

9.80.110    Waivers.

9.80.120    Information to be supplied by the park owner to tenant-homeowners and prospective tenant-homeowner.

9.80.125    Information to be provided by the city to the public.

9.80.130    Designated tenant-homeowners’ representatives.

9.80.140    Rights of prospective tenant-homeowners.

9.80.150    Annual registration and other notices required from owner.

9.80.160    Retaliation prohibited.

9.80.170    Excessive rents or demands therefor.

9.80.175    Permissible reasons for terminating or refusing to renew a tenancy.

9.80.180    Refusal of tenant to pay illegal rent.

9.80.190    Remedies.

9.80.200    Administration fees.

9.80.210    Late payment – Fee.

9.80.220    City manager authorized to promulgate rules and regulations.

Appendix A

*Prior legislation: Ords. 92-19 and 92-23.


9.80.010 Findings and purpose.

The city council has recognized and finds that:

A. The state of California has recognized, by the adoption of special legislation regulating tenancies of mobilehome owners in mobilehome parks, that there is a significant distinction between tenants of mobilehome parks and other dwelling units, and the council likewise has recognized that tenants of mobilehome parks, unlike apartment tenants or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of having made a substantial investment in a residence, the space for which is rented or leased as distinguished from owned. The physical removal and relocation of a mobilehome from a rented or leased space within a mobilehome park can be accomplished only at substantial cost and inconvenience with the concurrent ability to find another location, and, in many instances, the removal requires a separation of the mobilehome unit from appurtenances which have been made permanent, thus creating severe damage and depreciation in value to the mobilehome. As a result of the absence of vacant spaces and park restrictions on accepting mobilehomes that are not new, it is virtually impossible for mobilehome owners to move their mobilehomes from one park to another park within the city.

B. The city council finds and declares that the existing mobilehome parks in the city are the only lands designated for mobilehome parks by the 1985-2005 Sonoma General Plan and no new sites for mobilehome parks are anticipated; that the average value of a mobilehome ($47,527) is less than 20 percent of the average value of a home in Sonoma, making mobilehomes an important source of affordable housing for the community; that 30 percent of the households below the poverty level in the city are aged 65 and over; that the median age of mobilehome park residents is 76 years; that 54 percent of mobilehome residents are single-person households, most (64 percent) headed by females; and that based on five years of experience in administering a very low-income senior rental development and reviewing the applications of prospective tenants, the incomes of the predominant residents of mobilehomes (i.e., senior citizens) are likely to fall into the very low (50 percent or less of the county median income) category (a gross annual income of $15,350 or less) as determined by the U.S. Government Department of Housing and Urban Development.

C. Studies and hearings have shown that there is presently within the city and surrounding areas a shortage of spaces for the location of mobilehomes, resulting in a low vacancy rate. Space rent increases at the time of sale or other transfer of a mobilehome within a park have been shown to be as great as a 50 percent increase over the pre-transfer rent. In some mobilehome parks, rent increases in the past decade have been substantially in excess of the increases in the Consumer Price Index.

D. Rapidly rising and large incremental increases in space rent have resulted in an atypical market depression in the resale value of mobilehomes within the city.

E. Because of the shortage and potential for rapidly rising rates, regulation is necessary to assure that economic hardship to a substantial number of mobilehome park tenants in the city, many of whom are senior citizens on low fixed incomes, does not occur.

F. Pursuant to studies and hearings conducted by the city council and city staff, the city council has determined it necessary and in the public interest to establish a mechanism to assist in the resolution of disputes that may arise from time to time between tenants and management of mobilehome parks regarding the rates charged for the rental or lease of space.

G. Therefore, the city council does accordingly find and declare that it is necessary to establish a means to provide protection to mobilehome park tenants from unreasonable rent increases, while at the same time recognizing the need of mobilehome park management to receive a fair return and to receive rent increases sufficient to cover increased cost of repairs, maintenance, service, insurance, upkeep, and other amenities.

H. The city council further finds and declares that the adoption of this chapter will not have a significant, substantial or adverse effect on the physical environment of the community because enactment of this chapter involves no deviation from the general plan and no change in the present use of any property within the city. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998).


9.80.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall be defined as follows:

A. “Capital improvement” means the installation of new improvements and facilities and the replacement of existing improvements and facilities which consist of more than ordinary maintenance and/or repairs. There are two distinct types of capital improvements: necessary capital improvements and upgrade capital improvements. The city council or the city manager shall from time to time adopt regulations establishing criteria to be used to differentiate between capital improvements and ordinary maintenance and/or repairs.

1. Necessary Capital Improvement. A necessary capital improvement shall be a capital improvement required to maintain the common facilities and areas of the park in a decent, safe and sanitary condition or maintain the existing level of park amenities and services.

2. Upgrade Capital Improvement. An upgrade capital improvement is an expenditure for capital improvements to add facilities or increase amenities or services.

B. “City manager” shall include the city manager or a person designated by the city manager to perform the functions required by this chapter.

C. “Consumer Price Index” and “CPI” mean the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose area published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

D. “In-place transfer” means the transfer of the ownership of a mobilehome with the mobilehome remaining on the mobilehome space following the transfer.

E. “Landlord” means a mobilehome park owner, mobilehome owner, lessor or sublessor who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or portion thereof, and the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.

F. “Mobilehome” means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Section 36790 of the Vehicle Code as defined or the definition as amended from time to time in Section 798 of the California Civil Code.

G. “Mobilehome park” and “park” mean any area of land within the city where five or more mobilehome spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation.

H. “Mobilehome space” means the site within a mobilehome park intended, designed or used for the location or accommodation of a mobilehome and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction therewith.

I. “Owner” means the owner or operator of a mobilehome park or an agent or representative authorized to act on said owner’s or operator’s behalf in connection with the maintenance or operation of such park. “Owner” and “owner of a mobilehome park” shall also mean any owner, lessor or sublessor of a mobilehome park in the city who receives or is entitled to receive rents for the use or occupancy of any mobilehome space thereof, and the representative, agent or successor of such owner, lessor or sublessor, and who reports to the Internal Revenue Service any income received or loss of income resulting from such ownership or claims any expenses, credits or deductions because of such ownership.

J. “Rehabilitation work” means any renovation or repair work completed on or in a mobilehome park which was performed in order to comply with the direction or order of a public agency, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake, or other casualty.

K. “Rent” means any consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity, demanded or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use or occupancy, including housing services, of a rental unit or in connection with the assignment of a lease or in connection with subleasing of the rental unit.

“Rent” shall not include:

1. Utility charges for charges for sub-metered gas and electricity.

2. Charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer service, and/or other services which are either provided and charged to mobilehome residents solely on a cost pass-through basis and/or are regulated by state or local law.

3. Any amount paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome unit (as opposed to amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome space).

4. Charges for laundry services.

5. Storage charges.

L. “Rent increase” means any rent demanded of or paid by a tenant-homeowner or tenant in excess of rent paid for the rental unit immediately prior to such demand or payment. Rent increase includes any reduction in the services provided to a tenant or transfer or assignment of the obligation to pay the cost of the service from the landlord to a third party without a corresponding reduction in the moneys demanded for or paid as rent.

M. “Rent stabilization administration fee” means the fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council in accordance with the provisions of Article II of this chapter.

N. “Rental agreement” means a written agreement between a landlord and a tenant-homeowner or mobilehome tenant for the use and occupancy of a rental unit to the exclusion of others.

O. “Rental unit” means a mobilehome or mobilehome space, located in a mobilehome park in the city of Sonoma, which is offered or available for rent. Rental unit includes the land, with or without a mobilehome, and appurtenant buildings thereto and all housing services, privileges and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy of the mobilehome or mobilehome space.

P. “Service reduction” means a decrease or diminution in the basic service level provided by the park occurring at any time since January 1, 1992, including but not limited to services the park owner is required to provide pursuant to:

1. California Civil Code Sections 1941.1 and 1941.2.

2. The Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code Section 798 et seq.

3. The Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 18200 et seq.

4. The landlord’s implied warranty of habitability.

5. An express or implied agreement between the landlord and the resident.

Q. “Tenancy” means the right of a tenant to use or occupy a mobilehome park space.

R. “Tenant” or “tenant-homeowner” means a person who has a tenancy in a mobilehome park or who has purchased or is in the process of purchasing or otherwise acquiring a mobilehome that will remain at a particular mobilehome park. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.030 Applicability of chapter.

This chapter shall be applicable to all mobilehome park spaces within the city of Sonoma except as provided in SMC 9.80.035. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.035 Exemptions from this chapter.

A. Exemptions Provided by State Law. As of May 2016, the following exemptions from local rent regulations are provided by state law:

1. Spaces that are subject to a lease which exempts that space from rent regulation pursuant to the California Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code Section 798 et seq.

2. New mobilehome park spaces which are exempted pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.45.

3. Spaces which are not the principal residence of the tenant-homeowner, which are exempt pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.21.

The purpose of this subsection is to provide information about exemptions based on state law which preempts local law, rather than to provide any basis for an exemption based on this section.

B. Units Owned or Operated by Government Agencies. This chapter shall not apply to mobilehomes or mobilehome parks owned or operated by any governmental agency or any rental unit whose rent is subsidized pursuant to a public program that limits the rent that can be charged for the mobilehome.

C. Mobilehome Parks with Less Than Five Spaces. This chapter shall not be applicable to spaces in mobilehome parks with less than five spaces. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.040 Base rent.

Except as provided in this chapter, an owner shall not demand, accept, or retain rent for a mobilehome space exceeding the rent in effect for said space on January 1, 1992. If a previously rented mobilehome space was not rented on January 1, 1992, the owner shall not demand, accept, or retain rent for said space exceeding the rent in effect during the last month the space was rented prior to January 1, 1992. If a mobilehome space is rented for the first time after January 1, 1992, the owner shall not demand, accept, or retain rent for said spaces exceeding the rent first charged for the space. Unless provided otherwise, the “base year” means the calendar year 1992. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998).


9.80.045 Automatic annual rental increases.

A. Once every 12 months, an owner shall be permitted an automatic rental increase for each space in a percentage amount equal to 80 percent of the percent change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) between the CPI index in effect in the month the increase is calculated and that published 12 months prior, so that if the CPI in effect at the time of the calculation is the December index, the calculation will be based on the current December index and that published in the prior December; in no instance shall the rental increase permitted pursuant to this section result in a rental increase of greater than five percent per 12-month period over that in effect prior to the rental increase permitted pursuant to this section.

B. Notice of Allowable Annual Rent Increase.

1. Notice by City Manager. The allowable annual rent increase shall be annually calculated by the city manager and posted by February 15th of each year in City Hall and on the city’s website, and on a notice board in each mobilehome park and shall be mailed to each park owner and to the mobilehome owner representative in each park.

2. Notice in Mobilehome Parks. A copy of the clerk’s notice shall be posted in a prominent place by each park owner in each mobilehome park within three work days after it is received by the park owner.

C. No Decrease if CPI Decreases. In the event that the CPI decreases, no rent decrease shall be required pursuant to this section. In the event that the CPI decreases by more than two percent in any year, said decrease shall be subtracted from the following annual increase(s) allowable pursuant to this section; provided, however, that in the event the following annual increase is less than two percent, no rent decrease shall be required.

D. Banking of Allowable Annual Increases. Increases authorized pursuant to this section may be implemented by the landlord at any future time, subject to the precondition that by January 30th of each year the park owner notify the mobilehome owner of each increase allowed pursuant to this section which has not been implemented and notification that the banked increase may be added to the rent at a future date.

E. Compliance with State Law. Rent increases permitted pursuant to this section shall not be effective and shall not be demanded, accepted, or retained until the landlord has given the notice required by state law. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998).


9.80.050 Allowable rent following the expiration of an exempt lease.

In the event a mobilehome space was previously exempt under a lease pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17 but that lease has expired or expires, the base space rent, for purposes of calculating the annual adjustment pursuant to SMC 9.80.045, shall be the rent in effect under the lease as of the date of expiration of the lease; provided, that mobilehome space rents can be verified by information required on, and/or documentation submitted with, the annual registration application. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.060 Full and partial vacancy decontrol – Establishment of new base rent.

A. A mobilehome park owner shall be permitted to charge a new base rent for a mobilehome space whenever an in-place transfer or lawful space vacancy occurs.

B. For purposes of this chapter, a lawful space vacancy is defined as follows:

1. A vacancy occurring because of the termination of the tenancy of the affected mobilehome tenant in accordance with the Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code Sections 798.55 through 798.60, as amended, excepting Section 798.59; or

2. A vacancy of the mobilehome space arising from the voluntary removal of a mobilehome from the mobilehome space by the affected mobilehome tenant. A removal of the mobilehome from the space for the purpose of performing rehabilitation or capital improvements to the space or for the purpose of upgrading the mobilehome shall not constitute a voluntary removal of the mobilehome.

C. For purposes of this chapter, an in-place transfer includes the situation where a mobilehome space occupancy changes as a result of the voluntary sale of the mobilehome and the voluntary termination of the mobilehome tenancy by the seller of the mobilehome.

D. When a new base rent is established following the vacancy of a mobilehome space pursuant to this section, the park owner shall give written notice to the new affected mobilehome tenant of the 12-month anniversary date for rental increases allowed in this section, and shall give written notice to such affected tenant that the space rent may be subject to stabilized rent increases pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

E. No rental increase made pursuant to this section resulting from an in-place transfer shall be greater than five percent of the rent in effect prior to the increase unless the resulting rent is less than $350.00 per month, in which case the rent may be increased to $350.00 per month, except that if the monthly rent in effect prior to vacancy is less than $300.00, the maximum increase in rent shall be $50.00 per month. No more than one rental increase per space shall be made under this section in any 12-month period. The $350.00 minimum rent established in this section shall be adjusted annually on the anniversary date of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which change shall equal a percentage equal to 80 percent of the change in the CPI between the date of the prior change in the minimum rent (or the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter as the case may be) and the date of the annual adjustment. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998. Formerly 9.80.070).


9.80.070 Fair return standard.

A. Presumption of Fair Base Year Net Operating Income. It shall be presumed that the net operating income received by the landlord in the base year provided the park owner with a fair return.

B. Fair Return. A park owner has the right to obtain a rental increase to maintain net operating income (“MNOI”) equal to the base year net operating income adjusted by 100 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI since the base year. It shall be presumed this standard provides a fair return. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city manager or hearing officer from granting an increase that is necessary in order to meet constitutional fair return requirements. The base year CPI shall be the annual average CPI for 1992. The current year CPI shall be the annual average CPI for the calendar year which is used as the current year in the petition described in SMC 9.80.080.

C. Current Year. The current year shall be the calendar year that precedes the year in which the said petition is filed.

D. Adjustment of Base Year Net Operating Income. The park owner or tenant-homeowners may make an application to rebut the presumption that the base year net operating income provided the owner with a fair return and the city manager may approve said application if s/he is able to make one of the following findings in subsection (D)(1) or (2) of this section, based upon substantial evidence in the record:

1. Exceptional Expenses in the Base Year. The park owner’s operating expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating operating expenses so the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the park over a reasonable period of time. The following factors shall be considered in making such a finding:

a. Extraordinary amounts were expended for necessary maintenance and repairs.

b. Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of services provided.

c. Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the application of prudent business practices.

2. Exceptional Circumstances in the Base Year. The gross income during the base year was disproportionately low due to exceptional circumstances. The following factors shall be considered in making such a finding:

a. If the gross income during the base year was lower than it might have been because some tenants were charged reduced rent.

b. If the gross income during the base year was significantly lower than normal because of the destruction of the park and/or temporary eviction for construction or repairs.

c. The pattern of rent increases in the years prior to the base year and whether those increases reflected increases in the CPI.

d. Base period rents were disproportionately low in comparison to the base period rents of other comparable parks in the city.

e. Other exceptional circumstances, excluding any comparisons of base period rents to rents of other comparable parks located outside of the city or to market rents which are determined by comparisons of rents from comparable parks located outside of the city.

E. Calculation of Net Operating Income.

1. Net Operating Income. Net operating income shall be calculated by subtracting operating expenses from gross rental income.

2. Gross Rental Income.

a. Gross rental income shall include:

i. Gross rents calculated as gross rental income at 100 percent occupancy, adjusted for uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent such vacancies or bad debt are beyond the control of the landlord. Uncollected space rents in excess of three percent of gross space rent shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise and shall not be included in computing gross income.

ii. All other income or consideration received or receivable in connection with the use or occupancy of the rental unit, except as provided in subsection (E)(2)(b) of this section.

b. Gross rental income shall not include:

i. Utility charges for submetered gas and electricity.

ii. Charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer service, and/or other services which are either provided and charged to tenants solely on a cost pass-through basis and/or are regulated by state or local law.

iii. Any amount paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome unit (as opposed to amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome space).

iv. Charges for laundry services.

v. Storage charges.

3. Operating Expenses.

a. Included in Operating Expenses. Operating expenses shall include the following:

i. Reasonable costs of operation and maintenance.

ii. Management Expenses. It shall be presumed that management expenses have increased by the percentage increase in rents or the CPI, whichever is greater, between the base year and the current year unless the level of management services has either increased or decreased significantly between the base year and the current year.

iii. Utility Costs. Utility costs except where the consideration of the income associated with the provision of the utility service is regulated by state law and consideration of the costs associated with the provision of the utility service is preempted by state law.

iv. Real Property Taxes. Property taxes are an allowable expense, subject to the limitation that property taxes attributable to an assessment in a year other than the base year or current year shall not been considered in calculating base year and/or current year operating expenses.

v. License and Registration Fees. License and registration fees required by law to the extent these expenses are not otherwise paid or reimbursed by tenants.

vi. Landlord-Performed Labor. Landlord-performed labor compensated at reasonable hourly rates.

(A) No landlord-performed labor shall be included as an operating expense unless the landlord submits documentation showing the date, time, and nature of the work performed.

(B) There shall be a maximum allowed under this subsection of five percent of gross income unless the landlord shows greater services were performed for the benefit of the tenants.

vii. Legal Expenses. Subject to SMC 9.80.075, reasonable attorneys’ fees, expert witness’s fees, expert’s fees (including those paid to the city pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(C)(7)), and other costs (including fees paid to the city pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(C)(2)) (collectively, “legal expenses”) incurred in connection with successful good faith (A) attempts to recover rents owing, (B) pursuit of rights under or in relationship to this chapter and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, including legal expenses incurred in the course of pursuing successful fair return petitions and (C) unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable law, and legal expenses necessarily incurred in dealings with respect to the normal operation of the park, to the extent such expenses are not recovered from adverse or other parties. In addition, in the event that the landlord successfully prosecutes a fair return petition and in connection therewith is awarded reasonable legal expenses, those expenses shall be separated out from any MNOI rent increase award and recovered from and invoiced to the tenants as a separate, limited time period pass-through. These legal expenses shall be amortized and recovered in equal monthly payments over a five-year period, unless the city manager or hearing officer concludes that a different period is more reasonable, and the pass-through payment of these legal expenses by the tenants shall terminate after the full payment of these legal expenses with interest has been recovered by the park owner at the end of the amortization period.

viii. Interest Allowance for Expenses That Are Amortized. An interest allowance shall be allowed on the cost of permitted, amortized operating expenses, including but not limited to the legal expenses pass-throughs provided for in subsection (E)(3)(a)(vii) of this section; the allowance shall be the interest rate on the cost of the amortized expense equal to the “average rate” for 30-year fixed rate home mortgages plus two percent. The “average rate” shall be the rate Freddie Mac last published in its weekly Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS) as of the date of the initial submission of the petition. In the event that this rate is no longer published, the index which is most comparable to the PMMS index shall be used.

b. Exclusions from Operating Expenses. Operating expenses shall not include the following:

i. Mortgage principal or interest payments or other debt service costs.

ii. Any penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other provision of law.

iii. Land lease expenses.

iv. Political contributions and payments to organizations which are substantially devoted to legislative lobbying purposes.

v. Depreciation.

vi. Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any utility rebate or discount, security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement or any other method or device.

vii. Unreasonable increases in expenses since the base year.

viii. Expenses associated with the provision of master-metered gas and electricity services.

ix. Expenses which are attributable to unreasonable delays in performing necessary maintenance or repair work or the failure to complete necessary replacements (e.g., a roof replacement may be a reasonable, necessary capital improvement under SMC 9.80.090, but if water damage occurred as a result of unreasonable delays in replacing the roof, it would not be reasonable to pass through the cost of repairing the water damage).

c. Adjustments of Operating Expenses. Base year and/or current operating expense items may be averaged with other expense levels for the same types of items for other years or amortized or adjusted by the CPI or may otherwise be adjusted, in order to establish an expense amount for the item(s) which most reasonably serves the objectives of obtaining a reasonable comparison of base year and current year expenses. Grounds for such adjustments include, but are not limited to:

i. Either the amount or nature of an expense item for a particular year is not representative;

ii. The base year expense is not a reasonable projection of average past expenditures for that item in the years immediately preceding or following the base year;

iii. The current year expense is not a reasonable projection of expenditures for that item in recent years or of future expenditures for that item;

iv. If a particular item of expense exceeds the normal industry or other comparable standard for the area, the park owner shall bear the burden of proving the reasonableness of the expense. To the extent that it is found that the expense is unreasonable it may be adjusted to reflect the normal industry standard;

v. A base year expense is exceptionally low by industry standards and/or on an inflation adjusted basis is exceptionally low relative to the current year expense although the level or type of service for which the expense is incurred has not changed significantly;

vi. An increase in maintenance or management expenses is disproportionate to the percentage increase in the CPI, while the level of services has not changed significantly and/or is not justified by special circumstances.

F. Rent Increases for Periods Preceding Date That a Park Owner May Implement Rent Increases Pursuant to SMC 9.80.080. In the event that the period for determining the allowable rent increase pursuant to SMC 9.80.080 exceeds 120 days, the park owner may recover a retroactive rent charge to cover the time period from the date that the rent increase would have begun if the rent increase decision had been made within 120 days. Delays or continuances that are mutually agreed to in writing by all parties concerned, any extensions in the 60-day decision period specified in SMC 9.80.080(D)(11), and the number of days that lapse between petitioner receiving notice of the necessity of replenishing its deposit and paying the required amount pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(C)(2) and/or (C)(7) shall not be counted in determining whether said 120-day period has expired. In order to avoid undue hardship on the tenants affected by the decision, this retroactive rent charge shall be amortized and paid over a period of five years, unless the city manager or hearing officer determines that a different amortization period is more reasonable, and then shall be eliminated at the end of that applicable time period. Interest may be charged on this amortized rent charge in an amount calculated pursuant to subsection (E)(3)(a)(viii) of this section.

G. Per Space Rent Adjustment Pursuant to Fair Return Standard. The allowable rent increase per mobilehome space pursuant to this section shall not be increased as a result of the fact that there are exempt spaces in the park. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.075 Legal expenses and settlement proposals.

A. Procedure at City Manager Stage.

1. At least 10 days prior to the time that the city manager takes a petition filed pursuant to SMC 9.80.080, 9.80.090, or 9.80.100 under submission (“submission date”) pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(D)(1), the designated tenant representative (defined in SMC 9.80.130) and/or the landlord may submit a written offer to the other party to settle the claims or requests made in the petition and to allow a decision or award to be made in accordance with the terms and conditions stated in the offer. The written offer shall include a statement of the offer, containing the terms and conditions of the award or decision which the offering party is willing to accept, and a provision that allows the accepting party to indicate acceptance of the offer by signing a statement that the offer is accepted. At the same time that the offering party submits its offer to the other party, the offering party shall also file a copy of the written settlement offer with the city clerk in a separately sealed envelope, with a statement on the outside of the envelope identifying the offeror and stating that it is a written settlement offer submitted pursuant to this section. Any acceptance of the offer must be in writing and shall be signed by the counsel for the accepting party or, if not represented by counsel, by the accepting party (under this chapter, either the landlord or the designated tenant representative).

2. If the offer is accepted, the parties shall notify the city manager and the city manager shall enter the accepted offer as the final decision of the city manager respecting the petition.

3. If the offer is not accepted prior to the submission date or within seven calendar days after the offer’s receipt by the opposing party, whichever occurs first, it shall be deemed withdrawn and cannot be given in or considered as evidence as part of the city manager’s decision-making. Said submission date and said seven-day period may be continued and enlarged, respectively, upon written stipulation of the parties, subject to the city manager’s approval. Any such continuance or enlargement shall not be counted against the 120-day period specified in SMC 9.80.070(F).

4. The sealed copy of the written settlement offer that is so filed with the city is not to be opened by the city until it is either timely accepted by the opposing party or, if it is not timely accepted by the opposing party and deemed withdrawn, the offer shall be opened after the city manager has rendered a final decision on the petition.

B. Procedures at Appellate Stage.

1. At least 10 days prior to the date of the appeal hearing noticed pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(D)(5), the designated tenant representative and/or the landlord may submit a written offer to the other party to settle the claims or requests made in the petition and to allow a decision or award to be made in accordance with the terms and conditions stated in the offer. The written offer shall include a statement of the offer, containing the terms and conditions of the award or decision which the offering party is willing to accept, and a provision that allows the accepting party to indicate acceptance of the offer by signing a statement that the offer is accepted. At the same time that the offering party submits its offer to the other party, the offering party shall also file a copy of the written settlement offer with the city clerk in a separately sealed envelope, with a statement on the outside of the envelope identifying the offeror and stating that it is a written settlement offer submitted pursuant to this section. Any acceptance of the offer must be in writing and shall be signed by the counsel for the accepting party or, if not represented by counsel, by the accepting party (under this chapter, either the landlord or the designated tenant representative).

2. If the offer is accepted, the parties shall notify the city manager and the hearing officer and the hearing officer shall enter the accepted offer as the final decision of the hearing officer respecting the petition.

3. If the offer is not accepted prior to the appeal hearing date or within seven calendar days after the offer’s receipt by the opposing party, whichever occurs first, it shall be deemed withdrawn and cannot be given in or considered as evidence upon the trial of the appeal. Said appeal hearing date and said seven-day period may be continued and enlarged, respectively, upon written stipulation of the parties, subject to the hearing officer’s approval. Any such continuance or enlargement shall not be counted against the 120-day period specified in SMC 9.80.070(F).

4. The sealed copy of the written settlement offer that is so filed with the city is not to be opened by the city until it is either timely accepted by the opposing party or, if it is not timely accepted by the opposing party and deemed withdrawn, the offer shall be opened after the hearing officer has rendered a final decision on the petition.

C. Procedures Common to Both Stages.

1. If an offer made pursuant to this section is not accepted and the rejecting party fails to obtain a more favorable award or decision, the rejecting party shall not recover his or her post-offer legal expenses and shall pay the legal expenses incurred by the offering party from the time of the offer. If competing offers to settle are timely submitted but have not been timely accepted, the city manager or hearing officer, as the case may be, shall determine which party has failed to obtain a more favorable decision or award and assign responsibility for the payment of legal expenses accordingly.

2. That assignment of responsibility shall be memorialized in a “notice of assignment of legal expense liability” (“legal expense notice”) and mailed and emailed to the parties and the DTR within seven days after the city manager or hearing officer has issued his/her final decision on the petition. Within seven days of his/her/its receipt of the legal expense notice, the parties shall submit written requests for the awarding of and an accounting of their legal expenses and serve those requests simultaneously on the city manager or hearing officer, and all parties by regular mail and electronic mail. Said requests shall include detailed records of fee billings, time records and supporting declarations executed under penalty of perjury. Within seven days of receiving the requests, opposing parties may file objections to those requests and serve said oppositions in the same fashion as the original requests were served. Within seven days of the date that oppositions are served or within seven days of the deadline for the filing of oppositions, if none is submitted, the city manager or hearing officer shall submit a proposed supplemental decision stating the amount of legal expenses each party is required to pay and the reasons therefor.

a. When issued by the city manager, said supplemental decision shall become final when it is issued and shall be appealable separate from the city manager’s decision pertaining to the merits of the petition. The appellate procedures set forth in SMC 9.80.080(D)(2) shall govern an appeal of a city manager’s decision pertaining to the awarding of legal expenses, but shall be consolidated with any appeal taken of the city manager’s final decision pertaining to the merits of the petition.

b. When issued by the hearing officer, said supplemental decision shall become final in seven days after the proposed decision, unless either party requests an evidentiary hearing within said seven days, in which case a final decision shall be made within seven days after the hearing is concluded. Scheduling of the hearing shall be left to the sound discretion of the hearing officer. For purposes of any challenge to the hearing officer’s decisions, the hearing officer’s decision shall become final upon the mailing, with proofs of service, to all parties of (a) the hearing officer’s final decision on the merits of the petition, or (b) the hearing officer’s final decision on the awarding of any legal expenses, whichever occurs last.

c. In his or her discretion, the city manager or the hearing officer, as the case may be, may reduce or offset from any award made in favor of the petitioner on the petition the amount of legal expenses that petitioner may be required to pay to another party as a result of the operative effect of this section.

3. Subject to subsection (C)(2)(c) of this section, any award of legal expenses that is made against a party as a result of the operation of this section shall be separated out and invoiced by the park owner separately from any MNOI rent increase award, capital improvement rent increase award, or reduction in services award as a separate, limited time pass-through. Such legal expenses shall be amortized and recovered in equal monthly payments over a five-year period (plus interest as calculated in SMC 9.80.070(E)(3)(a)(viii)), unless the city manager or hearing officer concludes that a different period is more reasonable, and shall be eliminated after payment is completed at the end of the amortization period. In the case of a rent reduction petition submitted pursuant to SMC 9.80.100, where the landlord is required to pay legal expenses to the tenants as a result of rejected settlement offers, the landlord’s obligation to pay said legal expenses shall be amortized and paid in equal monthly payments over a five-year period (plus interest as calculated in SMC 9.80.070(E)(3)(a)(viii)), unless the city manager or hearing officer concludes that a different period is more reasonable, and shall be extinguished after payment is completed at the end of the amortization period. In the cases of an MNOI petition and/or a petition filed pursuant to SMC 9.80.090 where the landlord is required to pay legal expenses to the tenants as a result of rejected settlement offers, and the amount owed to the tenants has not been used to offset or reduce any landlord recovery pursuant to subsection (C)(2)(c) of this section, the landlord’s obligation to pay said legal expenses to the tenants shall be amortized and paid in equal monthly payments over a five-year period (plus interest as calculated in SMC 9.80.070(E)(3)(a)(viii)), unless the city manager or hearing officer concludes that a different period is more reasonable, and shall be extinguished after payment is completed at the end of the amortization period.

4. In determining whether a party “has obtained a more favorable award or decision” than that proffered in a settlement offer not accepted by that party, the city manager or hearing officer shall rely upon and be guided by legal precedent and authorities construing the same term used in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 998. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.080 Procedures for review of fair return petitions.

A. Right to Petition. A park owner may petition for a rent increase in order to obtain a fair return. This petition is sometimes referred to herein as “MNOI petition” or “fair return petition.” No petition may be filed in November or December except in cases of exceptional unforeseen circumstances.

B. Limit on Frequency of Petitions. Only one petition pursuant to this section may be filed for a mobilehome park within a 12-month period. An exception to this limitation shall be authorized in the event of extraordinary circumstances that could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time the prior petition was filed.

C. Submission of Petition.

1. Petition Form Required. Such petition shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager.

2. Petition Fee. Upon the receipt of a fair return petition, the city manager shall determine the estimated costs the city will incur in staff time and city attorney time in processing and acting upon the petition. The city manager will notify the petitioning party (“petitioner”) of the amount of that fee and the time within which it must be deposited with the city. The city manager shall keep an accounting of the fee and how it is used to defray the city’s costs. If at any time during the processing of the petition, the remaining balance of the fee is less than $1,000, the city manager shall notify the petitioner of the remaining balance and the amount that and the time by when the petitioner must pay to replenish the deposit. The petition shall not be further processed until the petition has paid to the city the fees described in this section. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the petitioner within 60 days after the date of the final decision made with respect to the petition.

3. Contents of Petition Form. The form may require any information deemed relevant by the city manager. The form shall include, but not be limited to:

a. A list of the names and addresses of all mobilehome park tenants subject to the proposed rent increase.

b. A statement of the date the rent increase is proposed to be effective.

c. The rent for each space in the park in the base year, the current year, and the three prior years.

d. An income and expense statement for the base year, the current year, and the three years prior to the current year.

e. Evidence documenting the income and expenses claimed by the landlord.

f. All other documentation and opinion testimony upon which the park owner is relying to justify the rent increase.

g. A statement of the petitioner’s theories in support of the rent increase application.

4. Notice of Petition. The park owner and the city shall provide notice of a petition as follows:

a. The petitioner and city: by sending a hard copy and electronic .pdf copy of the petition to the designated tenant representative;

b. The petitioner: by providing the city with hard and electronic copies of the petition;

c. The petitioner: by notifying each tenant household that the petition has been filed on a city-approved form.

5. Determination That the Petition Is Complete. The city manager will determine if a petition filed pursuant to this section is complete within 30 days after the petition is submitted. A petition will be considered complete only if and when the required fees have been paid. If the petition is incomplete, the city manager will inform the petitioner in writing as to what additional information is required. Within 30 days of petitioner’s submission of any additional information or fees submitted at the direction of the city manager, the city manager shall determine whether the petition is complete and notify petitioner of the city manager’s determination. If additional information or payments remain lacking, the petitioner shall submit such information and/or payments and the city manager shall again have 30 days to determine the petition’s completeness. This process shall continue until the city manager issues to petitioner a written notice advising the petitioner that the petition is complete. The time period specified in SMC 9.80.070(F) shall begin running on the date the city manager delivers said completeness notice to petitioner.

6. Access to the Petition. The documentation required by this section shall be available for inspection and copying by any person during the normal business hours of the city. The city shall make a copy of all submissions by the park owner and the tenants in conjunction with a petition that shall be available in the form of an electronic .pdf file which shall be accessible through the city’s website.

7. Cost of Expert Analysis. Upon the receipt of a fair return petition, the city manager shall determine if the employment of experts will be necessary or appropriate for the city to thoroughly and competently analyze the petition. Depending upon the complexity of the fair return petition, and the park owner’s use of experts, the city manager may retain a certified public accountant to, among other things, verify the accuracy of the expense and income items stated in the petition; an expert in the use and theory of the fair return and MNOI methods utilized in this chapter for determining fair return petitioners; and, if appropriate or necessary, a licensed appraiser. If the city manager so determines, the city manager shall also determine the anticipated cost of employing any such experts. The resulting figure shall be communicated to the petitioner. The city manager shall keep an accounting of the fee and how it is used to defray the city’s costs. If at any time during the processing of the petition, the remaining balance of the fee is less than $1,000, the city manager shall notify the petitioner of the remaining balance and the amount that and the time by when the petitioner must pay to replenish the deposit. The petition shall not be further processed until the petitioner has paid to the city the estimated cost of expert analysis. Any unused portion for payments so collected shall be refunded to the petitioner.

8. Contents of Expert Analysis. At a minimum, any analysis pursuant to this subsection shall include a determination of:

a. Base year and current year rental income;

b. Base year and current year operating expenses by category;

c. Base year and current year overall operating expenses;

d. Base year and current year net operating income;

e. The percentage change in net operating income between the base period and the current period;

f. The percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period;

g. The ratio of the percentage change in net operating income to the percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period; and

h. The rent adjustment required under an MNOI standard pursuant to this chapter.

9. Submission by Tenant-Homeowners. The tenant-homeowners may submit a written response to the park owner’s petition within 30 days after the petition is determined complete, unless the city manager determines that there is good cause to extend that deadline. The tenant-homeowners’ written response shall be delivered to the landlord and to the city clerk.

D. Review Procedures.

1. Initial Decision by City Manager. A fair return petition shall be decided by the city manager, without a hearing or personal appearances by any of the involved parties or their representatives. The decision will be made within 60 days of the date that the petition is determined complete, unless the city manager determines that there is good cause to extend that deadline. The city manager shall email all the involved parties or their representatives the date on which the city manager shall consider the matter submitted and beyond which the city manager will not accept any additional information, briefs, evidence or arguments (the “submission date”). The city manager shall email notice of the submission date to all parties or their representatives at least 21 days prior to the submission date. The city manager’s decision on the merits of the petition shall be emailed and sent by mail, with proof of mailing, to the park owner, the park owner’s and tenant’s representatives, and the designated tenant representative.

2. Appeal of City Manager’s Decision. The decision of the city manager may be appealed, within 20 days after the date of its mailing, to a hearing officer. An appeal by the landlord shall be signed by the landlord or its/his/her lawfully appointed agent. An appeal by the tenant-homeowners must be signed by tenant-homeowners residing on a majority of the mobilehome spaces that are subject to the city manager’s decision (That is, if tenants renting 50 spaces are affected by the city manager’s decision, the written appeal of one adult tenant from each of 26 separate spaces would be required.). An appeal must be in writing and must be delivered to the opposing parties and the city within the 20-day appeal period specified above. If the city manager’s decision is not timely appealed, the city manager’s decision shall become final on the twenty-first day after the decision has been mailed. The appealing party shall be required to pay for the costs of the appeal process, including those imposed by the appellate hearing officers (see below) and those established by resolution of the city council. The appeal shall be conducted through a de novo evidentiary hearing, which shall consider at least the following: the fair return petition, all information, expert opinions and arguments submitted by the park owner or the tenants to the city manager in support of or in opposition to the petition; the city manager’s decision; the opinions of the city’s independent witness(es); and any additional arguments or facts upon which the city manager’s decision is based; and the briefs, evidence and testimony accepted or rejected by the city manager in support of or in opposition to the petition by any of the parties to the proceedings.

3. Procedure for Selection of a Hearing Officer.

a. Qualifications. Hearing officers shall be licensed attorneys of the State Bar of California in good standing, and shall have no financial interest in mobilehomes, mobilehome spaces or mobilehome parks and shall not have represented mobilehome park owners or mobilehome park tenant-homeowners in rent setting cases or park closings or park conversions or any disputes between park owners and park residents.

b. A hearing officer shall be selected through the California Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). In the event that it is not possible to set up a hearing through the OAH, the city manager may elect to contract with another agency that provides arbitration or hearing officer services or may establish a panel from which the hearing officer is selected in accordance with the following procedure set forth in subsection (D)(3)(c) of this section.

c. In the event that a panel of hearing officers is established, the city manager shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that there are at least five qualified candidates who will comprise the panel of prospective hearing officers. A hearing officer shall disqualify himself or herself from serving as hearing officer in a particular matter where he/she has a conflict of interest within the meaning of the Political Reform Act (Government Code Section 87100 et seq.), and shall otherwise comply with the disqualification provisions of Canon 3.E. of the Code of Judicial Ethics. The city shall make the initial selection of the hearing officer from the panel. The parties to the appeal shall be advised in writing of the selected hearing officer, and advised of their right to disqualify the selected hearing officer within five days of receipt of the notice of selection. In the event of a disqualification, another hearing officer shall be randomly selected from the panel by the city, and a new notice of hearing sent to the parties. Each party shall have the right to disqualify one hearing officer for a particular appeal if there are five or fewer hearing officers on the list and may disqualify up to two hearing officers if there are eight or more hearing officers on the list.

4. Time of and Scheduling of Hearing.

a. A hearing on the appeal shall commence within 30 days of the selection of a hearing officer unless both parties agree to a different schedule. The hearing shall be completed within 15 days after it is commenced. These time deadlines may be extended if the hearing officer finds that there is good cause to commence and/or complete the hearing at a later date.

b. The hearing may be scheduled during the normal business hours of the city unless a majority of the residents that are subject to the petition requests that the hearing be scheduled during the evening. The hearing shall be scheduled at a time that it is convenient for the residents’ and park owner’s representatives.

c. The presentations of each party at the hearing and of the city staff and experts shall be limited to 90 minutes each unless the hearing officer determines that there is good cause to enlarge those time periods. Each party and the city shall be permitted one hour of cross-examination of expert witnesses, unless the hearing officer determines that there is good cause to enlarge those time periods. The city may provide legal counsel to help prepare the city’s experts for their presentation at the appeal hearing, to defend the city’s expert witness and to cross examine the expert witnesses of the parties.

d. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated herein, whether or not the city decides to appear, submit documents and/or briefs, retain counsel to represent the city, or otherwise participate in the administrative appellate proceedings described in this chapter shall be left to the sound discretion of the city.

5. Notice of Hearing. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given at least 21 days prior to the hearing.

6. Requests for Additional Information (Not Offered to the City Manager) by Opposing Party.

a. Either party or the city may request that additional, supporting documentation (not previously provided to the city manager as part of his/her initial examination of and decision on the petition) be provided to substantiate the claims made by a party. The request shall be presented in writing to the hearing officer.

b. The hearing officer may order production of such requested documentation, if the hearing officer determines the information is relevant to the proceedings.

7. Submission of Reports.

a. Responses may be submitted by the tenants or the park owner to the decision of the city manager or to reports by the city’s experts. Said responses shall be submitted to the other parties and hearing officer at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The submissions shall be in printed and electronic form.

b. Rebuttal reports may be submitted by the park owner, tenant-homeowners and/or city staff and/or a consultant on behalf of the city; it shall be submitted to the parties and hearing officer at least five days prior to a hearing.

c. The parties’ responses, provided for in subsection (D)(7)(a) of this section, and their and the city’s rebuttal reports, provided in subsection (D)(7)(b) of this section, shall be considered the prehearing briefs of the parties and the city and no other prehearing briefs shall be allowed unless requested by the hearing officer for good cause. The submissions shall be in printed and electronic form.

d. For good cause, the hearing officer may accept additional information at the hearing.

8. Conduct of Hearing.

a. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city council and any rules set forth by the hearing officer.

b. The hearing officer shall have the power and authority to require and administer oaths or affirmations where appropriate, and to take and hear evidence concerning any matter pending before the hearing officer.

c. The rules of evidence generally applicable in the courts shall not be binding in the hearing. Hearsay evidence and any and all other evidence which the hearing officer deems relevant and proper may be admitted and considered.

d. Any party or such party’s representative, designated in writing by the party, may appear at the hearing to offer such documents, oral testimony, written declaration or other evidence as may be relevant to the proceedings.

e. The hearing officer may grant or order not more than two continuances of the hearing for not more than 10 working days each. Additional continuances may be granted only if all parties stipulate in writing or if the hearing officer finds that there is a good cause for the continuance. Such continuances may be granted or ordered at the hearing without further written notice to the parties.

f. A tape recording of the proceedings shall be made or arranged by the city manager in a format that is easily made available and is easily usable.

g. The hearing shall be conducted in a manner that ensures that parties have an opportunity to obtain documents and to obtain information about the theories and facts to be presented by the opposing parties in adequate time in advance of the hearing to enable preparation of their respective cases.

9. Required Findings in Decision. Any decision pursuant to this subsection shall include a determination of:

a. Base year and current year rental income;

b. Base year and current year operating expenses by category;

c. Base year and current year overall operating expenses;

d. Base year and current year net operating income;

e. The percentage change in net operating income between the base period and the current period;

f. The percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period;

g. The ratio of the percentage change in net operating income to the percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period;

h. The rent adjustment required under the MNOI standard pursuant to SMC 9.80.070 and this section.

10. Conditions for Allowance or Disallowance of Rent Increase. The allowance or disallowance of any proposed rent increase (or decrease) or portion thereof may be reasonably conditioned in any manner necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.

11. Deadline for Decision. A petition for a fair return adjustment shall be decided by the hearing officer within 60 days of the date of the filing of the appeal and the payment of all appellate fees, unless the hearing officer determines that there is good cause for an extension of this period or the city manager extends this period due to the length of time required to accommodate scheduling availability and limitations required to obtain the services of a hearing officer.

12. Notice of Decision. The city manager shall mail copies of the hearing officer’s decision to the park owner and all affected tenants within three days of the city’s receipt of the hearing officer’s written decision. Copies of the decision shall be emailed to the park owner’s and residents’ representative as soon as possible after the decision is received by the city and in all cases within 24 hours after the decision is received by the city.

13. Preservation of Record. Any written findings made by the final decision-maker pursuant to this section shall be permanently preserved in the city records, so that they are available in the event of a future rent increase petition involving the same mobilehome park.

14. Representation of Parties.

a. The parties in any hearing may be represented at the hearing by a person of the party’s choosing. The representative need not be an attorney.

b. Written designation of representatives shall be filed with the city manager or hearing officer.

c. The written designation of the representative shall include a statement that the representative is authorized to bind the party to any stipulation, decision or other action taken by the city manager or the hearing officer at the administrative hearing.

15. Modification of Decision in the Event of Mathematical or Clerical Inaccuracies. Any party alleging that the hearing officer’s statement of decision contains mathematic or clerical inaccuracies may so notify the hearing officer and the other party within 15 calendar days of the mailing of the decision to that party. The hearing officer may make any corrections warranted, and refile the statement of decision within 10 working days after receiving the allegation of the mathematical error. Alternatively, the hearing officer may decline to make any such corrections, but shall so notify the parties of his/her determination. Upon refiling of the statement of decision with corrections or the filing of the hearing officer’s declination to make corrections, the hearing officer’s decision shall be final.

E. Overall Period for Review of Fair Return Petition. Except as is otherwise provided in this chapter, from the time a petition is determined complete to the time a final decision on that petition is made, no more than 120 days shall pass, unless the hearing officer determines that there is good cause for extending this deadline or the city manager extends this period due to the length of time required to accommodate scheduling availability and the time involved in obtaining the services of a hearing officer.

F. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, on all issues necessary to the granting of the petitioner’s petition, both at the city manager and hearing officer levels of review. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.090 Preapproved temporary rental increases for specified capital improvements.

A. An owner shall be permitted to obtain a temporary rental increase to obtain reimbursement for specified capital improvements pursuant to the provisions of this section.

B. The city manager or city council shall from time to time adopt an amortization schedule for typical capital improvements subject to the provisions of this section.

C. Prior to making a necessary capital improvement described in the adopted amortization schedule or a necessary capital improvement reasonably similar to the types of improvements described in the adopted amortization schedule, the park owner shall be permitted to file a petition with the city seeking approval of a temporary rental increase to reimburse the owner for the cost of the capital improvement. Except as is provided in subsection (F) of this section, a park owner who commences and completes an allegedly necessary capital improvement prior to obtaining approval under this chapter for a temporary rental increase to reimburse the owner for the cost of that improvement shall be deemed to have conclusively waived the right to seek a rental increase for that cost.

D. In order to obtain approval for such a temporary rental increase, the owner must submit a petition to the city seeking such approval and providing the following minimum information:

1. A description of the proposed capital improvement and its cost and evidence establishing that the improvement is a capital improvement and not an item of maintenance and/or repair. The cost of the proposed capital improvement shall be reflected in at least two fully executed and binding contracts, bids or proposals from qualified and licensed (if required by law) contractors, installers and/or builders. Resumes, references and a list of similar projects previously successfully completed by the contractors/builders/installers shall also be included with the petition;

2. Evidence establishing that the improvement is necessary at the time the owner seeks to implement it;

3. The date(s) upon which the owner proposes to commence and complete the capital improvement work;

4. The method and manner by which the city will be notified by the owner as to the commencement and prosecution of the work so that the city can adequately and timely monitor the work as it is being performed to assure, as much as is practicable, that the work which may be ultimately approved as a result of the owner’s petition has been completed in accordance with the information provided as part of the petition and as approved hereunder;

5. The period of time over which the owner proposes to amortize the petitioned-for rental increase and the rationale therefor;

6. Evidence that interest to be charged during that amortization period is comparable to interest that would be charged on a commercially available loan;

7. Evidence that the capital improvement is made at a direct cost of not less than $100.00 per affected rental unit or at a total direct cost of not less than $5,000, whichever is lower;

8. Evidence that the costs, less any insurance proceeds, available grants or other applicable recovery or sources of funds, are averaged on a per unit basis for each rental unit actually benefited by the improvement. In this connection, the owner shall have an affirmative duty to, in good faith, make a diligent search for and reasonable inquiry about the availability of sources of funds to pay for the cost other than by increasing the rents charged by the owner and the petition shall contain a representation by the owner, executed under penalty of perjury, that such diligent search and reasonable inquiry was conducted and that no such alternative funds were found to exist (or that such funds were found to exist, stating the amount and source thereof and how they are to be used in paying for the subject improvement(s));

9. Evidence that the costs are to be amortized over a period of not less than 36 months;

10. Evidence that the costs do not include any additional costs incurred for property damage or deterioration that result or have resulted from any unreasonable delay in undertaking or completing any repair or improvement;

11. Evidence that the costs do not include costs incurred to bring the park, rental unit(s), improvement or other property into compliance with a provision of the Sonoma Municipal Code or state law where the original installation of the improvement was not in compliance with code requirements;

12. A representation by the owner stating that at the end of the amortization period, the allowable monthly rent will be decreased by any amount it was increased because of a rent increase approval granted under this section; and

13. Evidence that the amortization period is in conformance with any schedule adopted by the city manager or city council, unless it is determined that an alternate period is justified based on the evidence presented during the consideration of the owner’s petition.

E. The city clerk shall provide notice (“capital improvement notice”) of the petition to all affected tenants. The notice shall indicate the proposed capital improvement, the amortization schedule including interest for the capital improvement, and the resulting temporary rental increase proposed. The city clerk shall email by .pdf or other format the petition and all of its attachments to the designated tenant representative. The city shall make a copy of all submissions by the park owner and the tenants in conjunction with the petition that shall be available in the form of an electronic .pdf file which shall be accessible through the city’s website. The owner shall post a complete, physical copy of the petition and its attachments at a location that is obvious and accessible to all tenants.

1. In the event that 50 percent plus one of the tenants renting spaces the rent for which is controlled by this chapter (with each space receiving one vote) (that is, if tenants renting 50 controlled spaces are affected by the proposed rent increase, the approval of one adult tenant from each of 26 separate spaces would be required) whose rent would be increased were the petition approved protest the petition in writing to the clerk, which said protests are received by the city clerk within 30 days after the date the clerk mails or emails the capital improvement notice to the affected tenants, the city manager shall determine whether the petition is complete pursuant to SMC 9.80.080, including determining whether all applicable fees have been paid, and process the petition in accordance with SMC 9.80.080 as described below. Upon the city manager’s determination that the petition is complete, the city manager may (a) retain whatever expert assistance s/he may require in order to examine and decide the petition, (b) require the owner to pay the necessary amounts to cover the experts’ costs pursuant to SMC 9.80.080, and (c) require the owner to provide any additional information or evidence necessary in order for the city manager to make his/her decision on the petition. In addition, the city manager shall identify the submission date pertinent to the petition and so inform all affected parties and shall otherwise follow the review procedures set forth in SMC 9.80.080 as the city manager deems are applicable and appropriate for the disposition of the petition.

a. In order for the city manager to grant the petition, the city manager must find that petitioner’s submittals have proven, by a preponderance of the evidence, that each of the criteria and evidentiary requirements specified in subsection (D) of this section has been satisfied.

b. The city manager’s decision on the petition shall be appealable pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(D)(2) through (8), (10) through (15) and (F).

2. In the event that 50 percent plus one of the tenants renting spaces the rent for which is controlled by this chapter whose rent would be increased were the petition approved do not protest the petition in writing to the clerk within 30 days after the date the clerk mails or emails the capital improvement notice to the affected tenants, the city manager shall approve the petition as submitted, and send a notice to the petitioner and the affected tenants stating that the petition has been granted and identifying the amount of the rent increase allowed to be charged the affected tenants. Said decision by the city manager shall be final and shall not be administratively appealable.

F. A park owner shall be entitled to seek a temporary rent increase in order to make an upgrade capital improvement only if the park owner has:

1. Consulted with the park tenants prior to initiating construction of the improvements regarding the nature and purpose of the improvements and the estimated cost of the improvements;

2. Obtained the prior written consent of at least one adult resident from each space of a majority of the mobilehome spaces to include the upgrade as a capital improvement eligible for amortization as a temporary rental increase. (That is, if the park has 50 spaces, the approval of one adult tenant from each of 26 separate spaces would be required.) Evidence of such consent must be presented at the time of filing the petition with the city.

Provided, that the above two criteria have been satisfied, the city manager shall approve the petition as submitted, and send a notice to the petitioner and the affected tenants stating that the petition has been granted and identifying the amount of the rent increase allowed to be charged the affected tenants. Said decision by the city manager shall be final and shall not be administratively appealable.

G. No rental increase granted pursuant to this section shall become effective until the first full month following the filing of a notice of completion of the capital improvement with the city clerk and the filing of a notice with the clerk by the city’s building official stating that the work has been completed in accordance with the petition and the information and evidence upon which the rent increase was granted. Any rental increase approved pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be itemized separately on any rental statement or billing provided to the affected tenants and shall terminate upon the conclusion of the approved amortization period.

H. Nothing in this section shall prevent the park owner from making emergency capital improvements required as a result of a disaster or other unpredictable event; in such event, the park owner may make such limited and reasonable capital improvements required to protect the public health and safety and to limit further damage to the park, and to thereafter or simultaneously seek a capital improvement rental adjustment for such capital improvement pursuant to the provisions of this section. Any such petition shall be filed, processed and decided in accordance with subsections (D) and (E) of this section. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998. Formerly 9.80.065).


9.80.100 Rent reductions for service reductions.

A. Submission of Service Reduction Petition to City Manager. A service reduction petition shall be submitted to the city manager in writing and should state:

1. The affected spaces;

2. The prior level of service established by the park owner for that tenant-homeowner’s mobilehome space and common facilities used by that tenant;

3. The specific changes in the prior level of services comprising the alleged reduction in service;

4. The date the service reduction was first noticed by the tenant-homeowner;

5. The date of notice to the park owner of the alleged service reduction, and if such notice was given, whether the notice was given orally or in writing;

6. When and how the park owner responded to the tenant-homeowner’s notice, if notice was given;

7. Whether the condition was improved or corrected, and if so, when and how;

8. The status of the condition as of the date the petition is signed;

9. How the reduction or lack of the service in question has affected the petitioner’s enjoyment of his/her rental unit, specifying, if possible, the nature of the effect and the time(s) during each day that the effect is manifested; and

10. Whether such service reduction was the result of a vote of a majority of the affected tenant-homeowners.

B. Filing, Processing and Deciding Service Reduction Petitions.

1. Subject to the provisions of this section, the filing, processing, and deciding of a service reduction petition shall be governed by SMC 9.80.080(C)(1), (2), (5), (6), (7) and (9), (D)(1) through (8), (10), (12), (14), (15), and (F).

2. The petitioner seeking a service reduction rent decrease shall serve a copy of the petition and all supporting papers on the park owner’s representative and the designated tenant representative at the same time petitioner files the petition with the city.

C. If the city manager or hearing officer finds that a material service reduction has occurred, the city manager or hearing officer shall determine the resultant percentage reduction in the tenant-homeowners’ enjoyment of their rental units due to the service reduction. Rent shall be reduced by that percentage or amount. The tenant-homeowners also shall be entitled to a rebate of the following sum: the monthly rent reduction multiplied by the number of months between the date the homeowners notified the park owner of the reduction in service, and the date the city manager determined the rent reduction. Said rebate shall be amortized and paid to the affected tenants in equal monthly installments over a five-year period, bearing interest at the rate specified in SMC 9.80.070(E)(3)(a)(viii). In the event the park owner was not notified of the service reduction by the tenants or petitioner and the park owner did not know nor should have known that the service reduction occurred prior to the filing of the petition, then no rebate shall be awarded. If a preponderance of the evidence proves that the park owner knew or should have known of the reduction in service, then a rebate shall be awarded and calculated from the date that the park owner knew or should have known of the advent of the reduction.

D. A service reduction shall not include the elimination or reduction of a recreational facility or service when such elimination or reduction and rent decrease resulting therefrom have the prior written approval of tenants renting two-thirds of the rental units in the park. In such cases no rebate shall be required.

E. No recreational service or facility which has been reduced or eliminated shall be reinstituted at any cost to the homeowners without prior written approval of tenants renting two-thirds of the rental units in the park.

F. Consolidation of Service Reduction Petition with Consideration of Fair Return Petition. In the event that a service reduction petition is filed while a fair return petition is pending, either the city, the park owner, or the tenants may require consideration of the petition filed pursuant to this section in conjunction with the fair return petition. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.110 Waivers.

A. Any waiver or purported waiver by a tenant-homeowner of rights granted under this chapter shall be void as contrary to public policy.

B. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to require or attempt to require, as a condition of tenancy in a mobilehome park, a tenant-homeowner, a mobilehome owner, mobilehome tenant, prospective mobilehome owner, or prospective mobilehome tenant to waive in a lease or rental agreement or in any other agreement the rights granted to a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant by this chapter.

C. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to deny or threaten to deny tenancy in a mobilehome park to any person on account of such person’s refusal to enter into a lease or rental agreement or any other agreement under which such person would waive the rights granted to a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant by this chapter. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.120 Information to be supplied by the park owner to tenant-homeowners and prospective tenant-homeowner.

A. Posting of Chapter. A copy of this chapter shall be posted in the office of every mobilehome park and in the recreation building or clubhouse of every mobilehome park. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.125 Information to be provided by the city to the public.

The city’s web page shall include a copy of this chapter and other information (determined in the city’s sole discretion) related to mobilehome park space rentals within the city, and a copy of California’s Mobilehome Residency Law. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.130 Designated tenant-homeowners’ representatives.

A. The tenant-homeowners of each mobilehome park in the city who rent spaces controlled by this chapter shall annually elect by majority vote, with one vote per space, a designated resident representative (“designated tenant representative” or “DTR”) to receive all notices and documents which by this chapter are required to be delivered to the DTR. In addition, on behalf of the tenant-homeowners, said DTR shall have the authority to accept and reject settlement offers submitted pursuant to SMC 9.80.075, which said acceptance or rejection by the DTR shall be binding upon the said tenant-homeowners.

B. The elected DTR shall advise the city manager of the name, address and phone number of the elected DTR in writing no later than January 31st of each year and shall promptly notify the city manager of any change of representative. Said writing shall be dated, signed and also include the following certification, or a certification substantially similar to the following:

“I certify that I have been elected as the designated tenant representative (DTR) for the ______________________ mobilehome park (“park”) as the result of a duly noticed election. All tenants of spaces in the park which are governed by Chapter 9.80 of the Sonoma Municipal Code were delivered written notices advising them of (a) their right to vote for the park’s DTR, (b) the authority and obligations of the DTR, (c) the slate of candidates running for the position of the park’s DTR, (d) the date by when and how they must cast their vote and (e) the place to cast their vote. I further certify that of the ballots timely cast, ________ [number] or _______% were cast in favor of the undersigned.”

C. In the event no person is elected or willing to serve as the DTR, then the president or presiding officer of any existing tenants’ organization or association shall be requested to serve as the DTR until said position can be filled by election as set forth above. In the event that no person will or can serve as the DTR in a given park, then the duties and authorization imposed upon and granted, respectively, to the DTR hereunder shall not be discharged or exercised, respectively, with respect to that park. In the event a DTR fails to discharge his/her duties as specified in this chapter, the tenants described in subsection (A) of this section shall have the right to vote as to whether or not the DTR shall continue acting as the DTR. If the tenants renting a majority of the spaces controlled by this chapter vote against the DTR retaining his/her position as DTR, that person shall step down from and no longer occupy the position of DTR effective as of the date of the election.

D. In addition to the DTR’s duties and authorization set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the DTR shall discharge the following obligations:

1. Upon receipt of the notices and documents which the DTR is to receive under this chapter, the DTR shall (a) post copies of same in a community center or other place in the park that is readily accessible to and frequented by the tenants, and (b) electronically send them to all affected tenants but only to the extent that the DTR personally has the equipment, technology and know-how to accomplish this task (and the DTR only needs to electronically send said material to those affected tenants who have provided the DTR their email addresses);

2. Make good faith and timely efforts to notify all affected tenants of any settlement offers received by or proposed by the DTR pursuant to SMC 9.80.075. In this connection, the DTR shall develop and follow procedures aimed at soliciting and obtaining the maximum input practicable from those tenants affected by such settlement offers so that the DTR is reasonably certain that the positions the DTR takes vis a vis such offers is representative of the desires of those tenants who are renting a majority of the spaces affected or potentially affected by the offers.

E. During his/her term of office as the DTR, the DTR cannot also serve on any city council, commission, committee or board. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.140 Rights of prospective tenant-homeowners.

Any prospective tenant-homeowner must be offered the option of renting a mobilehome space in a manner which will permit the “tenant-to-be” to receive the benefits of the mobilehome space rent stabilization program codified herein which includes, but is not limited to, rental of a mobilehome space on a month-to-month basis. Such a person cannot be denied the option of a tenancy of 12 months or less in duration.

The park owner shall provide each prospective tenant-homeowner with a photocopy of the written notification attached as Appendix A to this chapter and will provide each prospective tenant with a copy of this chapter.

Any effort to circumvent the requirements of this section shall be unlawful. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.150 Annual registration and other notices required from owner.

A. Due Date. No later than May 31st of each year, each park owner shall file an annual registration statement, on a form prescribed by the city manager.

B. Contents of Registration Form. The registration form shall include the name(s), business address(es), and business telephone number(s) of each person or legal entity possessing an ownership interest in the park and the nature of such interest; the number of mobilehome spaces within the park; a rent schedule reflecting the current space rents within the park; a listing of all other charges, including utilities not included in space rent, paid by mobilehome owners within the park and the approximate amount of each such charge; the name and address to which all required notices and correspondence may be sent; the name and address of each mobilehome owner; the name and address of each person renting a mobilehome; an identification of those spaces or mobilehomes which the park owner considers exempt from this chapter and a statement of the reasons therefor; a statement of the number of recreational vehicle spaces in the park; and other information required by the city manager.

C. Certification of Registration Forms. All registration forms, and any documentation accompanying any registration forms, shall contain an affidavit or declaration, signed by the park owner or a designated agent, with his/her signature notarized, certifying that the information contained therein is true, correct and complete.

D. Notice of Sale of a Park. Upon the sale or transfer of a mobilehome park, the seller or transferor shall notify the city manager of the sale or transfer and of the name and address of the buyer or transferee. Within 10 days of the sale or transfer of a mobilehome park, the buyer or transferee shall provide a new registration form meeting the requirements of this section.

E. Notice to Prospective Park Purchasers. The park owner shall provide prospective park purchasers with a copy of this chapter and notice that the following would be a prerequisite to filing a rent increase application pursuant to SMC 9.80.080 and 9.80.090:

1. A statement of the base year income, expenses, and net operating income of the park with a breakdown of income and expenses by category.

2. Documents supporting the amounts reported in the income and expense statement. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.160 Retaliation prohibited.

A. It shall be unlawful for any landlord to evict a tenant-homeowner or mobilehome tenant where the landlord’s dominant motive in seeking to recover possession of the rental unit is:

1. Retaliation for the tenant-homeowner’s or mobilehome tenant’s organizing, petitioning government for rent relief, or exercising any right granted under this chapter; or

2. Evasion of the purposes of this chapter.

B. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant-homeowner or mobilehome tenant for the owner’s or tenant’s assertion or exercise of rights under this chapter in any manner, including but not limited to:

1. Threatening to bring or bringing an action to recover possession of a rental unit.

2. Engaging in any form of harassment that causes the tenant-homeowner to quit the premises.

3. Decreasing housing services.

4. Increasing rent.

5. Imposing or increasing a security deposit or other charge payable by the owner or tenant. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.170 Excessive rents or demands therefor.

It shall be unlawful for a park owner to demand, accept, receive, or retain any rent in excess of the amounts authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.175 Permissible reasons for terminating or refusing to renew a tenancy.

A tenancy which is not subject to the provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law shall not be terminated nor shall its renewal be refused, except for one or more of the following reasons:

A. Failure of the tenant to comply with a local ordinance or state law or regulation relating to mobilehomes within a reasonable time after the tenant receives a notice of noncompliance from the appropriate governmental agency;

B. Conduct by the tenant, upon the mobilehome park premises, which constitutes a substantial annoyance to other tenants;

C. Failure of the tenant to comply with a reasonable rule or regulation of the mobilehome park. No act or omission of the tenant shall constitute such failure to comply unless and until the owner has given the tenant written notice of the alleged rule or regulation violation and the tenant has failed to adhere to the rule or regulation within seven days;

D. Nonpayment of rent, utility charges, or reasonable incidental service charges;

E. Condemnation of the mobilehome park;

F. Change of use of the mobilehome park; provided, that the provisions of subsection (f) of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code are followed:

1. The owner gives the tenant written notice of the proposed change 12 months or more before the date of the proposed change,

2. The owner gives each proposed tenant whose tenancy will commence within 12 months of the proposed change written notice thereof prior to the inception of that person’s tenancy. Notice of termination or refusal to renew must be given in writing in the manner prescribed by Section 1162 of the Code of Civil Procedure or at least 60 days prior to the termination date of the tenancy. Said notice shall state the date the tenancy terminates, the reason for the termination or refusal to renew, and the specific facts upon which the owner is relying. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998. Formerly 9.80.090).


9.80.180 Refusal of tenant to pay illegal rent.

A tenant may refuse to pay any rent in excess of the maximum rent permitted by this chapter. The fact that such unpaid rent is in excess of the maximum rent shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome space for nonpayment of rent or to collect the illegal rent. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998. Formerly 9.80.100).


9.80.190 Remedies.

A. Any person who demands, accepts or retains any payment or rent in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained for damages in the sum of three times the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted, or retained exceed the maximum rent which could be lawfully demanded, accepted or retained together with reasonable attorney’s fees and costs as determined by the court. 

B. Remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies and are not intended to be exclusive.

C. The city council may institute a civil action to compel compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998. Formerly 9.80.120).


9.80.200 Administration fees.

A. Except as to any fees assessed pursuant to SMC 9.80.080(C), the costs of administration of this chapter shall be borne by the city, subject to reimbursement of the city’s general fund by imposition of a rent stabilization administration fee chargeable against each mobilehome space in the city. The park owner who pays the fees imposed by this section may not pass through any of these fees assessed against a mobilehome space to the tenants.

B. On or before June 30th of each year, each owner of a mobilehome park shall pay to the city clerk of the city a mobilehome park rent stabilization program administration fee in the sum of $24.00 per year for each “mobilehome space,” including both occupied and unoccupied mobilehome spaces not subject to a rental agreement in full compliance with the requirements of Civil Code Section 798.17(a) and (b). The city council shall be authorized to increase this fee each year by the amount of the annual increase of the CPI. City staff shall determine the rise in the CPI from December to December, and round this percentage amount to the nearest $0.05.

C. The city clerk of the city shall forward these funds to the city manager department to administer the mobilehome park rent stabilization ordinance enacted in this chapter. Further, the city clerk of the city shall issue to each mobilehome park owner a receipt for payment of the fees required to be paid in this chapter.

D. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


9.80.210 Late payment – Fee.

A service fee equal to one and one-half percent per month will be charged on all late payments of administration fees under this chapter. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-6 § 1, 1998. Formerly 9.80.160).


9.80.220 City manager authorized to promulgate rules and regulations.

Subject to the approval of the city council, the city manager is authorized to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter and which implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


Appendix A

IMPORTANT NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE HOMEOWNER REGARDING THE PROPOSED RENTAL AGREEMENT FOR THE MOBILE HOME PARK.

PLEASE TAKE NOTICE THAT THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT CREATES A TENANCY WITH A TERM IN EXCESS OF TWELVE MONTHS.

BY SIGNING THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT, YOU ARE EXEMPTING THIS MOBILE HOME SPACE FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE CITY OF Sonoma MOBILE HOME RENT STABILIZATION ORDINANCE FOR THE TERM OF THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT.

THE CITY OF SONOMA MOBILE HOME RENT STABILIZATION ORDINANCE AND THE STATE MOBILE HOME RESIDENCY LAW (CALIFORNIA CIVIL CODE SEC. 798 et seq.) GIVE YOU CERTAIN RIGHTS. BEFORE SIGNING THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT YOU MAY CHOOSE TO SEE A LAWYER.

UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW, YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO BE OFFERED A RENTAL AGREEMENT FOR:

(1) A TERM OF TWELVE MONTHS, OR

(2) A LESSER PERIOD AS YOU MAY REQUEST, OR

(3) A LONGER PERIOD AS YOU AND THE MOBILE HOME PARK MANAGEMENT MAY AGREE. YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO REVIEW THIS AGREEMENT FOR 30 DAYS BEFORE ACCEPTING OR REJECTING IT.

IF YOU SIGN THE AGREEMENT YOU MAY CANCEL THE AGREEMENT BY NOTIFYING THE PARK MANAGEMENT IN WRITING OF THE CANCELLATION WITHIN 72 HOURS OF YOUR EXECUTION OF THE AGREEMENT.

IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR A MOBILE HOME PARK OWNER OR ANY AGENT OR REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OWNER TO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST YOU BECAUSE OF THE EXERCISE OF ANY RIGHTS YOU MAY HAVE UNDER THE CITY OF SONOMA MOBILE HOME RENT REVIEW LAW, OR BECAUSE OF YOUR CHOICE TO ENTER INTO A RENTAL AGREEMENT WHICH IS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THAT LAW.

(Ord. 02-2016 § 1, 2016).


Chapter 9.82       MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSIONS

Sections:

9.82.010  Purpose and intent.

9.82.015  Definitions.

9.82.020  Applicability.

9.82.025  Disclosure of notification requirements.

9.82.030  Relocation impact report required.

9.82.035  Notice and distribution of relocation impact report.

9.82.040  Notice to new residents.

9.82.045  Hearing on relocation impact report.

9.82.050  Findings.

9.82.055  Relocation assistance.

9.82.060  Bankruptcy exemption.

9.82.065  Administration fee.


9.82.010  Purpose and intent.

A.  Where a person proposes to convert an existing mobilehome park to another use or to close a mobilehome park or to cease using land as a mobilehome park, current provisions of state law, as set forth in Government Code Section 65863.7 and Civil Code Section 798.56, authorize the city to require the person proposing the change of use to file and distribute a report on the impact of such change and further authorize the city to require measures to be undertaken to mitigate the adverse effects of the change of use upon the tenants of the mobilehome park who would be displaced by such change.

B.  The city council finds and determines that unless mitigation measures are undertaken, the conversion, closure or cessation of use of mobilehome parks could have a substantial adverse effect upon park residents in terms of cost of relocation, scarcity of similar comparable housing within a reasonable proximity to the city, and the significantly higher costs of other types of housing in the immediate area if park residents cannot relocate to other mobilehome parks.

C.  It is the intent and purpose of the city council in adopting this chapter to establish reasonable rules and regulations in accordance with the authority granted by state law to mitigate the adverse effects of relocation upon mobilehome park residents who are confronted with a proposed change of use for their mobilehome park or portions of the park and so that the owners and occupants of mobilehomes and the owners of mobilehome parks understand their rights and responsibilities in such situations. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.015  Definitions.

"Applicant" means the person(s), firm(s), entity(ies) or corporation(s) applying for any application for the purpose of converting, changing to another use, closing, or ceasing to use land as a mobilehome park. If the owner of the controlling interest in a mobilehome park is not the applicant, then the applicant must provide evidence of the controlling owner’s consent to the filing of the application.

"Cessation of use of land as a mobilehome park" means a decision by the owner(s) of a mobilehome park to discontinue the use of property as a mobilehome park which is not an adjudication of bankruptcy.

"Closure of a mobilehome park" means one of the following:

A.  A closure of a mobilehome park occurs when less than 75 percent of the occupiable spaces are leased by qualified homeowners as defined in the Mobile-Home Residency Law (Civil Code Section 798 et seq.). However, upon application of a mobilehome park owner, the city council may, in its absolute discretion and upon a finding of good cause, determine that a closure of a mobilehome park is not occurring, notwithstanding that less than 75 percent of the occupiable spaces are leased. Any such application by the mobilehome park owner shall be accompanied by an estimate of a qualified appraiser as to the fair market value of the mobilehome(s) and all associated fixed property for which the foregoing exemption is requested. The appraiser’s estimate shall conform to the requirements of SMC 9.82.030(C)(12).

B.  Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection A of this definition, a closure of a mobilehome park occurs when the city council, in its absolute discretion and upon a finding of good cause, determines that the mobilehome park owner has acted and/or has failed to act in a manner which would cause a reasonable person to conclude that the mobilehome park owner intends to eliminate or reduce mobilehome spaces available for rent to the general public. Such acts or omissions include, but are not limited to, the withholding of available mobilehome spaces under the control of the mobilehome park owner, and statements by authorized agents and representatives of the mobilehome park owner to prospective buyers of the mobilehome park that the mobilehome park is being closed by the mobilehome park owner.

"Comparable housing" means housing which is comparable in floor area and number of bedrooms, bathrooms, and other rooms to the mobilehome to which comparison is being made, which housing meets the minimum standards of the Uniform Housing Code.

"Comparable mobilehome park" means any other mobilehome park within Sonoma County, substantially equal in terms of park amenities, rent and proximity to services.

"Conversion of a mobilehome park" means changing the use of a mobilehome park for a purpose other than the rental, or the holding out for rent, of two or more mobilehome sites to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. A conversion shall include, but not be limited to, a change of any existing mobilehome park or any portion thereof to condominium, stock cooperative, planned unit development, or any form of ownership wherein spaces within the mobilehome park are to be sold, or the cessation of use of all or a portion of the park as a mobilehome park, whether immediately or on a gradual basis, or the closure of a park.

"Conversion of a mobilehome park" shall not include a conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership.

"Conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership" means a sale, transfer or assignment of a mobilehome park either directly or indirectly in whole or in part to mobilehome park’s homeowners and prospective homeowners for the benefit of the mobilehome park’s homeowners and prospective homeowners. A conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership may include but not be limited to, conversion of the community to a subdivision, condominiums, planned development, community apartments, stock cooperative, other form of corporate ownership, or by a nonprofit organization qualified pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) for the homeowners’ or prospective homeowners’ benefit. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, in the event the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership is by a nonprofit corporation qualified under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), homeowners may or may not have the right to participate through direct ownership of the mobilehome park and the nonprofit shall not be required to make an offer of participation to the homeowners.

"Homeowner" means the owner(s) of a mobilehome.

"Impact report" means a report required by California Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4, as applicable, and containing the information set forth in SMC 9.82.030(C). "Impact report" does not include the impact required by Government Code Section 66427.5(b) for conversion to resident ownership.

"Long-term lot" means any mobilehome lot that has been occupied by the same mobilehome for at least nine of the 12 months prior to the adoption of this chapter.

"Mobilehome" means a vehicle designed or used for human habitation and shall include camping trailers, motorhomes, slide-in campers and trailers, when used as the occupant’s principal place of residence, and mobilehomes as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18211.

"Mobilehome lot" means any area or tract of land, or portion thereof, occupied or held out for occupancy by one mobilehome that is not owned by the park owner.

"Mobilehome park" means any area or tract of land where 10 or more mobilehome lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation.

"Resident" means a homeowner or tenant.

"Tenant" means a person who occupies a mobilehome within a mobilehome park pursuant to a bona fide lease or rental agreement and who, during his or her tenancy, is not the owner or member of the immediate household of the owner of the mobilehome. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.020  Applicability.

For applications involving the redevelopment, closure, or conversion of a mobilehome park that include a subdivision map, the provisions of Chapter 9.84 SMC shall apply. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to such applications, except as specifically referenced in Chapter 9.84 SMC. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.025  Disclosure of notification requirements.

When an application has been made to the city for the redevelopment, closure or conversion of a mobilehome park, the city shall inform the applicant, in writing, of local regulations regarding notifications to residents and mobilehome owners within the affected park, as well as the notification requirements set forth in Section 798.56 of the Civil Code. This disclosure shall be made at least 30 days prior to any hearing on the application or the relocation impact report. No hearing on the application shall be held or any other action on the application taken until the applicant has satisfactorily verified that required notices have been provided. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.030  Relocation impact report required.

A.  Any person who files an application with the city for a general plan amendment or for a rezoning of land use type or density, or for approval of a conditional use permit or any other application for the purpose of converting a mobilehome park to another use, close a mobilehome park or cease to use land as a mobilehome park, shall concurrently file with the city a mobilehome relocation impact report that complies with this section. No such applications shall be considered or deemed complete or processed for consideration or approved unless and until such relocation impact report is filed and approved in accordance with this chapter.

B.  At any time at which the occupancy of a mobilehome park is such that it meets the definition of "closure" as set forth in this chapter, the owner shall immediately provide written notification to the city of the event and shall either file a request for the preparation of a relocation impact report or shall petition the city council to make a finding that a closure is not occurring as set forth in SMC 9.82.015(A).

C.  The city shall select a consultant to perform the relocation impact report within 90 days of a written request from the applicant. The applicant shall be noticed in writing of the estimated cost of the relocation impact report and shall deposit that sum with the city prior to commencement of any work on the relocation impact report. The city will then contract with a consultant for the preparation of the relocation impact report. Once an application is filed, the residents of the mobilehome park shall be notified by the city that an application has been filed and that the preparation of a relocation impact report will be required. The relocation impact report shall contain, but need not be limited to, the following information: 

1.  A legal description of the property.

2.  A map and a detailed description of the condition of the mobilehome park, including the nature and location of structures, landscaping, easements, utilities and other on-site features and amenities.

3.  The names and addresses of all mobilehome owners within the park (including absentee mobilehome owners), as shown on the rental agreement for the mobilehome park spaces, and the names and addresses of all mobilehome tenants within the park as of the date of the application.

4.  The characteristics of each mobilehome within the park, listed by space number and address, including the date of manufacture, type, width, living area, and number of bedrooms.

5.  The number of spaces within the park, length of occupancy by the current occupant of each space and the current lease rate for each space.

6.  The total number of mobilehome residents, listed by space identifying owner or renter occupancy, principal or second home occupancy, and the number of residents who are physically disabled, including the chronically ill.

7.  A description of the proposed new use and all discretionary approvals necessary therefor, if any.

8.  The proposed timetable for conversion, closure or cessation of use of the land as a mobilehome park and for obtaining other discretionary approvals for the proposed use, if any.

9.  The location of all comparable mobilehome parks within Sonoma County, including the park name, number of lots, number of vacancies, lease rates and terms, policies and restrictions on the type of mobilehomes and residents accepted, amenities offered and proximity to services (bus stops, grocery stores, hospitals, etc.).

10.  A determination based on the information provided in subsections (C)(4), (5) and (9) of this section of the total number of mobilehome units that are eligible to be relocated to a comparable mobilehome park.

11.  The estimated cost of relocating the mobilehomes identified in subsection (C)(10) of this section to available lots in mobilehome parks within the study area. The cost of relocating shall include the costs of dismantling, packing, moving, reassembling, rebuilding and unpacking, as necessary, the mobilehome, all personal property, skirting, tie-downs and all other associated structures and property.

12.  An estimate of the fair market value of each mobilehome and all associated fixed property that cannot be relocated to a comparable mobilehome park. In determining fair market value, the consultant shall consider the mobilehomes in their current locations assuming the continuation of the mobilehome park in a safe, sanitary and well maintained condition with competitive lease rates. The consultant shall specify the basis for a conclusion that any mobilehome cannot be relocated to a mobilehome park and the basis for determining the value of the mobilehome.

13.  The availability and cost of rental housing of comparable size and quality in the city of Sonoma for each mobilehome park tenant.

14.  A relocation plan that will include a timetable for physically relocating the mobilehomes, or payment of relocation assistance.

15.  Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the conversion upon each park resident based on SMC 9.82.055.

16.  A list of persons, firms and organizations with proven expertise in the fields of housing and relocation of persons displaced from housing. This list shall include the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fee schedules of persons who are qualified as mobilehome movers and appraisers of mobilehomes. The information shall include an explanation of the services that the housing specialists can provide.

17.  Any information which the city manager determines is necessary to address the specific issues raised by the application or the impact study and any information that may be necessary to implement provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.035  Notice and distribution of relocation impact report.

Not less than 15 days prior to a scheduled hearing before the city council, the park owner shall transmit to the owner or occupant of each mobilehome occupying a site within the mobilehome park and to all other persons described in SMC 9.82.030(C)(3), a copy of the relocation impact report, a copy of this chapter, and notices of the dates, times and places of the public hearings or any informational meetings. The copies provided shall be free of charge. Proof of service of distribution of the impact report to each resident must be filed by the applicant with the city manager seven days prior to the hearing and shall be signed under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.040  Notice to new residents.

When an application for a change of use and/or closure of a mobilehome park has been filed with the city, the park owner shall advise each prospective new resident who proposes to occupy a mobilehome within such park after the filing of such application, in writing, prior to the execution of a rental agreement or commencement of such occupancy whichever occurs first, that such application has been filed. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.045  Hearing on relocation impact report.

A.  When an application has been filed for a general plan amendment, rezoning, or conditional use permit for the proposed change of use and/or closure of a mobilehome park, the city manager shall schedule a public hearing on the relocation impact report before the city council within 30 days of receiving the relocation impact report. The city council, in considering the relocation impact report, shall make written findings based on evidence regarding the factors outlined in SMC 9.82.050.

B.  At the public hearing, all interested parties will be allowed to present evidence to the city council on any aspect of the application. The evidence may include, but is not limited to, justification for the payment of relocation costs, including the fair market value of any mobilehome, evidence why a mobilehome cannot be relocated to a comparable mobilehome park, and similar information.

C.  If the city council is unable to make findings consistent with SMC 9.82.050 and is unable to impose reasonable measures as provided in SMC 9.82.055 to mitigate the adverse impact(s) of relocation, the city council shall deny the application for the proposed conversion, closure or cessation of use. No other permit or approval shall be granted in furtherance of the proposed conversion, and no change of use, including cessation or closure, shall occur unless a relocation impact report has been approved. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.050  Findings.

The city council, in considering the relocation impact report, shall accept and hear evidence, shall consider such evidence, and shall make written findings based on such evidence regarding each of the following factors and any other factors as it deems appropriate:

A.  That the relocation impact report provides the information required by state law and this chapter and that it provides the city council with adequate information on the impacts of the park conversion in terms of disruption to affected residents and the methods available for addressing relocation needs.

B.  That there will exist, at the time of conversion, closure or cessation of use available mobilehome lots within Sonoma County to accommodate the mobilehomes to be displaced.

C.  That adequate options are available for residents who would be disrupted by the conversion.

D.  That the relocation plan provides for reasonable costs of relocation based on the findings of the relocation impact report.

E.  If the proposed conversion is to another residential use, whether the residents of the mobilehome park will have an opportunity to purchase, if for sale, or rent the new units, and whether the construction schedule will result in unreasonably long-term displacements.

F.  That the proposed conversion will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.

G.  That all reports and notices required by law have been properly prepared and properly served. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.055  Relocation assistance.

In approving a relocation impact report the city council may attach reasonable conditions in order to mitigate the impacts associated with the conversion, closure or cessation of use. The specific conditions of approval of a particular application shall be determined on an application-by-application basis with regard to the acts and circumstances of the application, but shall not exceed the reasonable cost of relocation, as documented in the relocation impact report. The city council shall require the applicant to enter into a written agreement with the city to ensure compliance with and fulfillment of the conditions of approval, which may include but are not limited to the following matters:

A.  Payment of relocation assistance to each resident who resided in the mobilehome park as of and after the date the application is filed or the date a closure, conversion or cessation of use is deemed by the city council to have commenced.

B.  Payment of the cost of physically moving the mobilehome to a new site, including teardown and setup of movable improvements such as patios, carports and porches; packing, moving and unpacking all personal property; and in-transit costs for meals, lodging and gas.

C.  Payment of a lump sum to compensate for payment of the first and last month rent and any security deposit at the new mobilehome park.

D.  Payment of a lump sum to compensate for any differential between rental rates at the closing mobilehome park and the new mobilehome park during the first year of the new tenancy.

E.  For tenants the costs may include all reasonable expenses incurred in moving to a new location, up to a maximum distance of 50 miles.

F.  For homeowners who are unable to reasonably relocate their mobilehome, payment of fair market value for their mobilehome, based on information contained in the approved relocation impact report.

G.  Setting aside a certain number of affordable units for the residents of the park, if the park is to be converted to another residential use; or providing a certain number of affordable units on-site or off-site, if the park is to be converted to a use other than residential.

H.  In order to facilitate a proposed conversion, closure, or cessation of use of a mobilehome park the residents and applicant may agree to mutually satisfactory conditions. To be valid, such an agreement shall be in writing, shall include a provision stating that the resident is aware of the provisions of this chapter, shall include a copy of this chapter as an attachment, shall include a provision in at least ten-point type which clearly informs the resident of the right to seek advice of an attorney prior to signing the agreement with regard to the resident’s rights under such agreement, and shall be drafted in the form and content otherwise required by applicable state law. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.060  Bankruptcy exemption.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if it is determined that the closure of a mobilehome park or cessation of use of the land as a mobilehome park results from an adjudication of bankruptcy. The applicant shall have the burden to produce substantial evidence that a court of competent jurisdiction has determined in connection with a proceeding in bankruptcy that the closure or cessation of use of the affected park as a mobilehome park is necessary. The documentation shall include the title, case number and court in which the bankruptcy proceedings were held and certified copies of all pertinent judgments, orders and decrees of the court. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


9.82.065  Administration fee.

The city council may establish by resolution reasonable fees to cover any costs incurred by the city in implementing this chapter. Such fees shall be paid by the park owner or applicant subject to the provisions of this chapter, in accordance with the limitations of Section 65863.7(g) of the Government Code. (Ord. 05-2004 § 1, 2004).


Chapter 9.84 CONVERSION OF MOBILEHOME PARKS TO RESIDENT OWNERSHIP

Sections:

9.84.010    Applicability.

9.84.015    Definitions.

9.84.020    Disclosure and notification requirements.

9.84.025    Notification to existing residents.

9.84.030    Contents of application.

9.84.035    Tenant impact report.

9.84.040    Tentative map requirements.

9.84.045    Application for the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership.

9.84.050    Criteria for approval of a conversion application.

9.84.055    Criteria for determining whether a proposed conversion is bona fide resident conversion.

9.84.060    Waiver of tentative and parcel map requirement.

9.84.065    Administration fee.


9.84.010  Applicability.

This section shall apply to all applications for the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership as defined in SMC 9.82.015. This section shall not apply to applications involving the redevelopment, closure or conversion of a mobilehome park as defined in SMC 9.82.015  . The provisions of Chapter 9.82 SMC shall apply only as set forth herein. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.015  Definitions.

Definitions used to interpret terms in this chapter shall be as set forth in SMC 9.82.015, as applicable unless otherwise set forth herein. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.020  Disclosure and notification requirements.

When an application has been made to the city for the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership, the city shall inform the applicant, in writing, of local regulations regarding notifications to residents within the affected park, as well as the notification requirements set forth in Section 798.56 of the Civil Code. Disclosure of notice requirements by the city shall be made at least 30 days prior to any hearing on the application required by SMC 9.84.050. No hearing on the application shall be held or any other action on the application taken until the applicant has submitted written verification that the applicant has provided residents with all required notices. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.025  Notification to existing residents.

The following resident notifications are required:

A. Notice of Filing of Application. The applicant shall carry out the notice requirements set forth in Government Code Section 66427.1. The applicant shall provide written verification to the city documenting that these requirements have been met. 

B. Notice of All Reports. The applicant shall provide a copy of the report required by Government Code Section 66427.5(b) and this chapter to the resident(s) of each mobilehome lot within the affected mobilehome park. Such notice shall be provided within 15 days after completion of the report, but in no case later than 30 days prior to the public hearing on the application. The applicant shall also provide a copy of the report to any new or prospective residents. 

C. Exclusive Right to Purchase. At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall provide the homeowner(s) of each mobilehome lot written notice of the exclusive right to purchase as set forth in SMC 9.84.045(C). 

D. Right to Continue Residency as a Tenant. At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall provide the resident(s) of each mobilehome lot written notice of the “right to continue residency as a tenant” in the mobilehome park as required by Government Code Section 66427.5(a) and the right to enter into a lifetime lease agreement as set forth in SMC 9.84.045(D).

1. “Right to Continue Residency as a Tenant.” As used in this section and SMC 9.84.045(D), and consistent with Government Code Section 66427.5(a), the “right to continue residency as a tenant” shall refer to the right of a homeowner to continue to lease or rent a mobilehome lot in the mobilehome park for the purpose of maintaining a mobilehome thereon, regardless of whether the homeowner(s) rent or lease the mobilehome to a tenant(s) as defined in SMC 9.82.010.

E. Notice to New Residents. After an application for a conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership has been filed with the city, the applicant shall advise each prospective resident who thereafter proposes to occupy a mobilehome lot within the mobilehome park, in writing, that such application has been filed. Notice shall be provided prior to the execution of a rental agreement or commencement of such occupancy, whichever occurs first. The applicant shall also provide a copy of the tenant impact report to any new or prospective residents. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.030  Contents of application.

An application for a subdivision map involving a conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership shall include:

A. A “survey of resident support” conducted in compliance with Government Code Section 66427.5. The applicant shall submit the completed survey and ballots as part of the application. In the event more than one homeowner’s association purports to represent the homeowners in the mobilehome park, the agreement required by Section 66427.5 shall be with the resident homeowner’s association which represents the greatest number of mobilehome lots in the park. 

B. A “tenant impact report” setting forth the impact of the conversion on residents of the mobilehome park. The tenant impact report shall, at a minimum, include all of the information required by SMC 9.84.035.

C. The most recent “Title 25 report” conducted on site by a qualified inspector demonstrating compliance with Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations and documentation and/or proof of remediation of any Title 25 violations, whether created by the applicant or previously received from the California Department of Housing and Community Development (“HCD”). 

D. A “tentative map” containing all the information required in a tentative map for any subdivision subject to the provisions of SMC 9.84.040.

E. Written verification from the applicant to the city documenting that the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.5 and this section have been met. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.035  Tenant impact report.

A. The tenant impact report shall, at a minimum, include all of the following:

1. Identification of the number of mobilehome lots in the mobilehome park and the rental rate history for each mobilehome lot over the two years prior to the filing of the application;

2. For nonpurchasing homeowners who are not low income under Government Code Section 66427.5(F)(1), identification of the anticipated method and anticipated timetable for determining the rents for the mobilehome lot occupied by such homeowners pursuant to Government Code Section 66427.5(F)(1), and to the extent available, identification of the number of mobilehome lots likely to be subject to these provisions;

3. For nonpurchasing homeowners who are low income under Government Code section 66427.5(F)(2), identification of the anticipated method and anticipated timetable for determining the rents for the mobilehome lot occupied by such homeowners pursuant to Government Code Section 66427.5(F)(2), and to the extent available, identification of the number of mobilehome lots likely to be subject to these provisions;

4. If the useful life of any common facilities or infrastructure is less than 30 years, a study estimating the cost of replacing such facilities over their remaining useful life, and the applicant’s plan, if any, to provide funding for same;

5. An estimate of the annual overhead and operating cost of maintaining the mobilehome park, its common areas and landscaping, including replacement costs as necessary, over the next 30 years and the applicant’s plan, if any, to provide funding for the same;

6. The name and address of each resident, household size and length of time at address;

7. An estimate of the number of residents who are seniors or disabled. An explanation of how the estimate was derived must be included;

8. An estimate of the number of mobilehomes that are homeowner-occupied and the number that are occupied by a tenant(s). For rented mobilehomes, the nature of the tenancy (for instance, by lease or month-to-month) and identity of the leasor;

9. The age of each mobilehome; whether it is a single, double, or triple; and the nature of all site improvements made to the mobilehome lot by the homeowner which are known or reasonably known to the applicant;

10. A survey of existing mobilehome parks, separately listing those within the city and those within a 50-mile radius of the mobilehome park, indicating the availability of vacant mobilehome lots and whether or not the mobilehome park will accept relocating mobilehomes, an estimate of the cost of relocation to mobilehome parks with vacancies, the monthly rent payable in the mobilehome parks, the amenities offered, and any restrictions on the type or age of the mobilehomes that may occupy the mobilehome lot.

B. Except as required by state law, the city’s planning director shall have the authority to waive any of the requirements for the tenant impact report set forth in subsection A of this section upon determination that the information is not relevant to a particular application under consideration. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.040  Tentative map requirements.

The tentative map shall contain all the information required on a tentative map for any subdivision, subject to the following alterations and additions:

A. In lieu of the contour lines normally required on a tentative map, sufficient elevations of the existing ground so that average slope of the ground can be determined at a minimum of two-foot intervals where the slope is less than 50 percent, and 10-foot intervals where the slope is greater than 50 percent.

B. Locations of existing buildings, whether temporary or permanent, swimming pools, recreational areas, mobilehomes and structures appurtenant to those mobilehomes.

C. The boundaries of each individual mobilehome lot.

D. The location of utility pads serving each mobilehome lot.

E. Existing storm drain lines, sanitary sewer and mains, sanitary laterals, water mains, gas mains, underground electric facilities and other underground structures or facilities within the boundaries of the tract and any extension of those facilities beyond the tract boundaries necessary to provide service to the subdivision.

F. Additional information as required by the city’s planning director so that an accurate evaluation of existing and any proposed facilities can be made. The planning director may approve a map prepared from an aerial photograph where, in the opinion of the planning director, sufficient ground measurements are available to evaluate existing facilities. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.045  Application for the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership.

The conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership shall be regulated as set forth in this section. Additionally, the applicable requirements associated with review of a subdivision map application set forth in SMC Title 19 shall apply.

A. Time Limit on Decision. Once a complete application for the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership has been filed, the city council shall approve or disapprove the application within 120 days.

B. Avoidance of Economic Displacement. If the application is approved, the applicant shall in all cases avoid the economic displacement of non-purchasing or nonparticipating homeowners by implementing the offer and avoidance of economic displacement requirements set forth in Government Code Section 66427.5.

C. Tenant Right to Purchase. The applicant shall offer each homeowner the right to purchase the mobilehome lot currently occupied by the homeowner’s mobilehome at the same or more favorable terms and conditions than those on which the mobilehome lot shall initially be offered to the general public. The right shall run for a period of 90 days from the issuance of the subdivision public report by the California Department of Real Estate pursuant to California Business and Professions Code, Section 11018.2, unless the applicant received prior written notice of the homeowner’s intent not to exercise the right. The applicant shall provide written verification to the city documenting that these requirements have been met.

D. Lifetime Leases. The applicant shall offer each homeowner, who elects not to purchase or relocate, a lifetime lease for the mobilehome lot currently occupied by the homeowner’s mobilehome. The right to enter into the lifetime lease shall expire no earlier than 180 days after the issuance of the subdivision public report by the California Department of Real Estate pursuant to California Business and Professions Code, Section 11018.2, unless the applicant received prior written notice of the homeowner’s intent not to exercise the right. Lifetime leases shall include the following conditions:

1. The homeowner cannot be evicted except pursuant to Article 6 of the California Civil Code (commencing at Section 798.55 et seq.).

2. The rent adjustments permitted by Government Code Sections 66427.5(F)(1) and (2) shall take effect no earlier than the first full month following the sale of at least one mobilehome lot to the homeowner whose mobilehome currently occupies that mobilehome lot.

3. All subsequent rent adjustments shall be governed by Government Code Sections 66427.5(F)(1) and (2).

4. Except as provided hereinabove, the terms and conditions of the lifetime mobilehome lot lease shall be the same as those contained in the current lease or rental agreement for that mobilehome lot. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.050  Criteria for approval of a conversion application.

The city council shall not approve the conversion of a mobilehome park to resident ownership unless the city council finds, after hearing on the application and based on the evidence in the record that:

A. The conversion to resident ownership is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific or area plan, and the provisions of SMC Title 19.

B. The conversion is a bona fide resident conversion as set forth in SMC 9.84.055;

C. An appropriate provision has been made for the establishment and funding of an association or corporation adequate to ensure proper long-term management and maintenance of all common facilities and infrastructure; and 

D. There are no conditions existing in the mobilehome park that are detrimental to public health or safety; except, that if any such conditions exist, the application for conversion may be approved if:

1. All of the findings required under subsections A through C of this section are made and the applicant has instituted corrective measures adequate to ensure prompt and continuing protection of the health and safety of mobilehome park residents and the general public.

2. The mobilehome park is suitable for conversion as determined by a review of its physical characteristics, including the report on the existing condition of the mobilehome park.

E. All of the required notifications and findings required by state law have been made, including but not limited to:

1. A survey of resident support has been conducted and filed with the city in accordance with the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter.

2. A tenant impact report has been completed and filed with the city in accordance with the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.055  Criteria for determining whether a proposed conversion is bona fide resident conversion.

A. Bona Fide Resident Conversion Defined. A “bona fide resident conversion” is a conversion to resident ownership that is pursued for the primary purpose of conveying mobilehome lots to current homeowners, rather than to avoid the city’s rent control regulations.

B. In determining whether a conversion to resident ownership is a bona fide resident conversion as required by SMC 9.84.050(B), the following rebuttable presumptions shall apply:

1. Where the survey of resident support conducted in accordance with Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter shows that the homeowners of more than 50 percent of mobilehomes in the mobilehome park support the conversion to resident ownership, the conversion shall be presumed to be a “bona fide resident conversion.” 

2. Where the survey of resident support conducted in accordance with Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter shows that the homeowners of at least 20 percent, but not more than 50 percent, of mobilehomes support conversion of the mobilehome park to resident ownership, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposed conversion is a bona fide resident conversion in accordance with subsection C of this section. 

3. Where the survey of resident support conducted in accordance with Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter shows that the homeowners of less than 20 percent of mobilehomes support the conversion to resident ownership, the conversion shall be presumed not to be a bona fide resident conversion.

C. An applicant may satisfy the burden established by subsection (B)(2) of this section by demonstrating, at a minimum, that a viable plan is in place to convey mobilehome lots to the current homeowners of the mobilehome park within a reasonable period of time. The city council shall have discretion to determine whether the plan presented by the applicant is viable in light of: 

1. The tenant impact report required by Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter.

2. The measure of homeowner support, as demonstrated by the survey of resident support required by Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter.

3. The Title 25 report required by this chapter and documentation and/or remediation of any Title 25 violations.

4. Any and all relevant evidence submitted to the city council by the applicant, residents of the mobilehome park, and/or other interested parties at or prior to the hearing on the application.

D. The presumptions established by subsections (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section may be rebutted by a showing that, despite the measure of support demonstrated by the survey of resident support, the primary purpose of the conversion is to convey mobilehome lots to current homeowners rather than to avoid the city’s rent control regulations. In determining whether the applicable presumption has been rebutted, the city council shall take into consideration the factors set forth in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.060  Waiver of tentative and parcel map requirement.

Where two-thirds of homeowners express support for conversion by signing a petition substantially in the form provided by Government Code Section 66428.1, the applicant may seek a waiver of the tentative and parcel map requirements provided by statute and under this chapter.

A. The waiver shall be granted by the planning commission unless any of the following exceptions apply:

1. Significant health and safety concerns require design or improvement.

2. Exterior boundary discrepancy requires recordation of new parcel/tentative and final maps.

3. The conversion to resident ownership creates additional mobilehome lots that did not exist prior to conversion.

4. Existing parcels were not created by a parcel or final map.

B. The applicant shall be entitled to a decision on the waiver within 50 days of requesting such a waiver. That decision is appealable to the city council. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


9.84.065  Administration fee.

The city council may establish by resolution reasonable fees to cover any costs incurred by the city in implementing this chapter. Such fees shall be paid by the applicant subject to the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the limitation of Section 65863.7(g) of the Government Code. (Ord. 08-2008 § 1, 2008).


Chapter 9.88       MINOR'S CURFEW

Sections:

9.88.010  Curfew designated – Exceptions.

9.88.020  Parent’s responsibility.


9.88.010  Curfew designated – Exceptions.

It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and daylight immediately following; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, guardian, or other adult person having care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment or recreational activity directed, supervised or sponsored by the local school or church authorities or organizations, or when the presence of such minor in the place or places is connected with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged.

Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 273 § 1.00, 1957; Ord. 227 § 1, 1951).


9.88.020  Parent’s responsibility.

It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit or allow such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and daylight immediately following contrary to the provisions of SMC 9.88.010.

Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 273 § 2.00, 1957; Ord. 227 § 2, 1951).


Chapter 9.92       DISCHARGING FIREARMS 

Sections:

9.92.010  Discharge of weapons prohibited.

9.92.020  Permitting process for allowed discharge.

9.92.030  Confiscation of firearm or other device, ammunition, paint ball, or projectile.

9.92.040  Severability.

9.92.050  Penalty for violation.


9.92.010  Discharge of weapons prohibited.

It is unlawful to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged, within the city limits any firearm, rifle, pistol, pellet gun, gas-operated gun, sling shot, spring gun, bow, crossbow, or any other weapon designed to discharge or propel any projectile capable of causing injury or defacement of property within the city, within 500 feet of a home, residence or other structure that is or might be occupied by people or to point or aim such a device at any person or domestic animal or motor vehicles; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to:

A.  Peace officers when acting in the line of duty;

B.  Persons otherwise lawfully acting to protect life or property;

C.  Persons so discharging in or upon an educational institution as a curricular activity or a business establishment licensed by the city for such purposes;

D.  Any person who has obtained a permit from the city council to discharge one or more of the above-referenced instruments for a personal and/or business purpose of for an archery or shooting club; or

E.  Any person who, with the consent of the owner of a private building, discharges one or more of the above-referenced instruments known as air rifle, air gun, b.b. gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun, gas-operated gun, sling shot, spring gun, bow, or crossbow for personal practice purposes within said private building, where the projectiles thereof cannot penetrate to the exterior of such building. (Ord. 91-16 § 2, 1991).


9.92.020  Permitting process for allowed discharge.

In issuing any such permit or permits, the city council shall designate the particular location where such discharge is allowed, the period of time during which such discharge is allowed and the specific business purpose for which such discharge is allowed. The city council may further condition any such permit to provide additional protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 91-16 § 2, 1991).


9.92.030  Confiscation of firearm or other device, ammunition, paint ball, or projectile.

It shall be the duty of any peace officer of the city to take from the possession of any person any of the said above-described instruments, weapons or devices that are being or have been used in violation of the same in accordance with instructions of the chief of police. (Ord. 91-16 § 2, 1991).


9.92.040  Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portions thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 91-16 § 2, 1991).


9.92.050  Penalty for violation.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to violate any provisions or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 91-16 § 2, 1991).

 


Title 10       VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.08  Definitions

10.12  Traffic Administration

10.16  Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations

10.20  Traffic Control Devices

10.24  Turning Movements

10.28  One-Way Streets and Alleys

10.44  Pedestrian Regulations

10.48  Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.52  Stopping for Loading or Unloading

10.56  Restricted Use of Certain Streets

10.60  Truck Routes

10.64  Obstruction to Visibility at Intersections

10.69  Increase or Decrease of Prima Facie Speed Limits

10.73  Removal of Abandoned and Other Nuisance Vehicles

10.74  Bicycles, Skateboards and Like Vehicles

10.76  Penalties


Chapter 10.08       DEFINITIONS

Sections:

10.08.010  Generally.

10.08.020  Vehicle Code definitions to be used.

10.08.030  Central traffic district.


10.08.010  Generally.

The words and phrases in SMC 10.08.020 through 10.08.030, when used in this title, shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.08.020  Vehicle Code definitions to be used.

Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply.

"Holidays" means all generally recognized federal and state holidays. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday is a holiday. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.08.030  Central traffic district.

"Central traffic district" means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by First Street East from Spain Street to Patten Street, Patten Street to all of Broadway to MacArthur Street, thence returning to Andrieux Street, Andrieux Street to First Street West, First Street West to West Napa Street, West Napa Street to its junction with Sonoma Highway and return to First Street West, First Street West to Spain Street, Spain Street to First Street East, and point of commencement. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.12       TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

10.12.060  City engineer.

10.12.070  Powers and duties of city engineer – Delegation.

10.12.080  Traffic safety committee established.

10.12.090  Duties of traffic safety committee.


10.12.060  City engineer.

The city engineer shall be authorized to place or maintain traffic control devices, signs or signals. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.12.070  Powers and duties of city engineer – Delegation.

It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.12.080  Traffic safety committee established.

The traffic safety committee shall consist of five members appointed in accordance with SMC 2.40.100. At least four of the members shall be qualified electors of the city. 

In order to implement the intent of SMC 2.40.070, while providing for staggered terms of office for the first appointees to the traffic safety committee, terms of office for the first appointees shall be as follows: three members shall be appointed for two-year initial terms and two members shall be appointed for one-year initial terms. Notwithstanding the provisions of SMC 2.40.070, the two appointees to one-year terms shall not serve for a total of more than seven years. At the time of initial appointments, the city council shall determine which of the appointees will serve two-year initial terms and which shall serve one-year initial terms. (Ord. 13-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.12.090  Duties of traffic safety committee.

It shall be the duty of the traffic safety committee to evaluate traffic safety issues that are referred to the committee by city staff or by the city council and to make recommendations to the city council as to the resolution of such issues. (Ord. 13-2003 § 2, 2003; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.16       ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.16.020  Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.

10.16.050  Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.

10.16.090  When vehicles may be removed from streets.


10.16.020  Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.

No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 2000-4 § 1, 2000).


10.16.050  Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.

No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.16.090  When vehicles may be removed from streets.

Any officer of the police department shall remove or cause to be removed:

A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours;

B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal; 

C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.20       TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES

Sections: 

10.20.010  Authority to install traffic control devices.

10.20.020  Traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes.

10.20.040  Installation of traffic signals.

10.20.070  Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices.

10.20.090  Unauthorized painting of curbs.


10.20.010  Authority to install traffic control devices.

The city engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices and markings when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.20.020  Traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes.

No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate visible devices are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.20.040  Installation of traffic signals.

A.  The city traffic engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

B.  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Traffic Manual and the California Maintenance Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation.

C.  Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.20.070  Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices.

The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation traffic control device or markings not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted installation no longer exist. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.20.090  Unauthorized painting of curbs.

No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of address numbers on a curb subject to applicable city regulations. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.24       TURNING MOVEMENTS

Sections:

10.24.010  Authority to place turning markers at intersections – Multiple lanes.

10.24.020  Authority to place restricted turn signs.

10.24.030  Signal controlled intersections – Right turns.


10.24.010  Authority to place turning markers at intersections – Multiple lanes.

The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.24.020  Authority to place restricted turn signs.

The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.24.030  Signal controlled intersections – Right turns.

A.  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section. 

B.  The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.28       ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS

Sections:

10.28.010  City traffic engineer to sign one-way streets and alleys.


10.28.010  City traffic engineer to sign one-way streets and alleys.

Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.44       PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS

Sections: 

10.44.010  Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks.

10.44.020  When pedestrians must use crosswalks – Pedestrians include skaters and skateboarders, etc.


10.44.010  Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks.

A.  The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside the district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock.

C.  The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.44.020  When pedestrians must use crosswalks – Pedestrians include skaters and skateboarders, etc.

No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in any other place in the city where there is a marked crosswalk within 100 feet in any direction, except in such a crosswalk. A "pedestrian" includes any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle, including, but not limited to, roller skates and skateboards. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.48 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections: 

10.48.010    Application of regulations.

10.48.030    City public works superintendent to maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas.

10.48.040    No parking areas.

10.48.041    Limited parking at City Hall grounds in the Plaza.

10.48.043    Vehicles over six feet in height – Parking or standing prohibited on Highway 12 within 100 feet of intersections.

10.48.050    Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.

10.48.060    Parking for demonstration.

10.48.070    Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.

10.48.080    Washing or polishing vehicles.

10.48.090    Parking adjacent to schools.

10.48.100    Parking prohibited on narrow streets.

10.48.110    Parking on grades.

10.48.120    Unlawful parking – Peddlers, vendors.

10.48.130    Emergency parking signs.

10.48.160    Twenty-four-minute parking.

10.48.190    Parking in violation of regulations established by resolution.

10.48.195    Repealed.

10.48.200    Parking parallel on one-way streets.

10.48.210    Diagonal parking.

10.48.220    Parking space markings.

10.48.230    No stopping zones.

10.48.240    Repealed.

10.48.250    Private parking lots – Unlawful parking in spaces reserved for handicapped persons.

10.48.260    Preferential parking permit program.


10.48.010 Application of regulations.

A. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

B. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or any other city ordinance regulating the standing, stopping and parking of vehicles on city street rights-of-way, the city engineer is authorized to grant encroachment permits pursuant to the authority delegated to him by other provisions of city ordinance, for the purpose of allowing the placement of debris boxes, trucks, trailers or other receptacles or devices used in connection with the construction or demolition of buildings, or for street construction or repair, in such manner as to occupy portions of public streets otherwise set aside for standing, stopping or parking of motor vehicles. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be temporary, however, for purpose of facilitating construction and demolition of structures (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.030 City public works superintendent to maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas.

The city public works superintendent is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.040 No parking areas.

No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle where the city engineer has determined that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, or in any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.041 Limited parking at City Hall grounds in the Plaza.

A. The parking of motor vehicles, including motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, within the Sonoma Plaza is limited to parking for business purposes within City Hall. The parking areas on the east, west and north sides of the City Hall building shall be reserved for parking by employees of the city except those parking spaces reserved for the handicapped as evidenced by appropriate signs. No public parking is allowed within the Sonoma Plaza area on the days and during the time that the City Hall is closed to the public.

B. The city clerk, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to approve variances to the parking restrictions contained in this section during periods when the Sonoma Plaza is being used for special activities or events in accordance with an approved permit.

C. Except for authorized maintenance and construction vehicles and equipment, no person shall operate motor vehicles, including motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, upon the sidewalks, lawns or other park areas of the Sonoma Plaza.

D. For the purpose of this section, the Sonoma Plaza is defined as that area bounded on the north by Spain Street, on the south by Napa Street, on the east by First Street East and on the west by First Street West. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.043 Vehicles over six feet in height – Parking or standing prohibited on Highway 12 within 100 feet of intersections.

No person shall park or stand any motor vehicle any part of which, including any load thereon, exceeds six feet in height at any time during day or night at any location on State Sign Route 12 within the limits of the city (including but not limited to Broadway and West Napa Street) within 100 feet of any intersecting street or alley. The ordinance codified in this section is enacted under Section 22507 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.050 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 

No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.060 Parking for demonstration.

No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.070 Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.

No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.080 Washing or polishing vehicles. 

No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.090 Parking adjacent to schools.

A. The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B. When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.100 Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 

A. The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.

B. When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.110 Parking on grades.

No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (within any business or residence district) without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.120 Unlawful parking – Peddlers, vendors.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

B. No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, no pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

C. No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

D. Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city traffic engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.130 Emergency parking signs.

A. Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer directs during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.160 Twenty-four-minute parking.

Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday(s) and holidays. When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.190 Parking in violation of regulations established by resolution.

The city council may, by resolution, regulate parking upon any street or highway of the city, or any off-street parking facility which the city owns or operates, including the determination and designation of parking time limits, and is authorized and directed, in the event of the adoption of any such resolution pursuant hereto, to place, paint and maintain or cause to be placed, painted or maintained the necessary signs, markers or painted curbs that may be required by the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state. 

It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon any street or highway of the city, or any off-street parking facility which the city own or operates, in violation of any regulation, including the designation of parking time limits, that has been established by resolution of the city council, and posted, painted or marked in accordance with this section. (Ord. 02-2013 § 1, 2013; Ord. 01-2013 § 1, 2013; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.195 Two-hour parking at all times.

Repealed by Ord. 01-2013. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.200 Parking parallel on one-way streets.

A. Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

B. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

C. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking is prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

D. The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.210 Diagonal parking. 

It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except at the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space. The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.220 Parking space markings.

The city public works superintendent is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.230 No stopping zones.

The city public works superintendent shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day(s) when stopping is prohibited. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.240 All night parking prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 01-2013. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.250 Private parking lots – Unlawful parking in spaces reserved for handicapped persons. 

It is the policy of the city that the provisions of Section 22507.8(a) of the California Vehicle Code apply to privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle not designated as being operated by a handicapped person in a stall or space designated for physically handicapped persons. Unlawfully parked vehicles may be removed from such spaces pursuant to Section 22511.8 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.48.260 Preferential parking permit program. 

Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 22507 of the California Vehicle Code, a parking permit program is established which grants preferential parking privileges to residents and merchants adjacent to certain streets. Permits shall be issued and the program administered by the chief of police. Permits shall be for the benefit of adjacent residents and merchants and their guests and shall be effective only upon the street or street segment stated on the permit. The number of permits to be issued shall be determined by the chief of police. Permit holders shall be exempt from the restrictions of SMC 10.48.190 and 10.48.240. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.52       STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING

Sections:

10.52.010  Authority to establish loading zones.

10.52.020  Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.

10.52.030  Effect of permission to load or unload.


10.52.010  Authority to establish loading zones.

A.  The city public works superintendent is authorized to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones.

B.  "Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb or other specifically designated area reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

C.  "Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

D.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

E.  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones, or in the absence of curbs, a loading zone shall be marked with a yellow stripe along the entire perimeter of such zone.

F.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in the zones. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999). 


10.52.020  Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.

The city public works superintendent is authorized to place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

A.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone;

B.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday(s) and holiday(s) for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials;

C.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holiday(s);

D.  Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday(s) and holidays;

E.  It is unlawful for any person in charge of any vehicle to permit such vehicle to remain standing at any time for a continuous period of time longer than two hours at posted locations so designated for two-hour parking, except by permit as provided in SMC 10.48.260. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.52.030  Effect of permission to load or unload.

A.  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary.

B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C.  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor.

D.  The provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.56 RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS*

Sections:

10.56.010    Certain vehicles prohibited in central traffic district.

10.56.020    Advertising vehicles.

10.56.030    Animal-drawn vehicles – Permit required.

10.56.050    Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets.

10.56.051    Commercial vehicles prohibited from parking in residential districts.

10.56.060    Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment – Permit required.

10.56.070    Repealed.

*For boundaries of central traffic district, see Chapter 10.08 SMC.


10.56.010 Certain vehicles prohibited in central traffic district.

A. No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day:

1. Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than 20 feet to the front or rear of the vehicle;

2. Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district;

3. Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage or dirt.

B. Provided, that the city traffic engineer may, by written permit, authorize the operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency deliveries to or from points within the central traffic district. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.56.020 Advertising vehicles.

No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district without a permit therefor issued by the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.56.030 Animal-drawn vehicles – Permit required. 

No person shall drive, move or operate any animal-drawn vehicle on any public city street or within the Plaza Horseshoe except by written permit of the city. Such vehicles utilized during special events held under city permit such as parades are exempted from this section. Permit authority and regulations for animal-drawn vehicles shall be established by the city council by resolution. In cases of immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare, the police chief may revoke permits for animal-drawn vehicles. Any animal-drawn vehicle permitted to enter the plaza or other city park shall be exempted from Sections 8.12.070 and 9.12.180. No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the central traffic district between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day. (Ord. 08.5-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.56.050 Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 

A. Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.

B. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.56.051 Commercial vehicles prohibited from parking in residential districts. 

It is unlawful to park or stand on any street in a residential district any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more, except commercial vehicles when actually in use to deliver or pick up goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure in the vicinity, or when actually in use to deliver materials to be used in the bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure in the near vicinity for which a building permit has been obtained. This section does not apply to recreational vehicles or other vehicles kept for purely personal use. Violation of this section is an infraction. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.56.060 Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment – Permit required.

No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without an encroachment permit from the city engineer. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.56.070 Motor-driven vehicles prohibited on bicycle paths.

Repealed by Ord. 01-2014. (Ord. 2000-4 § 2, 2000; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.60       TRUCK ROUTES

Sections:

10.60.015  Designated truck routes.

10.60.040  Designation of truck route.

10.60.070  Trucks on certain city bridges.

10.60.130  Andrieux Street restriction.


10.60.015  Designated truck routes.

A.  The city is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "truck routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons.

B.  When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a "truck route" having ingress and egress, by direct route, to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets.

C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

1.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or

2.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.60.040  Designation of truck route.

The streets of the city which are used as a through truck traffic route are designated as Broadway and that portion of Napa Street lying west of Broadway, they being already designated as such by the State Highway Department, and they are so designated and appropriate signs shall be installed thereon. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.60.070  Trucks on certain city bridges.

Any motor truck trailer, motor vehicle or any mobile equipment, the weight of which, including the load carried by it, is in excess of five tons, is prohibited from traveling on, over or across the bridges designated and appropriately posted by the city engineer. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.60.130  Andrieux Street restriction. 

No motor vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of 6,000 pounds shall use Andrieux Street between Second and Fifth Streets West, except any vehicle exempted by statute, and except for local delivery purposes under permit by the director of public works. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.64       OBSTRUCTION TO VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS

Sections:

10.64.010  Shrubbery obstructing visibility of intersections.


10.64.010  Shrubbery obstructing visibility of intersections.

Upon any complaint or notice, if the public works superintendent finds that any hedge, shrubbery, tree or other vegetation growing in the public right of way obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the public streets approaching such intersection, he/she shall cause the hedge, shrubbery, tree or other vegetation to be immediately trimmed or removed. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.69 INCREASE OR DECREASE OF PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

10.69.010    Powers of the city council.

10.69.020    Repealed.

10.69.025    Repealed.

10.69.030    Repealed.

10.69.040    Repealed.


10.69.010 Powers of the city council.

Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that a speed greater or less than the prima facie or maximum speed limit otherwise established by the California Vehicle Code is reasonable and safe upon any local street, it may by resolution increase or decrease speed limits in accordance with Sections 32, 22357, 22358 and 22358.3 of the California Vehicle Code, or other authorization of general state law. Prima facie or maximum speed limits established pursuant to this chapter shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the affected street. (Ord. 10-2009 § 2, 2009; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.69.020 Increased limit on certain streets. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-2009. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.69.025 Decreased limit to 45 miles per hour on certain streets.

Repealed by Ord. 10-2009. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.69.030 Decreased limit to 35 miles per hour on certain streets.

Repealed by Ord. 10-2009. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.69.040 Decreased limit to 25 miles per hour on certain streets.

Repealed by Ord. 10-2009. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.73       REMOVAL OF ABANDONED AND OTHER NUISANCE VEHICLES

Sections:

10.73.010  Declaration of nuisance.

10.73.020  Definitions.

10.73.030  Exceptions.

10.73.040  Nonexclusive regulation.

10.73.050  Enforcement.

10.73.060  Contract for performance of duties.

10.73.070  Administrative costs.

10.73.080  Discovery.

10.73.090  Notice.

10.73.100  Request for hearing.

10.73.110  Conduct of hearings.

10.73.120  Disposal of vehicle.

10.73.130  Notice to state.

10.73.140  Assessment against land.

10.73.150  Waiver of hearing.


10.73.010  Declaration of nuisance.

In addition and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted by this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.020  Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A.  "Highway" means a way or place, of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes "street."

B.  "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

C.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

D.  "Public property" does not include "highway."

E.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.030  Exceptions. 

This chapter shall not apply to: 

A.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.040  Nonexclusive regulation. 

This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.050  Enforcement.

The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police; or the city council by resolution shall designate the appropriate authority for administration and enforcement. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his deputies, or such designee and his deputies, may enter upon public or private property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.060  Contract for performance of duties.

When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to perform duties under this chapter, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.070  Administrative costs.

The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual costs of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. The cost of administration may be set as a fixed sum per removal, or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.080  Discovery.

Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police or other enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.090  Notice.

A 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

A.  Notice to Landowner.

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.

____________________________________ (Name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to the Sonoma Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to _________, license number _____, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Sonoma Municipal Code Chapter 10.73.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Sonoma and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council within such 10-day period, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration of such hearing.

Notice Mailed

_______________ (date)

City of Sonoma

By ___________________ Enforcement Officer.

B.  Notice to Vehicle Owner.

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AS ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

___________________________________ (Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle – notice should be given to both if different)

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to the Sonoma Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.73 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council within such 10-day period, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

Notice Mailed

_______________ (date)

City of Sonoma

By ___________________ Enforcement Officer.

(Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.100  Request for hearing.

Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received within 10 days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such 10-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, at least 10 days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.110  Conduct of hearings. 

All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council, or any other board, commissioner or official designated by the city council, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, denying his responsibility for the presence of the vehicle upon his land. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed upon the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.120  Disposal of vehicle.

Five days after adoption of an order after a hearing declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision, if such notice is required to be given to persons not present at the hearing, or 15 days after such action authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard, or otherwise as authorized by the Vehicle Code. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, except as authorized by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.130  Notice to state. 

Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence or registration available, including but not limited to registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.140  Assessment against land.

If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.73.150  Waiver of hearing.

No hearing need be held under this chapter if signed releases are provided by the property owner and vehicle owner to authorize removal and waive further interest of the vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle). (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 10.74 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND LIKE VEHICLES

Sections:

10.74.010    Operation of bicycles and other conveyances on public sidewalks, or bicycle or pedestrian paths.

10.74.011    Motor-driven vehicles prohibited on bicycle paths.

10.74.020    Skate park regulations.


10.74.010 Operation of bicycles and other conveyances on public sidewalks, or bicycle or pedestrian paths.

A. Except as is otherwise provided in this code, it shall be lawful for a person to ride, use or operate a bicycle propelled by human power or other means of conveyance propelled by human power, including roller skates, a skateboard, coaster, scooter, or tricycle, any place in the city upon a public sidewalk or public pedestrian or bicycle path. 

B. It is unlawful for any person to ride, use, or operate a bicycle or other conveyance propelled by human or motor power, including roller skates, a skateboard, coaster, scooter, tricycle, or other similar device any place in the city upon a sidewalk, or pedestrian or bicycle path, at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent having due regard for weather, visibility, traffic, width of sidewalk or path, or at a speed or in such a manner which endangers the safety of persons or property. When a person riding, using, or operating a bicycle or similar conveyance identified above encounters a pedestrian upon a sidewalk, they should yield the right-of-way to the pedestrian when reasonable and prudent given the totality of the circumstances.

C. It is unlawful for any person to ride, use, or operate a bicycle or other conveyance propelled by human or motor power identified in subsection (B) of this section, upon the sidewalks in the downtown Plaza area, specifically the public sidewalks on both sides of First Street West between Spain Street and Napa Street, First Street East between Spain Street and Napa Street, Napa Street between First Street East and First Street West, and Spain Street between First Street East and First Street West. 

D. Except as is otherwise provided in SMC 10.74.011, it is unlawful for any person to ride, use, or operate a bicycle propelled by motor power or other conveyance propelled by motor power any place in the city upon a sidewalk, or pedestrian or bicycle path. This subsection does not apply to (1) self-propelled wheelchairs, motorized tricycles or motorized quadricycles operated by persons who, by reason of physical disability, are otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian and (2) means of conveyances that are solely powered by battery, are manufactured for use by children and are commonly considered toys.

E. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, and the operation of any conveyance in any manner prohibited by this section by any person, or by any group of persons in company with another, is declared a public nuisance which may be summarily abated by any peace officer retained by the city by seizure and impoundment of the conveyance or conveyances used in the offense. Any conveyance seized and impounded under this section shall be held for disposition as may be ordered by the court which hears and disposes of the infraction charge against the offender, or any other court of competent jurisdiction.

F. This section shall not apply to city personnel who are authorized to ride, use or operate a bicycle propelled by human or motor power or other means of conveyance propelled by human or motor power any place in the city upon a sidewalk, or pedestrian or bicycle path. (Ord. 01-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


10.74.011 Motor-driven vehicles prohibited on bicycle paths.

Except for authorized city personnel, no person shall operate any motor-driven vehicle, including a motor-driven bicycle, scooter, skateboard or similar device onto or along any city bicycle path, except those defined as follows:

A. A “motorized bicycle,” which is a device that has fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power and has an electric motor that meets all of the following requirements: has a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; is incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; is incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power is used to propel the motorized bicycle faster than 20 miles per hour.

B. A “motorized scooter,” which is any two-wheeled device that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by human propulsion and electrical energy with a motor that has a power output of not more than 1,000 watts and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 15 miles per hour on level ground. (Ord. 01-2014 § 3, 2014).


10.74.020 Skate park regulations.

A. All persons must comply with the following regulations while inside the skate park facility:

1. Skate park facility use will be from 8:00 a.m. to dusk. Use of the skate park at any other time is prohibited unless by special city permission and permit. The facility shall only be used when gates are open or the skate area is not posted as closed.

2. All persons riding a skateboard or in-line skates shall wear personal safety equipment, which consists at a minimum of helmet, elbow pads on each elbow and kneepads on each knee.

3. All person not actively participating in a skating activity shall remain on the outside of the fence.

4. All food and drink are prohibited in the designated skate area.

5. No movable obstacles or materials (i.e., ramps/jumps) are allowed in the park.

6. Bicycles, scooters, motorized or gear-driven conveyances are prohibited and declared a public nuisance within the fenced area of the park.

7. Placing graffiti or vandalizing anywhere in or on the park is prohibited and the park will be closed until the graffiti or vandalism is removed and/or repaired. In addition to other penalties provided herein, any person putting graffiti or vandalizing on any part of the skate park shall pay for the cost of removal and damages thereof.

8. The following personal conduct and behavior are prohibited in the park area at all times:

a. Possession or use of drugs or alcohol or being under the influence;

b. Fighting or other violence;

c. Possession or use of firearms, knives, or other weapons of any kind;

d. Smoking or use of tobacco products.

9. Everyone will treat each other with respect and courtesy.

B. Penalties.

1. Any person in violation of any of the regulations of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to citation. A first offense may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation; a second violation within a year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00; a third or further infraction with a year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00.

2. Second and subsequent offenses within a year may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor.

3. Any person found by a preponderance of the evidence to have violated any provision of this section may lose his/her privilege to use the skate park facility for up to one year. (Ord. 2000-15 § 2, 2000).


Chapter 10.76       PENALTIES

Sections:

10.76.010  Penalty for violations.


10.76.010  Penalty for violations.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this title, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 99-9 § 1, 1999).


Title 11       (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Chapters:

12.04    Obstruction to Streets and Public Ways

12.06    Sidewalk Seating Permits

12.08    Tree Ordinance

12.09    Heritage Tree Ordinance

12.12    Sidewalk and Driveway Construction

12.14    Public Improvements Construction

12.16    Underground Utility Installation

12.20    Encroachments

12.24    Newsracks


Chapter 12.04 OBSTRUCTION TO STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS

Sections:

12.04.010    Animals prohibited.

12.04.020    Hitching animals.

12.04.030    Public use restriction prohibited.

12.04.040    Outdoor display of merchandise on sidewalk areas.


12.04.010 Animals prohibited.

No person shall cause or permit any vehicle or animal under his charge to stand or go upon any public sidewalk, or to stand upon the crosswalks thereof, or so near thereto as to obstruct the same. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 6, 1900).


12.04.020 Hitching animals.

No person shall leave standing in any of the streets, alleys or highways of this city any horse or animals attached to or hitched to any wagon, cart, carriage, buggy, or other vehicle unless attended by some person of suitable age and discretion or hitched in a good and substantial manner; provided, that drivers of delivery wagons or carts used in this city for delivering goods from stores therein may fasten or hitch the animal or animals drawing such delivery wagon by fastening or hitching such animal or animals to a weight, weighing not less than 20 pounds, placed upon the ground. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 7, 1900).


12.04.030 Public use restriction prohibited.

No person shall place any crates, cases, barrels, boxes or tanks on the sidewalk, nor suffer anything to remain thereon in front of premises occupied by him, which will in any manner restrict the public use thereof; but this restriction shall not apply to goods in the actual course of receipt or delivery into or from any place of business, if a space of not less than six feet in width of the sidewalk is left free for public travel at all times and such goods are removed from the sidewalk without delay. (Ord. 68 Art. XV § 16, 1900).


12.04.040 Outdoor display of merchandise on sidewalk areas.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage commerce and promote pedestrian traffic by allowing opportunities for safe and visually appealing outdoor display of merchandise in conjunction with commercial businesses, on and immediately adjacent to public sidewalks in the city of Sonoma.

B. Definitions.

1. “Outdoor display of merchandise” means the use of sidewalk areas by an immediately adjoining commercial business for the display and sale of merchandise, goods or commodities, including any structures such as tables, chairs, racks, etc., from which merchandise is displayed and/or sold.

2. “Sidewalk areas” means the public sidewalk and/or privately-owned areas immediately adjacent to the public sidewalk, including but not limited to pedestrian ways, arcades, entries, and alcoves.

C. Permit Required. Ongoing outdoor displays of merchandise may be allowed on sidewalk areas adjacent to commercial businesses, subject to approval of an outdoor merchandise display permit as set forth in this section.

D. Permissible Locations. Outdoor display of merchandise on sidewalk areas must be in conjunction with, and clearly incidental to, operation of an adjacent commercial business. Merchandise displayed in front of a business shall be confined to that portion of sidewalk area directly in front of the associated adjacent commercial business, subject to the standards of this chapter.

E. Requirements for Outdoor Display Areas. Outdoor displays shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Maximum Area. The area devoted to outdoor display of merchandise shall not exceed a footprint of 16 square feet per business, unless approved by the design review and historic preservation commission.

2. Maximum Height. The maximum height for any portion of an outdoor merchandise display is seven feet.

3. Dimensions. Outdoor merchandise display areas shall not extend more than two feet from the adjacent store front, as measured perpendicular from the exterior building wall of the adjacent structure. 

F. Required Sidewalk Clearance and Accessibility. In all cases, a minimum clearance of four feet of public sidewalk width shall be maintained unimpeded and free of obstruction at all points to allow for safe pedestrian circulation and handicap access. Doorways and other building entrances and exits shall not be impeded and in all cases shall comply with the building code for door clearances and exit width. 

G. Hours of Operation. Outdoor display of merchandise is limited to the hours of operation of the related adjacent commercial business. All material associated with the outdoor display, including goods, commodities and display structures (i.e., tables, racks, etc.), shall be removed from the sidewalk area and taken indoors upon the close of each business day.

H. Permit Process. Applicants for outside merchandise display permits shall submit a written application to the planning division on a city form. Outdoor merchandise display permit applications shall be considered and acted upon administratively by the planning and community services director or his/her designee, or by the design review and historic preservation commission, subject to the regulations in this title. Permit applications must include a site plan and proof of insurance, and shall be accompanied by a fee set by the city council by resolution. If the application is found to be complete and in compliance with the provisions of this section, a permit shall be granted. Proof of insurance must be provided on an annual basis thereafter.

I. Special Limitations. An outdoor merchandise display permit is an interruptible or revocable privilege. The city shall have the right and power, acting through the city manager or his/her designee, to suspend the operation of an outdoor merchandise display area at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades, marches, demonstrations, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior notice of any time period during which the city will suspend the operation of the outside merchandise display area.

J. Proof of Insurance. Prior to issuance of an outdoor merchandise display permit, the applicant shall provide proof of insurance and indemnification as required under the city’s risk management policies. Proof of insurance shall be provided to the city as part of the original permit application and on a yearly basis thereafter.

K. Signage. All signage associated with the outdoor merchandise display shall conform to the requirements of the city’s sign regulations (SMC Title 18, Signs and Display Advertising). Notwithstanding, individual price tags on merchandise are allowed.

L. Aesthetics. All material associated with outdoor display of merchandise, including goods, commodities and display structures (i.e., tables, racks, etc.) shall be kept clean, attractive, safe, and in good repair. The permittee shall also be responsible for keeping the sidewalk area in front of the business clean, swept and free of litter and debris.

M. Permit Revocation. An outdoor merchandise display permit may be revoked by the planning and community services administrator, following written notice to the permittee, if one or more of the conditions of the permit or of this section have been violated or if the outdoor merchandise display area is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, or unduly impedes or restricts the movements of pedestrians. Following revocation, no application for the same site shall be filed for a period of six months.

N. Appeals. The granting, denial or revocation of an outdoor merchandise display permit may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 19.84 SMC.

O. Sunset Clause. The ordinance codified in this section shall expire one year from the effective date [April 6, 2002] of its execution unless, prior to that date, the city council takes affirmative action to extend the ordinance. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 01-2011 §§ 1, 2, 2011; Ord. 2002-02 § 1, 2002; Ord. 77-17 § 1, 1977; Ord. 76-21 § 1, 1976).


Chapter 12.06       SIDEWALK SEATING PERMITS

Sections:

12.06.010  Purpose.

12.06.020  Sidewalk seating defined.

12.06.030  Administration.

12.06.040  Requirements and limitations.

12.06.050  Terms and renewal.

12.06.060  Revocation.

12.06.070  Appeals.


12.06.010  Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the conditions and requirements under which sidewalk seating, as defined, may be allowed to operate by permit on a public sidewalk within the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, permits for sidewalk seating shall be administered as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


12.06.020  Sidewalk seating defined.

Sidewalk seating is any group of tables, chairs and appurtenances situated and maintained upon the public sidewalk for use in connection with the consumption of food and beverages sold to the public from an adjoining indoor restaurant. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


12.06.030  Administration.

Sidewalk seating shall be allowed only by issuance of a permit approved by the community development director through the following procedure:

A.  The applicant shall submit a complete application, the form and content of which shall be as defined by the community development director. Fees for the application for or renewal of a sidewalk seating permit shall be set forth by the city council through resolution and as modified by the city council from time to time. Applications for sidewalk seating permits shall not be processed until a complete application has been made to the satisfaction of the community development director and all fees paid.

B.  The community development director shall provide notice of the application by posting the site and its surroundings for a period of 14 days.

C.  The community development director shall circulate the application to interested city departments for comments.

D.  At the close of the 14-day review period, the community development director shall act on the application, as follows: (1) grant the application, subject to conditions, if it meets the requirements of this chapter; (2) deny the application if it does not meet the requirements of this chapter; (3) refer the application to the planning commission for a determination if substantial public concerns have been expressed in the course of the review period. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


12.06.040  Requirements and limitations.

Sidewalk seating applications shall be subject to the following requirements and limitations:

A.  Sidewalk seating shall only be allowed in commercial zoning districts only and only in conjunction with and directly adjacent to an indoor restaurant which operates the seating. The sidewalk seating area shall extend no further than the actual street frontage of the indoor restaurant space. The sidewalk seating associated with an indoor restaurant shall be confined to a single area as designated on an approved permit.

B.  The total amount of outdoor seating associated with an indoor restaurant, whether on the sidewalk or on private property, shall not exceed 25 percent of the indoor seating of the restaurant, unless a greater amount is approved by use permit as set forth in Chapter 19.03 SMC.

C.  Outdoor seating areas shall only be allowed where there is adequate room to accommodate both normal pedestrian and handicapped traffic and the seating area. A minimum six-foot clear area of sidewalk between the seating area and any curb or obstruction shall be provided.

D.  All outdoor seating furniture, including tables, chairs, planters and umbrellas, shall be moveable. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base of not less than 60 pounds. Outdoor heaters, music and speakers are prohibited.

E.  The operator shall not permit the following outside the building: food preparation; tables preset with utensils, glasses, napkins or condiments; busing stations or storage; trash receptacles. All exterior surfaces shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the outdoor seating area in a clean and safe condition at all times.

F.  Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Tables, chairs and all other furniture shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors at night and whenever the seating area is not in use. The city, acting through the city manager or his designee, shall have the right to prohibit the operation of an outdoor seating area at any time because of actual or anticipated conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled events or festivals, parades, repairs to the street or sidewalk, demonstrations, or emergencies. To the extent possible, the city shall endeavor to provide prior written notice to the permittee that the operation of the sidewalk seating area will be suspended, but failure to provide such notice shall not affect the right and power of the city to prohibit the operation of any sidewalk seating area at any time. The decision to suspend operation of an outdoor seating area shall not be subject to appeal unless the suspension exceeds 30 days.

G.  Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk seating permit, the applicant shall provide proof of insurance and indemnification as required under the city’s risk management policies.

H.  Compliance with all applicable regulations of the department of alcoholic beverage control shall be required. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


12.06.050  Terms and renewal.

A sidewalk seating permit shall be valid for a period of one year. As long as all terms of the permit continue to be met and substantive complaints about the operation have not been received, the community development director may renew the permit each year without undergoing the notice and administrative review procedure. If necessary to address actual or anticipated problems with the operation, the community development director may impose additional conditions or require that the public notice and administrative review be repeated. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


12.06.060  Revocation.

A sidewalk seating permit may be revoked by the community development director at any time and without prior notice if it is found that the conditions of the permit or of this chapter have been violated, or that the sidewalk seating area is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, or if the operation of the sidewalk seating area unduly restricts or impedes the movement of pedestrians. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


12.06.070  Appeals.

The decision of the community development director or the planning commission to approve or revoke a sidewalk seating permit shall be subject to the appeal provisions set forth in Chapter 19.84 SMC. (Ord. 93-3 § 3, 1993).


Chapter 12.08 TREE ORDINANCE

Sections:

Article I. Purpose

12.08.010    Declaration of legislative purpose and findings.

Article II. Definitions

12.08.020    Definitions.

Article III. Prohibitions

12.08.030    Trees on public properties.

12.08.032    Significant trees.

12.08.035    Applications for new development.

12.08.038    Removal of trees in anticipation of development.

Article IV. Exceptions

12.08.040    Exceptions to tree committee and permit requirements.

Article V. Permits

12.08.050    Tree alteration or removal or relocation permits.

Article VI. Pruning and Trimming Regulations and Guidelines

12.08.060    Pruning and trimming regulations and guidelines.

Article VII. Maintenance and Replacement

12.08.065    Maintenance and replacement.

Article VIII. Appeals

12.08.070    Appeals.

Article IX. Enforcement

12.08.080    Civil fine for violation.

12.08.090    Criminal penalty for violation.

12.08.100    Injunctions.

12.08.110    Replacement trees.

12.08.120    Enforcing authority.

Article I. Purpose


12.08.010 Declaration of legislative purpose and findings.

The city council finds and declares that trees contribute greatly to the health, safety and general welfare of all of the city’s citizens and that the preservation and proper maintenance of trees is a matter of city-wide concern. The city council further finds and determines that it is necessary to enact regulations prohibiting unnecessary damage, removal or destruction of trees.

The city council recognizes and finds that trees provide great aesthetic benefits, offer windbreaks, provide summer shade, noise abatement and privacy screening, erosion control, act as filters against airborne pollutants, release oxygen, are wildlife habitats and prevent landslides through their root systems. All trees perform these functions for the property on which they are growing. Trees of significant size and maturity perform these functions for all persons living in their vicinity. Trees are key elements in a living system upon which the continued health and welfare of this community depends. In addition, trees in the community and in the neighborhood provide a sense of identity and tradition and enhance property values. For all of these reasons, it is the goal of the city council to maintain and expand the extent of tree canopy in Sonoma.

The city council further finds and declares that careless treatment and arbitrary removal of trees detracts from scenic beauty, causes erosion, increases risks of landslides, reduces property values, increases construction costs and drainage costs, and thereby further reduces the attractiveness of an area.

A purpose of the city council acting under the authority of its power to protect the health, welfare and safety of its citizens in enacting the following regulations is to protect certain trees, and to promote the concept of tree protection, but to keep governmental regulation to a minimum as far as practicable. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(1), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).

Article II. Definitions


12.08.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section.

A. “Accepted arboricultural standards” means those pruning standards approved in the publication “Pruning Standards” published by the International Society of Arboriculture, as the same now exists and may be revised from time to time.

B. “Accepted arboricultural practices” means practices set forth as acceptable or better in current generally accepted textbooks on arboriculture and tree care and in current professional journals on arboriculture or university level publications on tree care.

C. “Alter” means to intentionally take an action that diminishes the health and vigor of a tree. “Alter” includes, but is not limited to, excessive or improper pruning of a tree, grade changes around or near a tree, excessive irrigation of a tree, and trenching in the root zone of a tree. “Alter” does not include periodic trimming, shaping, thinning or pruning of a tree to preserve or protect its health, growth or appearance, in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards and practices.

D. “Certified arborist” means a person who has been tested by and is currently certified as an “arborist” by the International Society of Arboriculture.

E. “Certified tree worker” means a person who has been tested by and is currently certified as a “tree worker” by the International Society of Arboriculture.

F. “Diameter” means the average diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at 54 inches above the average ground level immediately surrounding the trunk of the tree.

G. “Landscape tree” means any tree required under a landscaping plan, approved by the design review and historic preservation commission, associated with commercial or multifamily development, except for trees located in private yard areas associated with an individual dwelling.

H. “New development” shall mean any project requiring the construction of a new commercial structure or structures, the subdivision of property into two or more lots for the purpose of constructing new residential or commercial structures, or new multifamily (more than two units) residential construction.

I. “Nonintrusion zone” means the area of ground as determined by the table below surrounding the trunk of a tree within which certain activities may be restricted or prohibited in order to protect the tree.

	Trunk Diameter (in inches)	Protected Distance (radius in feet)

	2	4

	4	6

	6	10

	12	12

	18	16

	24	18

	30	20

	36	24

	42	28

	> 48	32

J. “Person” means any individual or group of individuals, any partnership or corporation, or any unincorporated association. “Person” includes the city.

K. “Public property” means property owned by the city of Sonoma including parks, public streets, and street rights-of-way.

L. “Project arborist” means an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist selected by the city to report on and oversee the protection of trees on a site subject to new development.

M. “Protected tree” means any tree designated to be preserved on an approved development plan or as a condition of approval of a tentative map, a tentative parcel map, or other development approval issued by the city.

N. “Relocate” means to relocate a tree from the place where it is growing and replanting it in another location in accordance with accepted arboricultural practices and with the intent and a reasonable expectation that it will survive and grow in the new location.

O. “Remove” means the cutting down of a tree or the relocation of a tree in a manner not in accordance with accepted arboricultural practices.

P. “Significant tree” means any tree having a single trunk circumference greater than one and one-half feet at a height of four and one-half feet, except for those located on a single-family residential property or a multifamily residential property.

Q. “Significant tree, private” means any tree having a single trunk circumference greater than four and one-half feet at a height of four and one-half feet, located on a single-family or multifamily residential property within a front yard or street-side yard setback as defined in SMC Title 19.

R. “Tree” means any woody plant having a single trunk, or a combination of multiple trunks, with a natural growth pattern that includes a definitely formed branching crown.

S. “Tree committee” means the permanent committee consisting of three members, namely:

1. Two members of the community services and environment commission appointed by the chairperson of the commission;

2. One certified arborist appointed by the chairperson of the commission. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 11-2009 § 1(2), (3), (4), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).

Article III. Prohibitions


12.08.030 Trees on public properties.

A. Unless specifically excepted by ordinance of this city, it is unlawful for any person other than the public works director or his/her duly authorized representative to trim, prune, brace, or plant any tree in any public right-of-way, or public property within the city, or to cause the same to be done, unless and until a written permit to do so has first been obtained from the public works director.

B. It is unlawful for any person other than those authorized under emergency circumstances within this chapter to alter, remove, relocate, or cause to be altered, removed, or relocated any tree in any public street, public right-of-way, or public property within the city, unless and until a written permit to do so has first been obtained in accordance with SMC 12.08.050. Any such permit may be declared void by the public works director, if its terms are violated. This subsection shall not apply to removal of trees required for new street construction, except as authorized under Article V.

C. It is unlawful for any person to break, injure, deface, mutilate, kill, or destroy any tree in any public street, public right-of-way, or public property within the city, or to cause the same to be done or set fire to such within the city, nor shall any person cause or permit any wire charged with electricity, or any gas, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact therewith. No person other than the public works director or his/her designee shall place, apply, attach or keep attached to any such tree or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof any wire or rope (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, paint, or any other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(5), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


12.08.032 Significant trees.

It is unlawful for any person other than those authorized under emergency circumstances, as set forth within this chapter, to alter, remove, relocate, or cause to be altered, removed or relocated any significant tree or significant tree, private, as defined in this chapter, unless and until a written permit to do so has first been obtained in accordance with SMC 12.08.050. Any such permit may be declared void by the public works director if its terms are violated. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(6), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003).


12.08.035 Applications for new development.

A. Rule. Applications for new development, as defined by this chapter, requiring the review and approval of the planning commission or design review and historic preservation commission shall also be subject to the review of the tree committee. Said review shall be advisory in nature and shall occur prior to any consideration of the project by the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission when the project is not otherwise subject to planning commission review. In those instances when a project may be subject to the review of both the planning commission and the design review and historic preservation commission, the planning commission shall have the sole decision-making authority over tree-related matters governed by this chapter, except in the event of an appeal to the city council.

B. Scope of Tree Committee Authority. The scope of the review by the tree committee shall be limited to the identification of potential impacts of the proposed development to existing trees on or adjacent to the project site, and recommendations to the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission relative to the mitigation of identified impacts, including but not limited to a replacement program.

C. Authority of Planning Commission and Design Review and Historic Preservation Commission to Impose Conditions. The planning commission or design review and historic preservation commission, under their authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a project application, may, based on the recommendations of the tree committee and the arborist’s report, modify the project site plan, adopt conditions of approval, or take any other relevant action deemed necessary to preserve, protect or replace existing trees on or adjacent to the project site. Failure to comply with requirements or conditions of approval, established by the planning commission or design review and historic preservation commission, shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

D. Tree Information Required at Time of Application. An arborist’s report, prepared by an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture) certified arborist, shall be a requirement of all new development. The report shall provide the necessary information to determine the appropriate extent of tree preservation and protection and tree replacement requirements.

An arborist shall be selected and retained by the city planner from a list of qualified members provided by the tree committee. All costs and fees for the services of the arborist shall be paid by the applicant and shall be paid in full at the time of the project application.

The requirement of an arborist’s report may be waived by the determination of the city planner upon the finding of no significant trees on:

1. The project site;

2. On adjoining property that could reasonably be affected by the project construction.

The arborist’s report shall clearly describe in writing all trees on the property. The report shall indicate the genus and species, the shape, the trunk diameter of each tree and the nonintrusion zone around each tree as determined by the table in SMC 12.08.020(H), and shall indicate those trees which are proposed to be altered, removed, or relocated and the reasons therefor. Tree delineations by trunk location and an accurate outline of each tree’s nonintrusion zone must be shown on the project site plan or tentative map, and on every page of the development and improvement plans where any work is proposed within the nonintrusion zone of any protected tree. The property owner of the property and the person in control of the proposed development shall protect and preserve each tree situated within the site of the proposed development during the period the application(s) for the proposed development is being considered by the city.

E. Tree Replacement Program. A person owning or controlling a new development project shall be required to replace trees designated for removal as part of the approval of the project in accordance with the conditions of approval established by the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission as follows:

1. Unless otherwise approved by the review authority, tree replacement shall occur on-site and shall, at a minimum, occur at a 1:1 ratio and a 15-gallon box size for each six inches of tree diameter removed.

2. If the development site is inadequate in size to accommodate the replacement trees, the trees may be planted on public property with the approval of the public works director.

3. Upon the request of the developer and the approval of the city council, the city may accept an in-lieu payment of $100.00 per 15-gallon replacement tree on condition that all such payments shall be used for tree-related educational projects and/or planting programs of the city.

F. Protected Trees. Development of a property on which a protected tree is located shall be subject to project design and construction requirements including, but not limited to, subsections (F)(1) through (F)(6) of this section. All applicable project design and construction requirements related to the protection of trees shall be implemented in accordance with accepted ISA guidelines, unless modified or waived by the director of public works in consultation with the project arborist.

1. Before the start of any clearing, excavation, construction or other work on the site, every protected tree shall be securely fenced off at the nonintrusion zone, or other limit as may be established in the field by the project arborist. Such fences shall remain continuously in place for the duration of all work undertaken in connection with the development. The area so fenced off shall not be used as a storage area or altered or disturbed except as may be permitted under this subsection.

2. If the proposed development, including any site work for the development, will encroach upon the nonintrusion zone of a protected tree, special measures shall be utilized, as approved by the project arborist, to allow the roots to obtain oxygen, water, and nutrients as needed.

3. Underground trenching for public improvements shall avoid major support and absorbing tree roots of protected trees. If avoidance is impractical, tunnels shall be made below the roots. Trenches shall be consolidated to service as many units as possible. Trenching or any other excavation related to the project within the drip line of protected trees shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible and shall only be done under the on-site directions of a project arborist.

4. Concrete or asphalt paving shall not be placed over the root zones of protected trees, unless otherwise permitted by the project arborist. Artificial irrigation shall not occur within the root zone of oaks, unless deemed appropriate by the project arborist to improve tree vigor or mitigate root loss.

5. Compaction of the soil within the nonintrusion zone of protected trees shall be avoided, if possible. Any excavation, cutting, filling, or compaction of the existing ground surface within the nonintrusion zone shall be minimized and subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the project arborist.

6. Burning or use of equipment with an open flame near or within the nonintrusion zone shall be avoided. All brush, earth and other debris shall be removed in a manner which prevents injury to the protected tree. Oil, gas, chemicals or other substances that may be harmful to trees shall not be stored or dumped within the nonintrusion zone of any protected tree, or at any other location on the site from which such substances might enter the nonintrusion zone of a protected tree. Construction materials shall not be stored within the nonintrusion zone of a protected tree. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 11-2009 § 1(7), (8), (9), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


12.08.038 Removal of trees in anticipation of development.

A. Rule. A property owner, or the property owner’s representative or agent, shall not remove, purposefully damage, or purposefully cause to die and tree on the owner’s property with the intent to avoid requirements for tree preservation or protection that may be imposed upon the property under a development application.

B. Finding of Violation. If the city planner finds that subsection A of this section has been violated, the property owner shall be subject to the enforcement provisions set forth under Article IX of this chapter. In making his/her finding, the city planner shall consider the specific circumstances of the tree removal, including when the removal or damage occurred and the significance of the removed or damaged trees in terms of size, species, health and location. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(10), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003).

Article IV. Exceptions


12.08.040 Exceptions to tree committee and permit requirements.

The provisions of this regulation as provided in SMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.038 shall not apply to the following:

A. The trimming or clearing of any tree’s branches or roots from interfering (a) with the lines of any public utility, city water, sewer and storm drain lines and open storm drain channels and city streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters when necessary for the proper maintenance of such facilities, or (b) with the maintenance of adequate lines of sight along city streets and entrances to such streets, including lines of sight to traffic control signs and signals; provided, that accepted arboricultural practices are utilized in each instance.

B. A removal or alteration of any tree necessitated by a hazardous or dangerous condition caused by the tree, or a portion thereof, which requires immediate action to protect life or property. Such a tree may be altered or removed by city personnel or a designated city contractor without a permit. Decision-making authority in such situations shall be made by the city manager or the head of any one of the following departments: police, fire, public works, planning or building. 

C. The removal of a tree species, of whatever size, that have been specifically identified by the tree committee as not warranting the protections set forth in this chapter. Any such list of exempt trees shall be adopted and amended by the tree committee by resolution. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(11), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).

Article V. Permits


12.08.050 Tree alteration or removal or relocation permits.

A. Any person desiring to alter, remove or relocate any tree(s) for which a permit is required under the provisions of SMC 12.08.030(B) or 12.08.032 shall make application upon an appropriate city form to the public works director. The applicant may also submit documentation of any type, including written recommendations from a certified arborist, concerning the health and quality and the desirability of alternatives (e.g., relocation or alteration) to the removal of each tree.

1. The granting or denying of a tree removal permit should be based upon reasonable standards including:

a. The condition of the tree with respect to its general health, structural condition, hazards potential and proximity to existing or proposed structures;

b. The necessity of the tree removal to allow construction of improvements or otherwise allow economic or other reasonable enjoyment of the property;

c. The number, species, age, size and location of existing trees in the area and the effect of the requested removal on shade areas, air pollution, historic values, scenic beauty, and the general welfare of the city as a whole.

2. The review and permit process is not intended to prevent the necessary removal of trees for safety purposes, but is intended to provide a forum in which the value (i.e., shade, appearance, etc.) of the tree or trees proposed for removal can be measured against the reasons for which the applicant desires to have it altered, removed or relocated. Replacement trees should normally be required to mitigate the loss of the tree.

B. Prior to making a determination on the application, the tree committee shall inspect the tree(s) sought to be altered, removed or relocated. The tree committee may also refer the application to another department, commission or committee of the city, as they deem appropriate, and may require the applicant to provide additional information which they deem necessary in order to make an informed decision on the application. However, the tree committee shall render a decision on the application within 30 days of its referral to the committee by the public works director.

C. If the tree committee approves an application to alter, remove, or relocate a tree, it shall direct the public works director to issue a permit, subject to such conditions as the committee deems appropriate, which may include the planting of replacement trees.

D. A permit granted under the provisions of this section shall be valid for a period of 60 days from the date of issuance unless a longer period is stated in the permit, or an additional 60 days’ extension is granted by the public works director. If the work authorized by the permit is not commenced prior to the expiration date, the permit shall become null and void. Once the work authorized by a permit is commenced, it shall be expeditiously pursued to completion. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(12), (13), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).

Article VI. Pruning and Trimming Regulations and Guidelines


12.08.060 Pruning and trimming regulations and guidelines.

A. Pruning and trimming of all trees and shrubs within the city is encouraged except as prohibited or limited herein.

B. Pruning on public property except as authorized by the public works director or other city department heads responsible for maintenance, or provided for as an exception in this chapter, is prohibited.

C. An owner or occupant of a lot shall keep all trees, hedges and other plants situated on the lot which abut upon or overhang a public street or sidewalk properly trimmed so that the same shall not interfere with the free use of the street or sidewalk. Such trimming shall not require a permit under this chapter; however, an encroachment permit may be required, under other ordinances or regulations of the city, to perform work within the public right-of-way. 

D. The trimming and pruning of trees that provide habitat for nesting birds should be avoided during the nesting season (March through July) in order to limit impacts on bird habitat. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(15), (16), (17), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).

Article VII. Maintenance and Replacement


12.08.065 Maintenance and replacement.

A. Maintenance. Landscape trees, as defined in this chapter, shall be maintained in a sound and healthy condition at all times by the property owner. Regular maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, providing adequate irrigation; checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; pruning and trimming in accordance with SMC 12.08.060.

B. Replacement. In the event that a landscape tree, as defined in this chapter, dies or is substantially damaged within one year of its planting, the property owner shall be responsible for replacing the tree within 60 days with a tree of the same or similar species, unless an alternative is approved by the design review and historic preservation commission. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003).

Article VIII. Appeals


12.08.070 Appeals.

Any decision made by the public works director or tree committee under the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city council by any interested person. The appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 10 days of the decision. The written appeal shall state all facts and each ground upon which the appeal is based and shall be signed by the applicant. The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing before making a decision on the appeal. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(18), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).

Article IX. Enforcement


12.08.080 Civil fine for violation.

A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney on behalf of the city in the amount of the appraised value of the tree (as determined by the Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants, ISA, 1992 or as updated), but with a minimum amount of $1,000 for each such violation.

B. If two or more persons are responsible for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the civil penalty set forth in subsection A of this section.

C. Amounts recovered under this section shall be deposited into a fund carried upon the financial records of the city which shall be used exclusively for the planting of trees in public places in the city and for tree related educational projects or programs. (Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


12.08.090 Criminal penalty for violation.

A violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction punishable by:

A. A fine not exceeding $200.00 for the first violation;

B. A fine not exceeding $350.00 for a second violation within one year;

C. A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation occurring within one year. (Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


12.08.100 Injunctions.

In addition to all other actions and remedies, civil or penal, authorized by law, the city attorney is authorized to file an action in court seeking injunctive relief to enjoin a violation of any provision of this chapter or to prevent a threatened violation of any provision of this chapter. The injunctive relief sought in any such action may be prohibitory, mandatory, or both. (Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


12.08.110 Replacement trees.

In lieu of a civil fine under SMC 12.08.080 or prosecution under SMC 12.08.090 any person who alters, removes, or relocates a tree, or who permits or causes to be altered, removed, or relocated any tree in violation of any provision of this chapter, may petition the tree committee for permission to replace each tree so altered, removed, or relocated, with four replacement trees of an appropriate species as determined by the tree committee, each of a minimum 15-gallon container size, to be planted on the property on which the violation was committed. If approved by the city attorney, the tree committee may grant the petition, with or without conditions, if it finds that the proposed replacement trees will substantially restore the property environmentally to a condition equal to its condition prior to the violation. Each such replacement tree shall be deemed and considered a “protected tree” under the provisions of this chapter. The conditions imposed by the tree committee may include requirements for security to ensure the tree’s successful establishment and proper care for a stated period of time. The tree committee may also authorize the planting of a lesser number of larger trees or a larger number of smaller trees than specified in this section if it finds that either adjustment will be more beneficial to the permanency of all trees on the property. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(19), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


12.08.120 Enforcing authority.

The primary responsibility for the enforcement of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall reside with the public works director of the city with the assistance of the city attorney. (Ord. 11-2009 § 1(20), 2009; Ord. 09-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 96-11, 1996).


Chapter 12.09       HERITAGE TREE ORDINANCE

Sections:

12.09.010  Purpose.

12.09.020  Heritage tree defined.

12.09.030  Heritage tree dedication.

12.09.040  Removal and damaging of heritage trees prohibited.

12.09.050  Designated historical trees.

12.09.060  Penalties.


12.09.010  Purpose.

In the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city recognizes that trees contribute in many important ways to the health, safety, and welfare of all of Sonoma’s citizens. Besides their aesthetic benefits, trees offer windbreaks, provide erosion control, act as filters for airborne pollutants, release oxygen, and provide a habitat for birds and other wildlife. All trees perform these functions for the lands on which they occur. The city recognizes, however, that trees of significant size and maturity often perform these functions for all people living in their vicinity. They are key elements in a living system whose boundaries do not conform to the legal boundaries of private property. They are part of the natural heritage of all of Sonoma’s citizens upon which the continued health and welfare of the community depends. Also part of such valued natural heritage are other trees, not necessarily as large, which form an important element of the community’s history.

For these reasons, the city puts forth the ordinance codified in this chapter to protect certain trees that are deemed an essential part of Sonoma’s natural and historical heritage, wherever they occur in the city, while at the same time recognizing individual rights to utilize land in a manner that will not be prejudicial to the public interest. (Ord. 75-11 § 1, 1976).


12.09.020  Heritage tree defined.

As used in this chapter, "heritage tree" means a tree or group of trees specifically designated by official act of the parks and recreation commission that:

A.  The tree or group of trees has historical significance or has taken on the aura of historical appeal; or

B.  The tree or group of trees is mutually dependent upon each other for survival; or

C.  The tree or group of trees is considered an outstanding specimen of its species; or

D.  The tree or group of trees is the size of 50 inches or more in diameter measured at 24 inches above natural grade; and

E.  The tree or group of trees has been recommended as such by the parks and recreation commission and dedicated and accepted by the city council of Sonoma.

For the purpose of subsection C of this section, an outstanding specimen is a tree which has been determined by the parks and recreation commission heritage tree committee to be healthy, has attained maturity and is well formed. Any tree designated as a heritage tree may by identified with a marker or by any other means as determined by the parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 75-11 § 1, 1976).


12.09.030  Heritage tree dedication.

The parks and recreation commission’s heritage tree committee shall make a recommendation to the commission whether a tree, which meets the definitions under SMC 12.09.020, has a significant historical or horticultural value to the city to warrant its dedication as a heritage tree. Not all trees which meet the definition under SMC 12.09.020 will be significant, and the parks and recreation commission shall weigh the cost of maintenance against the value of the tree(s) as a Sonoma landmark in determining whether a tree should be dedicated as a heritage tree. The parks and recreation commission shall not recommend acceptance of dedication of a proposed heritage tree until at least six months (182 calendar days) has elapsed from the time the proposed dedication is taken under consideration by the commission.

Upon the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission that a tree(s) meets the criteria of a heritage tree and should be dedicated as such, the owner of the tree(s) may dedicate the tree(s) to the city, if he also dedicates right of access for maintenance and protection, and the dedication is accepted by resolution of the city council. Dedication shall be subject to such conditions as the council considers proper in the case. (Ord. 75-11 § 1, 1976).


12.09.040  Removal and damaging of heritage trees prohibited.

A.  It is unlawful for any person to break, injure, deface, mutilate, kill or destroy any heritage tree or set fire or permit any fire to burn where such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of a heritage tree, or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come into contact therewith, or to allow any gas, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with their leaves.

B.  It is unlawful and it is prohibited for any person other than the director of public works or his duly authorized representative to place, apply, attach or keep attached to any such heritage tree any wire, rope, sign, paint, or any other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever until a written permit to do so has first been obtained from the parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 75-11 § 1, 1976).


12.09.050  Designated historical trees.

In those cases in which the city and property owner cannot reach an agreement for the dedication of a proposed heritage tree, or where the city finds that a tree’s historical importance is outweighed by its dedication and maintenance costs, the city’s parks and recreation commission may declare such a tree a designated historical tree.

The purpose of such identification is to recognize and locate trees of historical significance in the city. Such identification as a designated historical tree is not intended nor shall it restrict the owner of such property where the tree shall occur from any normal exercise of his property rights that are recognized under law.

Such identification shall include the marking of designated historical trees on maps of the historic preservation combining district and on a master heritage and historical tree map to be prepared and maintained by the city planning department. Identification shall also include written notification to the property owner of such designation and, if so ordered by the parks and recreation commission and accepted by the property owner, a physical marker may be placed on or near a designated historical tree. (Ord. 75-11 § 1, 1976).


12.09.060  Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with them shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 75-11 § 1, 1976).


Chapter 12.12 SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

12.12.010    Permit required.

12.12.015    Additional regulations.

12.12.020    Application for permit.

12.12.030    Exception – Petitions.

12.12.040    Authorization prerequisite.

12.12.050    Exception – Recommendation of planning commission.

12.12.060    Recommendation of planning commission – Report.

12.12.070    City council action.

12.12.080    Appeal.

12.12.090    Regulations.

12.12.100    Display of permit.

12.12.110    Sidewalk repair.

12.12.120    Driveway repair.

12.12.130    Procedures governing maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches.

12.12.140    Owner, lessee or agent responsibility.

12.12.150    Approval denial when.

12.12.160    Penalty for violation.


12.12.010 Permit required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, repair, or cause to be constructed or repaired, in the city any sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector so to do. If the city council hereafter decides to designate some other official to handle the issuance of permits, such designation may be made by resolution and the official so designated shall exercise the authority herein given to the building inspector, and the term “building inspector”, where used in this chapter, shall be synonymous with the title of the official so designated. In no case, however, shall a permit be required or granted to construct sidewalks, curbs or curbs and gutters when the council has instituted improvement proceedings under the general laws of the state of California relating to such work. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1955).


12.12.015 Additional regulations.

A. A driveway shall be required for vehicular access between a commercial property and an abutting public street.

B. When a driveway is required under subsection A of this section, the installation of any necessary curb, gutter, and sidewalk along the frontage of the property for which the driveway is proposed shall also be required.

C. In cases where a commercial property is applying for a driveway encroachment permit for a property across from or adjacent to a residential property or a residential zoning district, the city engineer shall not issue the permit until one of the following conditions is met:

1. The applicant agrees to install and properly maintain landscaping, fencing, or any other appropriate buffering along the property line for which the driveway is proposed adequate to buffer the property from adjacent residential uses. In order to demonstrate how this would be accomplished, the applicant must submit a proposed buffering plan. The adequacy of the proposed buffering plan must be certified by the community development director. At a minimum, buffering plans should provide for screening shrubs or trees planted in sufficient number to provide adequate visual relief, or a solid board or masonry fence, constructed in compliance with the setback requirements of the zoning ordinance. Required buffering shall be bonded for prior to the issuance of the encroachment permit; or

2. The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the community development director that existing buffering on the site is adequate; or

3. For new development, for which the applicant has received the approval of the design review and historic preservation commission of a landscaping plan for the affected portion of the property, the implementation of the approved plan shall be required as a condition of issuance of the permit.

D. When the owner of a commercial property across from or adjacent to a residential property or zoning district applies for a driveway encroachment permit, the community development director shall cause notice of the application to be posted in the immediate vicinity at least 10 days prior to issuance of the permit.

E. The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the design review and historic preservation commission within 15 days of the date of decision. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 89-10 § 1, 1989).


12.12.020 Application for permit.

Any person desiring a permit for the construction or repair of a sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter shall file with the building inspector an application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the city for that purpose. Such forms shall specify the following:

A. The name and residence of the applicant;

B. The location of the property in front of which the proposed construction or repair is to be made;

C. The name of the person, firm, or corporation who will perform the work;

D. The nature and dimensions of the proposed work;

E. Such additional information as the building inspector may require. (Ord. 251 § 2, 1955).


12.12.030 Exception – Petitions.

The planning commission may recommend that the city council authorize conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in SMC 12.12.140 and 12.12.150. Application for any such exception shall be made by verified petition of the landowner stating fully the grounds for the requested exception and the facts relied on by the applicant. (Ord. 295, 1959; Ord. 251, 1955).


12.12.040 Authorization prerequisite.

In order to recommend authorization of the condition exception, the planning commission must find that facts exist with respect to the application showing all of the following:

A. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property or the adjacent neighborhood;

B. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; and

C. That the granting of the conditional exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to, or incompatible with, other property in the territory in which the property is situated. (Ord. 295, 1959; Ord. 251, 1955).


12.12.050 Exception – Recommendation of planning commission.

In recommending the conditional exception, the planning commission shall endeavor to secure substantially the purpose of this chapter as set forth in SMC 12.12.130. (Ord. 295, 1959; Ord. 251, 1955).


12.12.060 Recommendation of planning commission – Report.

In making its recommendation, the planning commission shall report its findings thereon to the city council and shall expressly and specifically set forth the conditions deemed necessary. (Ord. 295, 1959; Ord. 251, 1955).


12.12.070 City council action.

Upon receipt of such report, the city council may by resolution approve the exceptions with such terms and conditions the city council deems necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this chapter. (Ord. 295, 1959; Ord. 251, 1955).


12.12.080 Appeal.

Appeal may be made from any decision, determination or imposition of conditions by filing a notice thereof in writing with the city manager within 10 days after such decision or determination or imposition of conditions is made. Such notice shall set forth the matter or matters complained of and the ground upon which the landowner deems himself aggrieved.

The city manager shall report the filing of such notice to the planning commission and the director of public works.

The city manager, following the filing of the appeal, shall set same for hearing at the next regular meeting of the city council; provided at least 10 days’ notice thereof is given to appellant, and such hearing may be continued, for good cause, by order of the city council. Upon the hearing of the appeal, the city council may overrule or modify the decision, determination or conditions imposed, and enter any such order or orders as are in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this chapter, and such disposition of the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 377 § 13, 1967; Ord. 295, 1959; Ord. 251, 1955).


12.12.090 Regulations.

No permit issued under this chapter shall be in conflict with the following regulations:

A. All sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter work shall be done under the direction, supervision and to the satisfaction of the building inspector, who shall refer the matter of grade determination and technical engineering points involved including the inspection thereof to the city engineer or an engineer designated by the city council for such duties, and must be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications for subdivision improvements applicable to concrete sidewalks, driveways, driveway approaches, curbs or curbs and gutters on file in the office of the city clerk, reference to which is made for further particulars;

B. All prepared subgrades and surfaces shall be inspected and approved by the city before any concrete is poured. All completed work shall be subject to approval by the city. At least 24 hours’ advance notice shall be given to the city by applicant so that the city may schedule inspections;

C. No sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb, or curb and gutter shall be constructed other than of concrete unless special permission therefor has first been obtained from the city council;

D. All debris and surplus materials shall be removed promptly upon completion of the work;

E. Applicant shall maintain the premises in a safe manner, and shall provide adequate barricades and lights at his own expense to protect the safety of the public using the adjacent streets or sidewalks, and shall hold the city free from any damages incurred by his operations. (Ord. 96-15 § 1, 1996; Ord. 93-4 § 1, 1993; Ord. 251 § 3, 1955).


12.12.100 Display of permit.

All permits for the construction or repair of sidewalks, driveways, driveway approaches, curbs or curbs and gutters shall be posted conspicuously near the work by the person to whom the permit is granted. (Ord. 251 § 4, 1955).


12.12.110 Sidewalk repair.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning any building, lot or premises in the city fronting on any portion of an improved street or way where a sidewalk is laid to allow any portion of such sidewalk in front of such building, lot, or premises to be out of repair, or to become, be or remain defective, or to become, be or remain dangerous to the users thereof for any reason. Such person, firm or corporation must at all times keep each such sidewalk in such condition that it will not endanger persons or property passing thereon, will not interfere with public convenience in the use thereof, or be or remain an obstruction or impediment to normal, customary and usual pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Such property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance and repairs, including that required to repair damage caused by tree roots, needed to keep the sidewalk improvements in a safe condition. Such property owner shall have a duty to members of the public to keep sidewalk improvements in a reasonably safe condition and shall be liable for negligence to any person suffering damage due, in whole or in part, to the owner’s failure to perform this duty. (Ord. 04-2013 § 1, 2013; Ord. 251 § 5, 1955).


12.12.120 Driveway repair.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning property within the city into which is constructed a driveway to fail to keep such driveway or driveway approach in a good state of repair at all times. (Ord. 251 § 6, 1955).


12.12.130 Procedures governing maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches.

The provisions of Sections 5600 through 5630 and 5870 through 5894, inclusive, of the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, are adopted as the procedure governing the maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways, and driveway approaches in the city. For the purposes of this chapter, “sidewalk” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 5600 of the California Streets and Highways Code, and shall also include a “driveway” and a “driveway approach.” (Ord. 04-2013 § 2, 2013; Ord. 251 § 7, 1955).


12.12.140 Owner, lessee or agent responsibility.

Any owner, lessee or agent constructing or arranging for the construction of a building or dwelling shall also provide for the construction of cement curbs, gutters and sidewalks in accordance with city specifications, unless adequate curbs, gutters and sidewalks already exist along all street frontage adjoining the lot or lots on which the building or dwelling is to be constructed; provided, however, that curbs and gutters only may be required in the R-A agricultural zone; and further provided, that in areas not subdivided or parceled into one-half acre or smaller lots, the curbs and gutter or curb, gutter and sidewalk need not extend a greater distance than the side yards, or side and rear yards in the case of corner lots, as required by SMC Title 19. (Ord. 251 § 8, 1955).


12.12.150 Approval denial when.

The building inspector shall deny final approval and acceptance or final public utility connections to any building or dwelling until the concrete curbs and gutters or concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks exist or are constructed or their construction is guaranteed by cash deposited with the city in a sum equal to $2.50 per lineal foot for cement curbs and gutters, and $1.75 per lineal foot for cement curbs and gutters, and $1.00 per lineal foot for cement sidewalks. (Ord. 304 § 1, 1960; Ord. 251 § 9, 1955).


12.12.160 Penalty for violation.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 465 § 2, 1973; Ord. 251 § 10, 1955).


Chapter 12.14 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

12.14.010    Purpose.

12.14.020    Administration.

12.14.030    Building and occupancy permit issuance prerequisites.

12.14.040    Exceptions.

12.14.050    Requirements for variances.

12.14.051    Improvement agreements.

12.14.060    Requirements designated.

12.14.070    Building occupancy or utility connection refusal pending improvements.

12.14.080    Installation by city – Costs liability.

12.14.090    Standards.

12.14.100    Encroachment permit required.

12.14.110    Requirement, variance or decision appeals.

12.14.120    Penalty for violation.


12.14.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide a uniform procedure for the installation of public improvements in all zones of the city, to impose reasonable public property improvement requirements as a condition of construction of buildings or other improvements, and to require orderly development and improvements of public property consistent with public health and safety for the general public good. For public improvements pertaining to subdivisions, refer to SMC Title 19. (Ord. 12-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 491 § 1, 1974).


12.14.020 Administration.

This chapter shall be administered by the public works department and specifically by the city engineer and building official. (Ord. 491 § 2, 1974).


12.14.030 Building and occupancy permit issuance prerequisites.

No building permit shall be issued unless plans include provision for the construction of curb, gutter, sidewalk, storm drains and other necessary drainage facilities or any other public improvements required for the property, along with any needed right-of-way and/or easement dedications to the public. The construction of vehicle parking lots and any other improvement to buildings or real estate shall constitute an improvement for which a building permit shall be required.

If some public improvements already exist but do not meet existing city standards and are considered by the city engineer to be a hazard to health and safety of the general public, these improvements shall be reconstructed to existing city standards. Engineered plans prepared by a registered civil engineer showing the required improvements may also be required if determined necessary by the city engineer.

No occupancy permit for any building shall be approved or issued unless the required public improvements have been installed and accepted by the city engineer. (Ord. 491 § 3, 1974).


12.14.040 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not apply to a building permit when any of the following conditions exist:

A. When the total building permit valuation of improvements on a property does not exceed $40,000 within any 24-month period of time;

B. When the building permit is issued solely for reroofing a building. For the purposes of this subsection, reroofing shall include the roof membrane, roof sheathing, skylights, gutters and other incidental materials needed for the weatherproofing and maintenance of the roof;

C. When the building permit is issued solely for solar water heater or solar photovoltaic electrical installations;

D. When the building permit is issued solely for accessibility improvements to be installed in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or other approved accessibility standard, as determined by the building official;

E. When the building permit is issued solely for any combination of items in subsections (A) through (D) of this section. (Ord. 12-2009 § 2, 2009; Ord. 95-8 § 2, 1995).


12.14.050 Requirements for variances.

A variance from the requirements of SMC 12.14.030 in requiring public street improvements to be installed in conjunction with the improvements to the abutting property may be granted by the planning commission as follows:

A. Public Notice.

1. Contents of Notice. Notice of the planning commission hearing shall include:

a. The date, time and place of the hearing; and

b. The name of the applicant, a general description of the variance sought, and a general description, in text and by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing.

2. Notice Distribution. Notice of the hearing shall be given by all of the following methods:

a. Publication. Notice published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 20 days before the hearing, with an additional publication thereafter.

b. Mailing. Notice mailed or delivered at least 20 days before the hearing to the following:

i. Owner(s) of the Proposed Site. The owner(s) of the property being considered in the application, or the owner’s agent, and the applicant.

ii. Affected Owners. All owners of real property as shown on the latest Sonoma County equalized assessment roll, within a radius of 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and any other person whose property might, in the judgment of the planning director, be affected by the proposed project.

iii. Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the city clerk and has paid the required fee for the notice.

c. Posting. Notice in at least four public places within the boundaries of the local agency, including on a public place on the site (if applicable) directly affected by the proceeding and including the notice board at City Hall.

B. Hearing. Hearings shall be held at the date, time, and place described in the public notice required by subsection (A) of this section. Any hearing may be continued from time to time; provided, that before adjournment or recess of the hearing, a public announcement is made specifying the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued.

C. Decision.

1. Following the public hearing, the planning commission may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the variance.

2. The planning commission may approve a variance, with or without conditions, only if he or she first finds that:

a. Granting the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property in the same zone and vicinity in which the property is located; and

b. Based on information provided by the city engineer, at least one of the following:

i. Existing drainage facilities are inadequate and that the installation would endanger the public welfare by reason thereof; or

ii. It would be in the best interests of the city to cause all or a portion of the required work to be done on an area project basis rather than on an individual basis; or

iii. There are special circumstances applicable to the subject property such as size, shape, topography, location, existing improvements, or surrounding structures, and that the strict application of the requirements under this chapter would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose and intent of this chapter; or

iv. The nature and extent of the dedication, improvements or both, as required in this chapter, do not bear a reasonable relationship to the proposed use or uses of the property such that the exactions required would exceed the demands or burdens upon traffic, circulation and other factors justifying public improvements.

3. Notice of Decision. The notice of decision shall contain applicable findings, any conditions of approval, and reporting and/or monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or general welfare of the city. Following the hearing and decision, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be provided. (Ord. 12-2009 § 3, 2009; Ord. 95-8 § 3, 1995).


12.14.051 Improvement agreements.

A. In lieu of any required improvement under this chapter, or as a condition of granting a deferment or variance, the city manager may, at his or her discretion, enter into an agreement with the property owner. Such agreements shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney.

B. Improvement agreements as provided in this section shall contain a covenant between the property owner and the city, agreeing that the property owner or his or her successor in interest will undertake the construction of the required improvements within 90 days after notice to begin construction of the improvements is sent by the city to the property owner as listed on the most current county property tax rolls.

C. This agreement shall be in a form that is recordable and the parties shall agree that it shall be recorded in the Sonoma County recorder’s office.

D. The agreement shall further provide that in the event of default in undertaking and completing the required improvements, the city may cause such work to be done and the cost thereof shall be assessed as a lien against the property.

E. Such agreement shall recite that it creates a covenant running with the land and, as stated in subsection C of this section, shall be recorded in order to constitute legal notice to any prospective buyers of the property or successors in interest. (Ord. 12-2009 §§ 4, 5, 2009; Ord. 95-8 § 4, 1995).


12.14.060 Requirements designated.

The normal required improvements and grants of rights-of-way and/or easements shall be as follows:

	Requirements	Single-Family	Multiple-

Family	Commercial Use	Industrial Use	Religious or Charitable Use	Public Schools and Other Government Agencies

	One Unit 

Development	More Than One Unit 

Development

	1.    Curb and gutter	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage

	2.    Sidewalk	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage	Entire frontage

	3.    Paving and street improvements	Developer responsible	20 ft. 	20 ft.	42 ft.	32 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.

	4.    Drainage facilities	Developer responsible except for catch basin installation	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible

	5.    Engineering and improvement plans	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible	Developer responsible

	6.    Rights-of-way and easements	The developers or property owners shall grant to the city all required easements and rights-of-way necessary for the installation of streets, drainage, utilities and public service facilities.

Wherever the property to be developed abuts an existing public street and, by virtue of the provisions of this chapter and of the above table, the developer has an obligation for installation of paving, such paving shall tie into the paving of the existing right-of-way. Where the existing street structural section is determined to be inadequate by the city engineer, the developer shall be responsible for replacing the existing paving to the limits shown in the above table. Because of design considerations there may be conditions which would require improvements beyond the normal requirements shown in the above table. Improvements beyond the normal requirements may be required if determined necessary by the planning commission and/or the city engineer. (Ord. 79-1 § 2, 1979; Ord. 491 § 6, 1974).


12.14.070 Building occupancy or utility connection refusal pending improvements.

The building official shall deny final approval and acceptance and shall refuse to allow occupancy and final public utility connections to any building or structure unless curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage facilities, paving and other improvements, as may be required in this chapter or required as conditions of the development, exist or have been constructed and accepted by the city. (Ord. 491 § 7, 1974).


12.14.080 Installation by city – Costs liability.

If work or improvements required by this chapter are not performed by the owner within 90 days after the completion of occupancy of such construction, the city engineer is authorized to install such curb, gutter, sidewalk, paving, drainage facilities and any other required improvements or cause the same to be constructed by a call for bids to do the work. Following the call for bids, the owner shall not undertake or cause to be undertaken any work specified in the call for bids. All permits previously issued for the work shall become null and void. The cost of labor, materials, equipment rental and overhead as necessary to perform the work shall be charged against the owner of the real property and such charges shall become a lien upon the real property. (Ord. 491 § 8, 1974).


12.14.090 Standards.

All the improvements required by this chapter or by the city engineer shall be in accordance with the standards on file in the office of the city engineer.

Drainage facilities required by this chapter shall conform to the requirements of the Sonoma County water agency and the city. (Ord. 491 § 9, 1974).


12.14.100 Encroachment permit required.

An encroachment permit shall be required for all improvements performed in the public rights-of-way in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 12.20 SMC. (Ord. 491 § 10, 1974).


12.14.110 Requirement, variance or decision appeals.

An applicant requesting a building permit who is aggrieved by the requirements of this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the city council, provided written notice of the appeal is filed with the city clerk stating the basis for the appeal or grounds for the variance within 15 days of the decision. (Ord. 12-2009 § 6, 2009; Ord. 95-8 § 5, 1995).


12.14.120 Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in SMC 1.12.010.

Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 491 § 12, 1974).


Chapter 12.16       UNDERGROUND UTILITY INSTALLATION

Sections:

12.16.010  Definitions.

12.16.020  Public hearing by council.

12.16.030  Council may designate underground districts by resolution.

12.16.040  Unlawful acts.

12.16.050  Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.

12.16.060  Other exceptions.

12.16.070  Notice to property owners and utility companies.

12.16.080  Responsibility of utility companies.

12.16.090  Responsibility of property owners.

12.16.100  Service of notice.

12.16.110  Notice – Contents.

12.16.120  Action if work not commenced.

12.16.130  Report – Hearing.

12.16.140  Hearing – Action.

12.16.150  Assessment – Lien.

12.16.160  Responsibility of city.

12.16.170  Extension of time.

12.16.180  Penalty for violation.


12.16.010  Definitions.

Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California;

B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees;

C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross-arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service;

D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of SMC 12.16.030;

E.  "Utility" includes all persons or entitles supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 393 § 1, 1968).


12.16.020  Public hearing by council.

The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 10 days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 393 § 2, 1968).


12.16.030  Council may designate underground districts by resolution.

If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 393 § 3, 1968).


12.16.040  Unlawful acts.

Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein, as provided in SMC 12.16.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in SMC 12.16.090 through 12.16.150, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 393 § 4, 1968).


12.16.050  Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 10 days without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances without discrimination as to any person or utility to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 393 § 5, 1968).


12.16.060  Other exceptions.

In any resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works;

B.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F.  Antennae associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 393 § 6, 1968).


12.16.070  Notice to property owners and utility companies.

Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariff of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission.

Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified herein, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 393 § 7, 1968).


12.16.080  Responsibility of utility companies.

If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 393 § 8, 1968).


12.16.090  Responsibility of property owners.

Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in SMC 12.16.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030, the director of public works shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within 10 days after receipt of such notice. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.100  Service of notice.

The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears to general delivery, city of Sonoma. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the director of public works shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by 10 inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.110  Notice – Contents.

The notice given by the director of public works to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the director of public works will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.120  Action if work not commenced.

If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the director of public works shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the director of public works shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the director of public works, he shall file a written report with the city council, setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided, and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than 10 days thereafter. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.130  Report – Hearing.

The director of public works shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.140  Hearing – Action.

Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.150  Assessment – Lien.

If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the director of public works, and the director of public works is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. (Ord. 393 § 9, 1968).


12.16.160  Responsibility of city.

The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030. (Ord. 393 § 10, 1968).


12.16.170  Extension of time.

In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to SMC 12.16.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 393 § 11, 1968).


12.16.180  Penalty for violation.

It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment or by both. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 393 § 12, 1968).


Chapter 12.20 ENCROACHMENTS

Sections:

12.20.010    Purpose.

12.20.020    Definitions.

12.20.030    Acts requiring permit.

12.20.040    Exceptions.

12.20.050    Emergency work authorized.

12.20.060    Liability for damages.

12.20.070    Right of lawful use.

12.20.080    Existing facilities.

12.20.090    Permits.

12.20.100    Application.

12.20.110    Exhibits to accompany application.

12.20.120    Consent of other public agencies.

12.20.130    Administration by the city engineer.

12.20.140    Grounds for refusal.

12.20.150    Right of appeal.

12.20.160    Display of permit.

12.20.170    Term of permit.

12.20.180    Nonassignment of permits.

12.20.190    Changes in permit or work.

12.20.200    Fees.

12.20.210    Cash deposit bonds.

12.20.220    Bond in lieu of cash deposit.

12.20.230    Annual bond.

12.20.240    Bond for continuing use.

12.20.250    Additional bond or cash deposit.

12.20.260    Provisions of bonds.

12.20.270    Payable to city.

12.20.280    Exclusions from bonds.

12.20.290    Insurance required.

12.20.300    Erection and maintenance of safety provisions.

12.20.310    Notification – Beginning of work.

12.20.320    Notification – Completion of work.

12.20.330    Care of drainage.

12.20.340    Interference with use.

12.20.350    Restoring of street and maintenance of encroachment.

12.20.360    Relocation or removal of encroachments.

12.20.370    Standards, supervision and inspection.

12.20.380    Storage of material.

12.20.390    Small pipes.

12.20.400    Minimum cover.

12.20.410    Backfilling.

12.20.420    Poles and transmission lines.

12.20.430    Aids to visibility.

12.20.440    Movement of vehicles.

12.20.450    Mailboxes.

12.20.460    Hedges or fences.

12.20.470    Planting, trimming or removing trees.

12.20.480    Maintenance of hedges, plantings, fences.

12.20.490    Lawns.

12.20.500    Marking of streets, curb and sidewalks.

12.20.510    Replacing curb where driveway not used.

12.20.520    Monuments.


12.20.010 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating the use of city streets and the installation, maintenance and repair of underground and aboveground facilities within the public right-of-way of the city. (Ord. 471 § 1.1, 1973).


12.20.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “City” means the city of Sonoma, county of Sonoma, state of California, a municipal corporation;

B. “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city or his authorized representative;

C. “City street” means the entire width of the right-of-way of any road, street, lane, boulevard, avenue, drive or alley used by or for the general public, whether or not those roads, streets, lanes, boulevards, avenues, drives or alleys have been accepted as and declared to be a part of the city system of public streets, except streets forming a part of the state highway system. Any “private street” that is not dedicated for public use which is specifically restricted and used for access to and on private property by the owners of the property shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter;

D. “Contractor” means a contractor licensed by the state of California to do work covered by this chapter. A contractor may be authorized to act for a property owner in doing such work;

E. “Encroach or encroachment” means going upon, over, under or using any right-of-way in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with the normal use of that right-of-way, including the performance thereon of any of the following acts:

1. Excavating or disturbing the right-of-way or watercourse,

2. Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, pole, bench, mailbox, vending stand, fence, guardrail, wall loading platform, pipe, conduit, cable conductor, scaffolding, barricade, newspaper stand, banner, sign, merchandise display, or other structure on or under the right-of-way. Pole replacements in place will not require a permit,

3. Planting or removal of any tree, shrub or other growing thing within the right-of-way or watercourse,

4. Placing or leaving on the right-of-way or watercourse any rubbish, brush, earth or other material of any nature whatever,

5. Constructing, placing, or maintaining on, over, under or within the public right-of-way a pathway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, paving or other surfacing, any culvert or other surface drainage or subsurface drainage facility, any pipe, conduit or cable. The installation of overhead public utilities or cable TV facilities not involving setting of new poles shall be excluded from permit requirements,

6. Traveling on the right-of-way by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of dimension, weight, or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit,

7. Lighting or building a fire within the right-of-way,

8. Constructing, placing, planting or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree or other object adjacent to the right-of-way or watercourse which causes or will cause an encroachment.

The term “encroachment” shall not include the posting of any notice in the manner required by law, city ordinance, or land development proceeding and completed under SMC Title 19 up until those improvements have been dedicated to the city and accepted for maintenance by the city engineer;

F. “Permittee” means any person, firm, public or private corporation, franchised agency, association of individuals or groups, service clubs and other public agencies not particularly mentioned in this section that proposes to do work or encroach upon a public street herein defined and has been issued a permit for the encroachment by the city engineer or his designated representative;

G. “Private contract” means a contract between two or more parties for the installation, construction, revision, operation, or creation of an encroachment, to which contract the city is not a party;

H. “Public improvement” means publicly owned construction structures or facilities in the public right-of-way designed for the public use, safety or general welfare;

I. “Right-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the use of the general public for street or highway purposes which includes public utility, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer or pedestrian walkway purposes;

J. “Watercourse” means a channel for the carrying of storm water, including both natural and artificial watercourses. (Ord. 471 § 1.2, 1973).


12.20.030 Acts requiring permit.

No person shall encroach or cause to be made any encroachment of any nature whatever within, upon, over or under the limits of any right-of-way, including parades and other formal gatherings, or make or cause to be made any alteration of any nature within, upon, over or under right-of-way, or construct, put upon, maintain or leave thereon, or cause to be constructed, put on, maintained or left thereon any obstruction or impediment of any nature whatever, or remove, cut or trim trees thereon, or set fire thereon, or to place on, over or under such right-of-way any pipeline, conduit, or other fixtures or move over or cause to be moved over the surface of any right-of-way or over any bridge, viaduct, or other structure maintained by the city any vehicles or other object of dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging the right-of-way, or place any structure, wall, culvert, or similar encroachment or make any excavation or embankment in such a way as to endanger the normal usage or the right-of-way without having first obtained a permit as required by this chapter. (Ord. 471 § 1.3, 1973).


12.20.040 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties, or to any work being performed by any person or persons under contract with the city, but this chapter shall cover all work done by the Sonoma Valley county sanitation district. (Ord. 471 § 1.4, 1973).


12.20.050 Emergency work authorized.

This chapter shall not prevent any person from maintaining any pipe, conduit, conductor, pole and its related facilities lawfully on or under any public street, as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises except that the person making an emergency repair or encroachment on a public street shall apply for a permit one work day after work has been initiated. (Ord. 471 § 1.5, 1973).


12.20.060 Liability for damages.

The permittee shall be responsible for all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage caused by the work permitted and done by permittee under the permit, or proximately caused by failure on permittee’s part to perform his obligations under the permit in respect to maintenance. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers, or employees, permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless against all tort claims, tort liability and tort loss, and in particular from and against all such claims, liability and loss predicated on active or passive negligence of the city resulting directly or indirectly from operations under this permit insofar as permitted by law. (Ord. 471 § 1.6, 1973).


12.20.070 Right of lawful use.

Any permit granted under this chapter shall be subject to the right of the city, or any other person or persons entitled thereto, to use that part of the public street for any purpose for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of the street shall be unduly obstructed at any time. (Ord. 471 § 1.7, 1973).


12.20.080 Existing facilities.

The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utilities without the written consent of the city engineer and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove or relocate an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee. (Ord. 471 § 1.8, 1973).


12.20.090 Permits.

The written permits required by this chapter shall be issued by the city engineer or his designated representative subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter or required by other provisions of law. (Ord. 471 § 2.0, 1973).


12.20.100 Application.

The city engineer shall prescribe and provide a regular form of application for the use of any applicant for a permit required by this chapter. The application form shall contain space for the name, address and principal place of business of the applicant, together with such detail as in the judgment of the city engineer is necessary to establish the exact location, dimensions, duration, and purpose of the proposed use or encroachment. (Ord. 471 § 2.2, 1973).


12.20.110 Exhibits to accompany application.

The applicant shall enclose with, attach or add to the application for a permit a map, plat, sketch, diagram or drawing. Other plans by the nature and extent of the improvements may require drawings prepared by a registered civil engineer, when required by the city engineer, and of a size and in such quantity as he may prescribe, on which shall be plainly shown any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate or identify the proposed use or encroachment. (Ord. 96-15 § 1, 1996; Ord. 93-4 § 1, 1993; Ord. 471 § 2.3, 1973).


12.20.120 Consent of other public agencies.

The applicant shall also enclose with, attach or add to the application the written order or consent to any work required by law, Sonoma Valley county sanitation district, Sonoma County water agency, State Division of Highways, or any other public body having jurisdiction. A permit shall not be issued until and unless such order or consent is first obtained and evidence thereof filed with the city engineer. The permittee shall keep himself adequately informed of all state and federal laws and local ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect the permit. The applicant shall at all times comply with and shall cause all his agents and employees to comply with all such laws, ordinances, regulations, decisions, court and similar authoritative orders. (Ord. 471 § 2.4, 1973).


12.20.130 Administration by the city engineer.

A. The city engineer shall enforce the provisions of this section. He shall, upon application by qualified persons, issue permits for the work in the public rights-of-way when all applicable conditions established by this chapter for such permits have been met. He shall cause all such work being done without a permit to be stopped until a permit is obtained. He may require that such work without a permit be removed or corrected at the expense of the responsible persons. He shall inspect all work done in the public rights-of-way to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall certify when such work is properly completed. He shall keep on file for public distribution copies of all current standard plans and specifications of the city and all standards of design used in such work.

B. The city engineer shall determine the extent, type and requirements of the public improvements, the type of application and permit required and the fees applicable under the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall be valid unless signed by the city engineer or his authorized representative. (Ord. 471 § 2.5, 1973).


12.20.140 Grounds for refusal.

No application will be approved or permit issued for constructing or maintaining a loading platform upon or in the right-of-way of public street or for erecting or maintaining therein or thereon a post, pole, column or structure for supporting advertising signs.

Permit applications may also be denied or modifications required for any of the following reasons:

A. Work as proposed to be constructed creates a hazard to public health, safety and welfare;

B. Violation of a city ordinance;

C. When future city improvements may take place in the area of the proposed work necessitating street widening which would not warrant the construction of certain public improvements at this time or as proposed;

D. Violation of established plan lines;

E. Where lines and grades for lot improvements have not been established or approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 2.6, 1973).


12.20.150 Right of appeal.

Any person aggrieved by the action of any administrative official of the city acting under this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council. The aggrieved person shall file notice of appeal in writing with the city clerk within seven days after final action of the administrative official whose action is being appealed. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the action of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 471 § 2.7, 1973).


12.20.160 Display of permit.

The permittee shall keep any permit issued pursuant to this chapter at the site of work or in the cab of a vehicle where movement thereof on a public street is involved, and the permit must be shown on demand to any authorized representative of the city engineer or law enforcement officer. For a public utility or other franchised agency, the permit issued may be kept at the place of business of the permittee. The permit shall be made available to an authorized representative of the city engineer or law enforcement officer within a reasonable time after demand is made. (Ord. 471 § 2.8, 1973).


12.20.170 Term of permit.

A. Beginning of Work. The permittee shall begin the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter within 90 days from date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not begun within 90 days, or within the time stated in the permit, then the permit becomes void.

B. Completion of Work. The permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter within the time specified in the permit. If, at any time, the city engineer finds that the delay in the prosecution of completion of the work or use authorized is due to lack of diligence on the part of the permittee, he may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way to its former condition. The permittee shall reimburse the city for all expenses by the city in restoring the right-of-way. (Ord. 471 § 2.9, 1973).


12.20.180 Nonassignment of permits.

Permits shall be issued only to the person making application therefor and may not be assigned to another person or location by the permittee. Nothing shall deny the permittee to assign the work to others. If any permittee assigns his permit to another or another location, the permit shall become void. (Ord. 471 § 2.10, 1973).


12.20.190 Changes in permit or work.

No major changes may be made in the location, dimension, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the city engineer. No permit shall be required for the continuing use or maintenance of encroachments installed by public utilities or franchised agencies, or for changes therein or thereto where such changes or additions require no excavation of the improved right-of-way. (Ord. 471 § 2.11, 1973).


12.20.200 Fees.

The schedule of fees will be those established and adopted by the city council by resolution. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city cash or check, in a sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit, charges for filed investigation, and the fee for necessary inspection, all in accordance with the schedule established and adopted by the city council.

Fees will not be required of any public agency, public utility, or franchise agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public street or right-of-way or watercourse. (Ord. 471 § 2.12, 1973).


12.20.210 Cash deposit bonds.

Unless this part is waived in the permit and before a permit is effective, the permittee shall deposit with the city engineer or agency, authorized by resolution of the city council, cash or a certified cashier’s check in the sum to be fixed by the city engineer as sufficient to reimburse the city for costs of restoring the right-of-way or watercourse to its former condition, based upon schedules, if any, adopted by resolution of the city council; provided, however, that the permittee may file a cash deposit on an annual basis in a sum estimated by the city engineer as sufficient to cover his activities during any 12-month period. (Ord. 471 § 3.1, 1973).


12.20.220 Bond in lieu of cash deposit.

In lieu of the cash deposit prescribed by SMC 12.20.210, the permittee may, upon approval of the city engineer, file a cash deposit in the minimum sum established by the schedules, if any, adopted for that purpose by the city council and in effect at the time of application for a permit, and the balance of the sum fixed by the city engineer as sufficient to reimburse the city for expenses incurred in restoring the right-of-way to its former condition may be filed in the form of an approved surety bond issued by a company authorized to do a general surety business in the state of California. (Ord. 471 § 3.2, 1973).


12.20.230 Annual bond.

In lieu of a cash deposit, the permittee may, upon approval by the city engineer, annually file with the city engineer an approved surety bond issued by a company authorized to do a general surety business in the state of California in a sum fixed by the city engineer as sufficient to reimburse the city for expenses to be incurred in restoring the right-of-way to its former condition subject to the schedules, if any, adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 471 § 3.3, 1973).


12.20.240 Bond for continuing use.

An applicant for a permit for a use or encroachment which is to continue or remain within, under, or upon the right-of-way of a public street or watercourse beyond the time authorized for construction or installation shall file with the city clerk a cash deposit or surety bond issued by a company authorized to do a general surety business in the state of California in a penal sum to be fixed by the city engineer as sufficient to reimburse the city for all expenses incurred by the city in making the watercourse available for flow of storm water or the right-of-way safe and convenient for the travel of the general public, subject to the schedules, if any, adopted by resolution of the city council and in effect at the time of application for a permit. (Ord. 471 § 3.4, 1973).


12.20.250 Additional bond or cash deposit.

The city engineer may require an additional bond or cash deposit at any time when, in his opinion, the amount of the bond or cash deposit previously made is insufficient, subject to the schedules, if any, adopted for that purpose by the city council, and in effect at the time of application for a permit. (Ord. 471 § 3.5, 1973).


12.20.260 Provisions of bonds.

The aforesaid bonds shall be executed by the applicant or contractor doing work as principal and by a surety company authorized to do business in the state of California. The bond shall name the city as obligee and shall be conditioned as follows:

A. That each and all of the terms and conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and complied with to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B. That each and all of the provisions of this chapter are complied with.

An extension of time for performance of work may be granted by the city engineer, but no such extension of time shall be valid unless written and no such extension shall release any surety company upon any bond. (Ord. 471 § 3.6, 1973).


12.20.270 Payable to city.

Any bond or cash deposit required by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the city. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the permit, and fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the bond or cash deposit will be released. Annual bonds shall remain in effect until the permittee bonding agent notifies the city in writing 30 days prior to date of cancellation. Acknowledgment and subsequent release of any bond shall be at the discretion of the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 3.7, 1973).


12.20.280 Exclusions from bonds.

Cash deposits or bonds will not be required of any public utility, public agency or franchised agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public street or right-of-way. (Ord. 471 § 3.8, 1973).


12.20.290 Insurance required.

All permittees encroaching the public street area shall carry property damage and public liability insurance. No person, firm or corporation shall be entitled to encroachment permits under this article unless and until he has filed and maintained on file with the city engineer a certificate or certificates showing and certifying that such person, firm or corporation carries public liability and property damage insurance, issued by an insurance carrier determined reliable by the city engineer, insuring the applicant and the city against loss by reason of injuries to or death of persons, or damage to property, caused by the applicant, its agents or employees in performing any work under such permit in the amounts prescribed by the schedule adopted by the city council. (Ord. 471 § 3.9, 1973).


12.20.300 Erection and maintenance of safety provisions.

The permittee in the conduct of the work, use, or maintenance of an encroachment authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide, erect, and/or maintain such lights, barriers, warning signs, patrols, flagmen and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the traveling public. Any omission on the part of the city engineer to specify in the permit what lights, barriers, or other protective measures or devices shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all requirements of law and appropriate regulations and ordinances for adequately protecting the safety of those using public streets. If at any time the city engineer finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, the city may provide, erect, maintain, relocate, or remove such safeguards as are deemed necessary or may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way to its former condition, all at the expense of the permittee.

A permittee making any excavation or erecting or leaving any obstruction within, under, or upon the right-of-way, or causing the same to be made, erected, or left, shall place and maintain lights at each end of the excavation or obstruction, at not more than 50-foot intervals along the excavation or obstruction, from one-half hour before sunset of each day to one-half hour after sunrise of the next day until the excavation is entirely refilled or the obstruction removed and the right-of-way made safe for use. In addition, reflectorized warning signs conforming to the requirements of the California Division of Highways shall be placed 200 feet and 400 feet from each excavation or obstruction, in such a position as to adequately warn public traffic.

All warning signs, lights and other safety devices shall conform to the requirements of Section 465.7 of the Vehicle Code and of any construction signing manual issued by the Department of Public Works of the state of California. (Ord. 471 § 4.1, 1973).


12.20.310 Notification – Beginning of work.

Before beginning any work which is or includes excavation, construction of concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or driveways, planting, trimming or removing trees, making, placing or causing an obstruction in the traveled way, the permittee shall notify the city engineer’s office at least 24 hours in advance of doing such work. (Ord. 471 § 4.2, 1973).


12.20.320 Notification – Completion of work.

Where required under the permit, the permittee shall, upon completion of all work authorized in the permit, notify the city engineer. No work shall be deemed to be completed until notification of completion is given pursuant to this section and the work is accepted by the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 4.3, 1973).


12.20.330 Care of drainage.

If the work, use or encroachment authorized in the permit issued pursuant to this chapter interferes with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage or as directed by the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 4.4, 1973).


12.20.340 Interference with use.

All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will least interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the general public at the place where the work or use is authorized, and at no time shall a public street be closed, or the use thereof denied the general public, or access to adjacent private property be denied without the written permission of the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 4.5, 1973).


12.20.350 Restoring of street and maintenance of encroachment.

Upon completion of the work, acts or things for which the permit was issued or when required by the city engineer, the permittee shall replace, repair or restore the public street at the place of work to the same condition existing prior thereto unless otherwise provided in the permit. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, impediments, material or rubbish caused or placed upon the right-of-way of the public street under the permit and shall do any other work or perform any act necessary to restore the public street to a safe and usable condition.

After completion of all work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in inspecting and maintaining the area affected by the encroachment. For a period of one year after the completion of the work, the permittee shall repair and make good any injury or damage to any portion of the street which occurs as the result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the street which would not have occurred had such work not been done. By the acceptance of the permit, the permittee shall, upon notice from the city engineer, immediately repair any injury, damage or nuisance, in any portion of the right-of-way, resulting from the work done under the permit. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly or should the conditions of the injury or damage require repairs or replacement to be made before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the city may, at its option, make the necessary repairs or replacement or perform the necessary work and the permittee shall be charged with all the expenses incurred in the performance of the work. (Ord. 471 § 4.6, 1973).


12.20.360 Relocation or removal of encroachments.

If any future construction, reconstruction or maintenance work by the city on a public right-of-way requires the relocation, removal or abandonment of installations or encroachments in, on or under the public right-of-way, the permittee owning, controlling, or maintaining such installations or encroachments shall relocate, remove or abandon the same at his sole expense; provided, however, that this provision shall apply to and remain in force and effect only so long as the right-of-way upon which such installations or structures are located are used for usual street purposes and not as a freeway, and this provision shall cease to apply when such street becomes a freeway. When removal, relocation or abandonment is required, the city engineer shall give the permittee a written demand specifying the place of relocation, or that the installations or encroachment must be removed, relocated or abandoned. If the permittee fails to comply with the instructions, the city may cause the removal, relocation or abandonment of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 471 § 4.7, 1973).


12.20.370 Standards, supervision and inspection.

All work done under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform to specifications established by the city engineer or in the absence of established specifications to recognized standards of construction and approved practices in connection with the work to be done. All work shall be done subject to the supervision of, and to the satisfaction of, the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 4.8, 1973).


12.20.380 Storage of material.

No material or excess excavation shall be stored on any public street, alley or sidewalk unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Excess earth materials from trenching or other operations shall be removed from the pavement, traveled way, or shoulder as the trench is backfilled and the work is carried forward. (Ord. 471 § 4.9, 1973).


12.20.390 Small pipes.

When specified on the permit, utility services and other small diameter pipes, two inches or less, or rigid conduits shall be jacked or otherwise forced underneath a paved street surface and the street shall not be cut, trenched, or otherwise disturbed. No tunneling will be permitted except as specifically set forth in the permit. (Ord. 471 § 4.10, 1973).


12.20.400 Minimum cover.

The minimum cover over any and all pipes or conduits larger than two and one-half inches installed within the right-of-way shall be 30 inches of earth or imported materials, unless otherwise specified in the permit. Within the public street, the minimum cover of 30 inches shall be measured from the surface, existing or planned. The city engineer is authorized to permit installation of pipes or conduits where 30 inches of cover cannot be provided because of topography, structures, or other engineering necessity. (Ord. 471 § 4.11, 1973).


12.20.410 Backfilling.

Backfilling of an excavation shall be in accordance with the city of Sonoma Standard Specifications and Standard Plans approved by the city council, both as to material and method; and backfill shall not be placed in any excavation without compaction of the material used therein, the degree and method thereof to be to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 471 § 4.12, 1973).


12.20.420 Poles and transmission lines.

Clearances and types in the construction of poles and transmission line carriers shall be in accordance with rules, regulations, and orders of the California Public Utilities Commission and other public agencies having jurisdiction.

No wires or cables are to be attached to trees without specific authorization to do so in the permit, and in no event shall wires be so attached as to girdle the tree or interfere with its growth. No wires or cables shall be below the minimum elevation above the ground, prescribed in the rules, orders and regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission.

When a pole, brace, stub, or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted, and resurfaced where applicable. (Ord. 471 § 4.13, 1973).


12.20.430 Aids to visibility.

When the location or position of a pole or other obstruction makes accentuation of its visibility to vehicular traffic necessary, the city engineer may require that the pole or other obstruction be painted or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Division of Highways of the state of California at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 471 § 4.14, 1973).


12.20.440 Movement of vehicles.

Before a vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of weight or dimension or characteristic, prohibited by law without a permit, is moved on any public right-of-way, a permit to do so must first be granted by the city engineer as set forth in the specifications established by the city engineer, or as otherwise required by him in accordance with the California State Division of Highways. Copies of all transportation permits issued by the Sonoma County road commissioner and the State Division of Highways relative to one or two-way trips requesting access to city streets shall be presented to the city engineer at the same time the application for a transportation permit is submitted to the city engineer.

When authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of dimension or weight in excess of that permitted by law, the permittee shall comply with the general law regulating travel over a public street, including posted signs or notices which limit speed or direction of travel, or weight which may be placed upon a structure or the width or height that may be moved thereon or thereover, or otherwise restrict or control travel on a public street. The permittee shall at all times conform to and abide by the practice and procedure necessary to make safe and convenient the travel of the general public, and to keep safe and preserve the public highway over and on which movement is being made. Any violation of this section shall cancel the permit issued to the permittee. (Ord. 471 § 4.15, 1973).


12.20.450 Mailboxes.

All mailboxes must be placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Post Office Department, but no box shall be so placed within the road right-of-way as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public. (Ord. 471 § 4.16, 1973).


12.20.460 Hedges or fences.

No hedge, fence or similar structure shall be planted or erected in a right-of-way without a permit. The intent of this restriction is to keep free a walkway for pedestrian or other lawful public travel without interference by or with vehicular travel. No encroachment of any nature will be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs or denies such pedestrian or other lawful travel within the limits of the right-of-way of a public street, or which impairs adequate sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 471 § 4.17, 1973).


12.20.470 Planting, trimming or removing trees.

The applicant for a permit to plant trees in the right-of-way of a public street shall show in his application the exact location of and the kind of trees to be planted. All trees planted within the right-of-way shall conform to the kind of trees outlined in the official tree list as adopted by the city council. No change shall be made in either location of trees or in kind of trees without the approval of the city engineer.

The city engineer may refuse to issue a permit authorizing the planting of trees in the right-of-way of a public street when, in his judgment, the location as described in the application or the nature of growth above or below ground of the kind of tree proposed will impede or inconvenience travel on a public street or unduly disturb the right-of-way thereof, or in any way impede construction or maintenance of necessary facilities.

Trimming of trees will be permitted only when and in the manner authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter in order that the shapeliness of the tree may be preserved.

An application for removal of a tree will be approved and permit issued only when a necessity for removal exists, and adjacent property owners concur, or when deemed necessary by the city engineer. When a tree is removed within the public right-of-way, the entire stump shall be taken out for a distance of at least two feet below the ground surface unless otherwise specified in the permit, and the hole backfilled and the material compacted. All debris from trimming or removal shall be removed from the site and the right-of-way restored to its former condition. (Ord. 471 § 4.18, 1973).


12.20.480 Maintenance of hedges, plantings, fences.

The permittee, or the owner of the adjacent property, shall maintain the hedges, shrubs, walls, fences or similar structures erected for landscaping purposes in a neat and orderly condition at all times. If an encroachment is not maintained as specified in this chapter, the city engineer may direct that permittee or property owner to remove the encroachment and restore the right-of-way to its former condition, at the expense of the permittee or property owner. (Ord. 471 § 4.19, 1973).


12.20.490 Lawns.

Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any person may plant and maintain a lawn of any grass, or type not prohibited by other law, within the right-of-way of a public street without a written permit. However, the lawn shall not extend into the traveled way of the public street nor into drainage ditches, gutters or other drainage facilities.

The general public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful travel. The city may use the planted area for any purpose whatever, and may issue a permit to any applicant to go thereon to perform work or otherwise encroach pursuant to this chapter. If the lawn is damaged or disturbed in the course of an authorized encroachment, it shall be removed and replaced by the permittee unless the permit specifically states otherwise. (Ord. 471 § 4.20, 1973).


12.20.500 Marking of streets, curb and sidewalks.

No person, without first having obtained a permit, shall solicit on a commercial or donation basis, to place, or maintain any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design, or other marking upon any street, sidewalk, or curb; except that markings for the purpose of identifying survey, utility or construction locations shall not be subject to this chapter. (Ord. 471 § 4.21, 1973).


12.20.510 Replacing curb where driveway not used.

Where a curb depression has been provided for a driveway to a residence or a business and such driveway is no longer needed or used as a driveway, the owner of the property or owner or operator of the business shall replace the driveway with new curb, gutter and sidewalk and repair any damage done to the adjacent sidewalk by use of such driveway. Such work shall be done in conformity with the requirements for the construction of curbs and sidewalks within the city. (Ord. 471 § 4.22, 1973).


12.20.520 Monuments.

Any monument of granite, concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines and/or elevation of any public street or right-of-way, property subdivision, or a precise survey point or reference point shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the city engineer to do so, the permission to be granted in conformance with requirements as set forth in specifications established by the city engineer. Replacement of removed or disturbed monuments will be at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 471 § 4.23, 1973).


Chapter 12.24 NEWSRACKS

Sections:

12.24.010    Purpose and intent.

12.24.020    Definitions.

12.24.030    General provisions.

12.24.040    Permit required.

12.24.050    Standards for the placement, installation, maintenance and operation of newsracks.

12.24.060    Removal and hearing.

12.24.070    Notices.

12.24.080    Applicability.

12.24.090    Abandoned newsracks.

12.24.100    Severability.

12.24.110    Enforcement authority.

12.24.120    Appeals and judicial review.


12.24.010 Purpose and intent.

A. Findings. The city council of the city of Sonoma finds and declares that:

1. The uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks in the public right-of-way can constitute a threat to public health, safety and welfare by interfering with and obstructing the use of the public rights-of-way and by offending community aesthetic sensibilities and adversely affecting tourism, which is one of the major sources of economic viability of the community.

2. The city council recognizes, however, that the use of such rights-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspapers and news periodicals that access to those areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The city council further finds that these strong and competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which can be satisfactorily achieved only through the means of this chapter, which is designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the place and manner of using such newsracks.

B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-way so as to:

1. Protect the right to distribute information protected by the United States and California Constitutions, through the use of newsracks.

2. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.

3. Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including but not limited to ingress into or egress from any place of business or residence, from the street to the sidewalk, or from parked vehicles to the sidewalk.

4. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mail boxes, and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes.

5. Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way, encourage well-designed and aesthetically compatible newsracks and protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding properties.

6. Reduce exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims and litigation.

C. Preservation of Constitutional Rights. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. (Ord. 01-2012 § 1, 2012).


12.24.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the following words and phrases shall be construed as defined in this section:

“Block” shall mean one side of a street between two consecutive intersections. 

“City manager” shall mean the city manager or his or her designee.

“Director of public works” shall mean the director of the public works department or his or her designee.

“Double-slotted newsracks” shall mean single newsracks containing separate provisions for two tabloid-style (vertically formatted) publications, where each side has a separate coin slot, merchandise receptacles, or places where the publications are dispersed. A double-slotted newsrack shall be considered one newsrack, cabinet, or compartment for purposes of this chapter.

“Modular newsracks” shall mean an attached group of two or more newsracks supported by a pedestal.

“Newsrack” shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale or free distribution of newspapers, news periodicals, commercial handbills, or other publications.

“Newsrack permit” shall mean a permit which was issued under this chapter of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

“Person” shall mean any person or persons, or entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, or joint venture. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.030 General provisions.

A. Roadway and Driveway Prohibition. No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into, or over, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon any part of the roadway of any public street, or upon any driveway.

B. Parkway Prohibition. No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack on a parkway, planter strip, or similar area designated for landscaping in a public right-of-way.

C. Sidewalk Restrictions. No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk in any manner inconsistent with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.040 Permit required.

A. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk without a newsrack permit from the public works department as required in this chapter.

B. The newsracks which are specifically identified in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter are deemed to have a newsrack permit for a period of three months from the effective date of this chapter, at which time a new newsrack permit must be filed as provided in this chapter. 

C. Applications for a new newsrack permit may be filed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Applications shall be filed with the director of public works upon a form provided by the public works department for that purpose and shall include the following information:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2. The address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any reasonable time concerning the applicant’s newsracks;

3. The number of proposed newsracks and the names and frequency of publications to be contained in each newsrack, including any existing newsracks;

4. Type or brand of newsrack, including a photograph and a description of the newsrack and supporting structure;

5. A site plan showing the exact location of each newsrack and supporting structure, and sufficient information to determine that the location complies with SMC 12.24.050;

6. Such application shall also contain a statement that the applicant will, in consideration of being issued a newsrack permit for the use of space, be responsible for any damage or repairs caused by the installation, maintenance or removal of any newsrack and agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Sonoma, its officers and employees from any loss, liability, or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person caused by the installation, use, or maintenance of the applicant’s newsrack within the city of Sonoma;

7. Such application shall also include a copy of the policy or a certificate of the comprehensive general liability insurance policy in the amount prescribed by city council resolution to protect against personal injury and property damages and not more than the amount required for other obstructions on city property. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as insured the city of Sonoma, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the newsrack placement. Proof of insurance coverage as specified in this subsection must be verified by the city prior to issuance of a newsrack permit.

D. An administrative fee may be imposed where such a fee is imposed merely to defray the expenses of administering constitutional regulation of newsracks and shall be strictly limited to the actual cost of administering such constitutional regulatory scheme. A fee may only be set subsequent to a hearing by the city council to determine said actual cost. Written findings setting forth the basis of the fee shall be sent to all distributors.

E. Existing newsracks which have been determined to meet the criteria for both design and placement provided in the City of Sonoma’s January 1, 1990, Newspaper Rack Policy are so indicated by an asterisk in Exhibit “A.” These newsracks are exempt from the application requirements in subsections (C)(4) (type and brand of newsrack) and (C)(5) (site plan) of this section, and the administrative fee for their application shall be waived. All other application requirements apply. Applications for these newsracks that are complete and consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and are filed within three months of the effective date of this chapter, shall be approved.

F. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (E) of this section, applications for new newsrack permits which are complete, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and for locations at which space for one or more newsracks is available shall be approved on a first-come, first-served basis.

G. Applications for a new newsrack location may be denied if there is a vacant and available newsrack in an existing modular newsrack on the same block. 

H. At the request of the applicant, an application for a new newsrack permit which is complete and consistent with the provisions of this chapter, but for a location at which space for a new newsrack is not available, shall be placed on a waiting list. If the requested location becomes available, the applicant will be notified according to its placement on the waiting list and a newsrack permit shall be issued; provided, that the newsrack complies with the provisions of this chapter. Said applicant shall have 15 days after the mailing of the notification letter to obtain a newsrack permit for the space by notifying the director of public works in writing and by paying the newsrack permit fee. Failure to obtain a newsrack permit within this period shall be deemed a withdrawal of the application. 

I. If a newsrack permit is denied, in whole or in part, the director of public works shall notify the applicant in writing within 10 business days of the decision explaining the reasons for the denial.

J. The applicant may appeal the denial of a newsrack permit pursuant to SMC 12.24.120.

K. A newsrack permittee may not assign its permits to another of its publication(s). (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.050 Standards for the placement, installation, maintenance and operation of newsracks.

Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk shall comply with all of the following standards:

A. Placement and Total Numbers.

1. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the permittee of the newsrack. For newsracks located in the public right-of-way, the pedestal shall be securely bolted to the sidewalk or a concrete footing under pavers, tiles, or similar surfaces as the case may be; provided, that the permittee of the newsrack restores the sidewalk, pavers, tiles or similar surfaces to their original condition upon removal of the newsrack. 

2. Where there are two or more newsracks in one location, newsracks shall be clustered into modular newsracks subject to the following conditions and limitations:

a. Modular newsracks shall be designed in such a manner as to utilize two rows with an equal number of compartments in each row.

b. No modular newsrack shall contain more than eight newsracks.

3. No newsrack may be installed within 200 feet of another single or modular newsrack on the same block except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, including without limitation SMC 12.24.040(B) and subsection (A)(4) of this section.

4. Any person, publication or agency may apply for a variance from the 200-foot separation requirement of subsection (A)(3) of this section. A variance may be granted by the director of public works if the applicant can establish that the variance would not violate (a) SMC 12.24.010, Purpose and intent, or (b) subsection (B) of this section, Location. The applicant can appeal the denial of a variance pursuant to SMC 12.24.120.

B. Location. Other than those existing newsracks identified under SMC 12.24.040(E), no newsrack shall be installed, used, or maintained:

1. When such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes, or other governmental use.

2. When such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes ingress or egress to or from any business, residence or legally parked or stopped vehicle or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects at or near the location.

3. Within 15 feet of the curb ramp of any street intersection, or in any location that interferes with or impairs the vision of operators of vehicles at street intersections.

4. Within five feet of any of the following: fire hydrant, emergency call box or other emergency facility, any marked crosswalk not at an intersection, any driveway or midblock curb ramp, any area designated by curb markings or signage to be handicapped parking, bus stop sign pole, or existing plaza periphery business wayfinding signs.

5. With the back to the roadway along the curb, if located within two feet from any curb where marked parking is parallel to the sidewalk.

6. Within 18 inches from trees and other vegetation installed in permanent planters in the public right-of-way, tree wells, supporting posts for covered walkways or canopies, or other similar elements at or near the location.

7. So as to obstruct, shield, or block a window of any business or residence where such newsrack is located within six feet from the face of the building on which the window is located.

8. At any location which creates less than a four-foot-wide path of travel as required by Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

9. At any location in front of a state park of California, Sonoma City Hall or on the sidewalks on either the interior perimeter or crossing within the Sonoma Plaza.

C. Dimensions and Design.

1. Each newsrack shall be pedestal-mounted and stackable, of metal construction, and of a style that is either the KJ-50 as manufactured by K-Jack, or the Traditional 49-16 as manufactured by Sho-Rack, or substantially similar thereto.

2. The color of any newsrack shall be brown; identified as “brown” or “federal brown” (as manufactured by Sho-Rack). An alternative color may be allowed by the director of public works; provided, that the alternative color is complementary to the surroundings.

3. No single or modular newsrack shall exceed 58 inches in height measured from the surface of the sidewalk or ground to the top surface of the newsrack, or 20 inches in depth. 

4. Use of double-slotted newsracks is encouraged for smaller, vertically formatted publications.

5. All units in modular racks shall open in the same direction.

D. Maintenance. Every newsrack shall be maintained by the permittee in a clean and neat condition free from dents, cracks, corrosion, rust, graffiti, dirt, or grease; chipped, discolored or peeling paint; information flyers or stickers that are not the property of the newsrack permittee; broken, cracked, or misshapen parts; and similar conditions that detract from the aesthetic quality of the commercial area. The newsrack shall be in working order at all times or locked in a closed position. Upon removal of a newsrack, the right-of-way shall be restored to its original condition prior to installation of the newsrack.

E. Advertising. Newsracks shall carry no advertising or public notices, other than a logo or similar information identifying the newspaper or publication, covering no more than 50 percent of the back and/or sides of the newsrack. No logos or similar information identifying the newspaper shall be allowed on the tops of the newsracks.

F. Identification. The address and telephone number of a responsible person who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall be displayed on the front of the newsrack in such manner as to be readily visible and readable to a prospective customer. The size of the identifying information shall not exceed 12 square inches. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.060 Removal and hearing.

In addition to any enforcement remedies available to the city as set forth in this code, any newsrack and the publications therein installed or maintained in violation of this chapter may be removed by the city subject to the notice and appeal procedures set forth in this section.

A. Notice of Violation. If at any time it is determined by the director of public works that any newsrack is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, a written notice of violation shall be mailed to the permittee of the newsrack, and posted on the newsrack, or if no identification is displayed on the newsrack, merely posted on the newsrack. The notice shall state the violation or violations which constitute the basis of the notice, the city’s intent to revoke the newsrack permit and to remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected or a hearing has not been requested within 15 days of the date of the mailing or posting of the notice of violation.

B. Hearing. A timely request for a hearing shall stay any removal of the newsrack. The request for a hearing shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the city clerk. The hearing shall take place before the city manager within 15 calendar days of the request. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given the director of public works and the permittee. The city manager shall issue a written decision within 10 calendar days of the hearing. If the city manager finds that the newsrack is in violation of this chapter and the violation is not corrected within 10 calendar days after the written decision is mailed to the permittee, the newsrack permit may be revoked and the newsrack and any publications therein, if not a modular newsrack, may be summarily removed. The newsrack permittee may appeal the city manager’s determination pursuant to SMC 12.24.120. A timely appeal to the city council shall stay the summary removal of the newsrack.

C. Removal. Any newsrack which is not brought into compliance with this chapter within 15 days after notice of violation has been posted on the newsrack if no hearing or appeal is requested pursuant to subsection (B) of this section or SMC 12.24.120 shall be removed by the director of public works and stored in a convenient place. The cost of removal and storage shall be borne by the permittee.

D. Notification of Removal. The director of public works shall notify the permittee of the removal by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the permittee, if any, or to the address displayed on the newsrack. Such notice shall be mailed within five business days after removal of the newsrack and shall state: (1) the date the newsrack was removed; (2) the reasons for the removal; and (3) the locations of and procedure for claiming the newsrack.

E. Release. Any newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released thereof within six months after the mailing of the written notice of removal upon satisfactory proof of authority to claim the newsrack and payment of an impoundment fee in an amount equal to the reasonable cost to the city of removing and storing the newsrack. If such newsrack remains unclaimed after this six-month period, it shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of by the city.

F. Removal in Exigent Circumstances. In the case of any newsrack which, in violation of the provisions of this chapter, creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, such newsrack may be summarily removed and stored in a convenient location so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The director of public works shall notify the permittee of the removal by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the permittee. Such notice shall be mailed within five business days after the removal of the newsrack and shall contain the same information as set forth in subsection (D) of this section. The permittee of the newsrack may request a hearing pursuant to the procedures of subsection (B) of this section for a determination of whether the newsrack was legally placed and, therefore, improperly seized. If the city manager determines that the seizure was improper, the city manager shall order the newsrack released and reinstalled by the city with no charge to the permittee. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.070 Notices.

Unless otherwise stated, notices required pursuant to the provision of this chapter shall be given in writing by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. The giving of notice under this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.080 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks within public rights-of-way, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions herein. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.090 Abandoned newsracks.

A newsrack shall be deemed abandoned when no printed material of the type listed on the permit is contained therein for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, or it contains only outdated issues for more than 30 consecutive days. If the director of public works determines that no printed material of the type listed on the permit is contained in a newsrack for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, or it contains only outdated issues for more than 30 consecutive days, the director of public works shall mail to the newsrack permittee and post on the newsrack a notice stating his or her finding that the newsrack has been abandoned. If the newsrack permittee does not respond in writing to the director of public works with a statement of intention not to abandon the newsrack within 10 days of the mailing and posting of said notice, the newsrack permit shall be deemed revoked and the director of public works may summarily impound such newsrack, and shall mail a notice of removal as set forth in SMC 12.24.060(D). If the newsrack permittee timely provides a statement of intention not to abandon the newsrack, and there is not printed material contained in the newsrack for more than 30 consecutive days thereafter, or it contains only outdated issues for 30 consecutive days, the newsrack permit shall be deemed revoked, and the director of public works (A) may, without first mailing or posting notice of abandonment, summarily impound such newsrack, (B) shall mail a notice of removal as set forth in SMC 12.24.060(D), and (C) shall determine whether a newsrack permit should be issued to an applicant on the waiting list, if one exists for the site, in accordance with SMC 12.24.040(F). (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.100 Severability.

Each phrase, clause, sentence, section, and provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be severable. Therefore, if any phrase, clause, sentence, section, or provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other phrase, clause, sentence, section, provision, or application of this chapter. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.110 Enforcement authority.

Except as specifically provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city manager or his or her designee. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


12.24.120 Appeals and judicial review.

Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who is aggrieved by a determination made pursuant to SMC 12.24.040(G), 12.24.050(A)(4), or 12.24.060 shall have 10 calendar days within which to appeal the decision to the city council in accordance with the appeals provisions of this code. Any appeal of a newsrack permit or variance denial under this chapter shall be set for a public hearing before the city council. (Ord. 01-2012 § 2, 2012).


Title 13 WATER AND SEWAGE

Chapters:

13.04    City Water System

13.08    Repealed

13.10    Water Shortage and Conservation Plan

13.12    Repealed

13.16    Repealed

13.20    Cross-Connections – Backflow Prevention

13.24    Water Main Extensions

13.28    Wells

13.32    Stormwater Management and Discharge Control


Chapter 13.04 CITY WATER SYSTEM*

Sections:

13.04.005    Definitions.

13.04.010    Designation.

13.04.020    Policy.

13.04.024    Repealed.

13.04.030    Operation.

13.04.040    Official water line map.

13.04.050    Design standards for water pipes, mains, and other water service equipment.

13.04.060    Adoption of rules and regulations for operation and maintenance of water system.

13.04.080    Settlement of disputes between consumer and city.

13.04.090    Turning water off or on in an emergency.

13.04.100    Use of water by contractors and other persons in construction work.

13.04.110    Capital improvement funds.

13.04.120    Rates, charges and fees for water service.

13.04.124    Water connections for new construction.

13.04.125    Water applications and security deposits.

13.04.140    Primary responsibility.

13.04.150    Hydrants – Purpose – Persons authorized to open.

13.04.160    Hydrants – Installation and connection with water mains.

13.04.180    Hydrants – Duty of the persons opening.

13.04.190    Existing fire hydrants.

13.04.200    Common service pipe for two or more consumers prohibited – Exception.

13.04.210    Turning on water without consent of water system.

13.04.220    Supplying other than to occupant of premises.

13.04.230    Interconnection of private and municipal water system without permit and approval.

13.04.240    Falsification of application.

13.04.250    Use or trespass upon water system property contrary to regulations without written permission prohibited.

13.04.251    Consumer shutoff in event of leakage.

13.04.253    Accidental or malicious damages.

13.04.260    Penalty for violation.

*Prior legislation: Ords. 2000-6, 465 and 377.


13.04.005 Definitions.

The specialized terms used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:

A. “Connection to the city water system” means the installation of water distribution facilities (including water lines and service laterals, but excluding water meters), linked to the city water system, sufficient to provide adequate water service upon the installation of a water meter or meters.

B. “Water distribution and supply system” means (1) piping, fittings, control valves and other appurtenances carrying or supplying potable water to a building; or (2) an automatic fire sprinkler system required to serve a building. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2001-9 § 2, 2001).


13.04.010 Designation.

The water system of the city, traditionally known as the Sonoma municipal water works, shall herein be referred to as the “water system” of the city of Sonoma. The city of Sonoma shall be designated as “city” for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.020 Policy.

It is expressly declared that the operation of the water system of the city shall be designed and effected to the end that the water system of the city shall be a self-sustaining operation, insofar as is possible. It is further the policy of operation of the water system of the city that the fees and charges imposed or to be imposed in the operation of the water system be designed to defray all costs of operation, to provide for normal replacement of physical facilities, and to provide for system improvement and expansion where needed. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.024 Water waste prohibitions.

Repealed by 02-2009. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.030 Operation.

The operation and direction of the water system of the city shall be under the direct control and supervision of the city manager, or such other officer or employee as may be designated, by resolution by the city council, who upon such designation shall exercise all the powers and duties granted herein to the city manager. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.040 Official water line map.

The city shall maintain a set of drawings showing the official water system, as it shall exist from time to time. A copy of said drawings shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Changes to the location of pipelines and facilities shown on said drawings shall occur as the result of projects approved by the city council except in the case of emergency repairs wherein the city manager or such other officer or employee as may be designated shall determine the appropriate location. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.050 Design standards for water pipes, mains, and other water service equipment.

A current set of design standards for common water pipe, mains and other water service equipment shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer or other city official designated by the city manager. (Ord. 01-2010 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.060 Adoption of rules and regulations for operation and maintenance of water system.

The city council reserves the right and power to, and may from time to time by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the operation, conduct and maintenance of the water system, and for furnishing water to users, and may likewise by resolution modify and where necessary establish the rates, charges and penalties to be imposed and followed in the operation of the water system, and may, from time to time by resolution, prescribe rules for the extension of water mains within the boundaries and outside the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.080 Settlement of disputes between consumer and city.

Any dispute between a customer and the city shall be made to the city in writing and submitted to the city manager or designee. A dispute involving a water bill will not be accepted as justification for nonpayment of the water bill, and payment in full shall be made pending settlement of the dispute. Such settlement shall be in writing. Should the customer be dissatisfied with the outcome of the dispute, the customer may appeal the decision of the city manager or designee to the city council who will act as final authority. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.090 Turning water off or on in an emergency.

The city shall have the right in an emergency to turn the water on or off without notice, but it shall be the duty of the city to make reasonable effort to notify all consumers in advance of such an emergency that the water is to be turned off or on. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.100 Use of water by contractors and other persons in construction work.

Contractors or any person desiring to use water in construction work shall in each and every case make written application for and obtain a written permit for a temporary construction meter or for the use of a hydrant meter. Should the water be obtained through the use of a hydrant meter connected to a fire hydrant, applicant shall become subject to the provisions of SMC 13.04.150. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.110 Capital improvement funds.

The city council reserves the right and power to, and may from time to time by resolution, adopt rules and terms for capital improvement funds for the improvement, both within the city and without the city, of the municipal water system. The power shall include the right to establish and administer special funds for the purpose of maintaining and replacing of water lines both inside and outside city limits. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.120 Rates, charges and fees for water service.

The city council shall, from time to time by resolution as it deems necessary and appropriate, provide for and set all water rates, charges and fees including connection charges and front footage charges and delinquent charges and other penalty charges. Said resolution may provide for automatic future adjustment of any of said rates, charges and fees by application of appropriate cost escalators as determined by the city council. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.124 Water connections for new construction.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that an adequate water supply is available to serve new, detached structures that makes use of potable water or for which a fire sprinkler system is required.

B. Requirement for Construction. Connection to the city water system shall be required prior to the final inspection approval of any building permit for the construction of any new, detached structure utilizing a water supply and distribution system as defined in this chapter.

C. Exemption Provision. A property owner shall be exempt from this connection requirement, if the property owner applies for and obtains an exemption prior to the issuance of any building permit for construction subject to the requirements of this section. Any property owner desiring an exemption shall file an exemption application with the city council. The application shall be on a form provided by the city water department. The city council shall grant the exemption if it finds that:

1. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property, including, without limitation, unusual technical obstacles to connecting to the city water system; and

2. The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2001-9 § 2, 2001).


13.04.125 Water applications and security deposits.

All service addresses within the city limits of Sonoma consuming water supplied through a water meter shall have a current signed application on file with the water department. Applications shall list the account name, the address being served by water and the billing address, if different. Identification in the form of driver’s license number and/or Social Security number will be required. If the property is a rental, the owner’s name and address must be listed. For all multi-use accounts, the property owner shall be required to complete the application and be listed as the responsible party. Original signatures on the applications are required; other forms will not be accepted. Rental properties for which the tenant is the responsible party, the city shall require a security deposit be paid with the application. The deposit will be held on account for a period of two years of service with no delinquencies, water shutoffs, or returned checks. Upon completion of the two-year period meeting the requirements set forth above, the deposit will be credited directly to the utility account for the service address. Upon cessation of service, the deposit will be applied to the utility account with any remaining balance being returned to the responsible listed party. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.140 Primary responsibility.

Where application is made for water services on a multiple-unit basis, the owner of the real property in question shall be primarily responsible for charges where one meter serves more than one family dwelling unit, and, as a condition of such water service, shall sign the application for water service as such responsible party. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.150 Hydrants – Purpose – Persons authorized to open.

A. Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires, and shall be opened and used only by the fire department or other officials of the city authorized to do so. 

B. For the purpose of this section, permits may be issued by the public works administrator or his or her designee for the sale of bulk water through hydrants; provided, that the hydrant meter user meets certain conditions. These conditions shall be set by use policy approved by the city manager or his or her designee. In no case shall the truck(s) or tank(s) receiving water be permitted unless equipped with an approved air gap back flow preventer. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.160 Hydrants – Installation and connection with water mains.

No fire hydrant shall be installed or connected with the mains of the water system of the city by any person, unless and until permission has been granted therefore by the city manager upon the recommendation of the fire chief and public works administrator. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.180 Hydrants – Duty of the persons opening.

Every person authorized to open a fire hydrant shall utilize only the proper style of tools for this purpose and replace the cap on the outlet when same is not in use. They shall leave the hydrant in as good condition as when found, and such an officer or person shall report to the water department of the city or the fire chief any leaks or breaks or damage to the fire hydrant immediately upon discovery. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.190 Existing fire hydrants.

The city council retains the right to direct the closure and capping of a fire hydrant existing outside the city limits and direct that it shall not be used or opened unless and until permission has been granted by the city council upon recommendation of the fire chief and public works administrator. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.200 Common service pipe for two or more consumers prohibited – Exception.

No water shall be served to two or more parcels or properties separately owned through a common service pipe, or other water conduit, unless there is no main contiguous to the premises from which service may be had; provided, that where there is no main contiguous to the premises from which service may be had, temporary permission may be granted upon written application to the water system; provided, that the customer first shall in writing guarantee the payment of water rates and charges for all parcels or properties so served, and for each monthly minimum charge under the rules and regulations established or to be established by the city council; when there shall be a main contiguous to the premises so served, the temporary permission shall lapse and be of no force and effect. Upon the recommendation of the fire chief, and with the approval of the public works administrator, a single fire service connection serving two or more properties may be allowed when such a configuration is found to enhance fire protection without jeopardizing water quality. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.210 Turning on water without consent of water system.

It is unlawful for any person to turn on the water after the same has been turned off without the written consent of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.220 Supplying other than to occupant of premises.

It is unlawful for any person to supply water to premises other than the premises for which water service is granted unless authorized by the city on an emergency basis. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.230 Interconnection of private and municipal water system without permit and approval.

It is unlawful for any person to interconnect a private water system to the municipal water system without first obtaining the required permit and inspection. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.240 Falsification of application.

It is unlawful for any person, whether for himself or for any other person, partnership or corporation, to give false, or misleading, or false and misleading information in any written application for water service from the Sonoma water system. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.250 Use or trespass upon water system property contrary to regulations without written permission prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to open any fire hydrant, street hydrant, stopcock, gate or valve, or to interfere in any manner with any street water service, water connection, or any water meter attached to any service pipe connected with the water mains, or water pipes of the city, or to tap, break or injure any water main or water pipe of the city, or any reservoir of the city, or to tap any water service pipe or to take off or draw water from any water main, pipe or hydrant of the city without paying the established water rental therefor, after having made written application therefor as provided in the rules and regulations of the water system of the city or in anywise to trespass upon the public property of the water system, without written permission first being obtained from the water system of the city. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.251 Consumer shutoff in event of leakage.

The city may terminate water service to any customer who is notified by the city in writing of the existence of leakage in any part of the water system on the service side of the water meter, on private property, and who fails to take reasonable steps to eliminate such leakage. The notice shall be given to the occupant of the property who appears as the customer in the files of the water department. If leakage on the service side of any water meter on private property is of such magnitude as to threaten damage or deterioration to property or loss of water from continuous and unrestricted flow, such as that which would be caused by the bursting or total failure of a pipe or other component of a plumbing system, the city may terminate service at the meter immediately and without notice. When such service provides water for fire protection purposes, the fire chief shall immediately be notified of the interruption of water service. Service shall be restored as soon as reasonably possible after repair. In enacting this regulation the city council finds that water is a valuable commodity, and that shortage of water must be anticipated and guarded against even in times when supply is plentiful, so that the waste of water by unnecessary leakage is to be prevented at all times, notwithstanding the willingness or ability of a customer to pay for wasted water. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.253 Accidental or malicious damages.

Any person found responsible for accidental or malicious damage to the water system which results in a release of water, and/or the need to repair or replace any mains, fire hydrants, water meters, valves or other appurtenances, shall reimburse the city for the materials and labor costs associated with their act(s) or omissions, including the cost of the estimated volume of water released from the system. Such reimbursement shall be at rates set by city policy for the determination of fees. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.04.260 Penalty for violation.

Every person violating or contributing in any way to the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. Every violator of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day such violation shall continue, and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and every such separate offense. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


Chapter 13.08 WATER RATES

(Repealed by Ord. 97-6)


Chapter 13.10 WATER SHORTAGE AND CONSERVATION PLAN

Sections:

13.10.010    Purpose and authority.

13.10.020    Declaration of policy.

13.10.030    Definitions.

13.10.040    Authorization.

13.10.050    Application.

13.10.060    Waste of water prohibited.

13.10.070    Water conservation stages.

13.10.080    Exceptions and application procedures for exceptions.

13.10.090    Violation – Enforcement.

13.10.100    Violation – Procedures for enforcement.

13.10.110    Requiring flow-restricting device or shutting off water.

13.10.120    Violation – Installation of a flow-restricting device.

13.10.130    Violation – Additional remedy.


13.10.010 Purpose and authority. 

The purpose of this water shortage and conservation plan is to conserve the water supply of the city for the greatest public benefit with particular regard to public health, fire protection, and domestic use; to conserve water by reducing waste; and to achieve water use reductions in response to water shortages that occur from time to time.

Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the council from passing an emergency resolution for the immediate curtailment of water use by its customers due to water supply shortages and delivery limitations caused by catastrophic events and conditions, either natural or unnatural. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.020 Declaration of policy.

It is declared that, because of the conditions prevailing in the city and in the county of Sonoma, the public health, safety, and welfare requires that the water resources available to the city be put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to which they are capable, by promoting water conservation and the efficient use of potable water furnished by the city, eliminating intentional or unintentional water waste when a reasonable alternative solution is available, and prohibiting use of equipment which is wasteful. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.030 Definitions.

“Allotment” means the maximum quantity of water allowed for each customer over any applicable period as established in the water rationing provisions in this chapter.

“City” means the city of Sonoma acting by and through the city of Sonoma public works department as operator of the city of Sonoma water system.

“City manager” is the city manager of the city of Sonoma.

“Council” is the city council of the city of Sonoma.

“Customer” means any person, whether within or without the geographic boundaries of the city of Sonoma, who uses water supplied by the city and shall also include any nonoccupant property owners.

“Director” is the public works director of the city of Sonoma.

“Excess use” means the usage of water by a water customer in excess of the water allotment provided under the water rationing provisions of this chapter, over an applicable period.

“GPD” means gallons per day.

“Municipal code” means the municipal code of the city of Sonoma.

“Ornamental fountain” means a fountain that uses city of Sonoma potable water and may or may not have a system that recirculates the water and is not used for habitation of pet fish or other pet marine creatures.

“Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or governmental entity.

“Service interruption” means the temporary suspension of water supply, or reduction of pressure below that required for adequate supply, to any customer, portion of a water supply, or entire system.

“Water rationing” means procedures established to provide for the systematic distribution of critically limited water supplies, in order to balance demand and limited available supplies, and to assure that sufficient water is available to preserve public health and safety. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.040 Authorization.

The city manager or his/her designee is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this chapter upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.050 Application. 

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers, and property served by the city. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.060 Waste of water prohibited.

It is unlawful for a customer to permit potable water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain and/or to fail to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing. No customer shall use or permit the use of potable water from the city for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, agricultural, or other purpose for the nonessential uses as defined in subsection (A) of this section.

A. Nonessential Uses. Nonessential uses are defined as follows:

1. The washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, and other hard-surfaced areas by direct hosing, except as may be necessary to properly dispose of flammable or other dangerous liquids or substances, wash away spills that present a trip and fall hazard, or to prevent or eliminate materials dangerous to the public health and safety; provided, that the disposal of such is in conformance with Chapter 13.32 SMC, Stormwater Management and Discharge Control;

2. The escape of water through breaks or leaks within the customer’s plumbing or private distribution system for any substantial period of time within which such break or leak should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be presumed that a period of 72 hours after the customer discovers such a break or leak or receives notice from the city is a reasonable time to correct such break or leak or, at a minimum, to stop the flow of water from such break or leak;

3. Irrigation in a manner or to an extent which allows excessive runoff of water or unreasonable over-spray of the areas being watered. Every customer is deemed to have his/her water system under control at all times, to know the manner and extent of his/her water use and any runoff, and to employ available alternatives to apply irrigation water in a reasonably efficient manner;

4. Washing cars, boats, trailers, or other vehicles and machinery directly with a hose not equipped with a shutoff nozzle; and

5. Water for nonrecirculating conveyor car wash systems.

B. Exempt Water Uses. Use of water supplied by a private well or from a reclaimed wastewater, grey water, or rainwater utilization system is exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.070 Water shortage stages. 

The council may declare any of the water shortage stages set forth in subsections (A) through (D) of this section by resolution. When a water shortage stage has been declared by the council, it shall be a violation of this section for any customer of the city to knowingly make, cause, use, or permit the use of city-supplied water for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner in excess of or contrary to the applicable requirements set forth below.

A. Stage 1. Voluntary Conservation – Water Shortage Alert. The council may by resolution declare a Stage 1 water shortage upon notification that the board of directors for the Sonoma County water agency has declared up to 15 percent reduction in Russian River water supply delivery to the city. In order to achieve an overall system-wide reduction goal of up to 15 percent of Russian River water supply deliveries, all potable water customers of the city shall be requested to:

1. Apply irrigation water only during the evening and early morning hours to reduce evaporation losses.

2. Inspect all irrigation systems, repair leaks, and adjust spray heads to provide optimum coverage and eliminate avoidable over-spray.

3. For irrigation valves controlling water applied to lawns, vary the minutes of run-time consistent with fluctuations in weather.

4. Reduce minutes of run-time for each irrigation cycle if water begins to run off to gutters and ditches before the irrigation cycle is completed.

5. Become informed about and adhere to the city’s water waste prohibitions as established in SMC 13.10.060.

6. Utilize water conservation rebate and other incentive programs to replace high water-use plumbing fixtures and appliances with water-efficient models.

7. Utilize city information on using water efficiently, reading water meters, repairing ordinary leaks, and applying water efficiently to landscaping.

B. Stage 2. Mandatory Conservation – Water Shortage. The council may by resolution declare a Stage 2 water shortage upon notification that the board of directors of the Sonoma County water agency has declared a 16 percent to 25 percent reduction in Russian River water supply delivery to the city or recommendation by the director that Stage 2 must be implemented in order to meet Stage 1 reduction goals. When a Stage 2 water shortage has been declared by the council, the following restrictions shall apply in addition to the restrictions set forth in subsection (A) of this section:

1. Refilling or initial filling of a swimming pool shall be prohibited;

2. Use of water for nonrecirculating ornamental fountains by commercial customers shall be prohibited;

3. Noncommercial washing of privately owned motor vehicles, trailers, and boats except from a bucket and a hose equipped with a shutoff nozzle shall be prohibited;

4. Any use of water from a fire hydrant except for fighting fires shall be prohibited. Use for essential construction needs may be permitted by the director upon submittal of a permit application for construction water;

5. Use of potable water for dust control at construction sites shall be prohibited;

6. Residential and commercial irrigation shall be prohibited except on specific days and times as set forth by resolution of the council;

7. Other uses deemed by council resolution to be nonessential by the council.

C. Stage 3. Mandatory Compliance – Severe Water Shortage. The council may by resolution declare a Stage 3 water shortage upon notification by the director that the board of directors of the Sonoma County water agency has declared a 26 percent to 40 percent reduction in Russian River water supply delivery to the city or recommendation by the director that Stage 3 must be implemented in order to meet Stage 2 reduction goals. When a Stage 3 water shortage has been declared by council, the following restrictions shall apply in addition to the restrictions as set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section:

1. Watering of athletic fields and turf areas in public and private parks shall be limited to 75 percent of the water usage in year 2006 for the same period of time; or if 2006 billing data is unavailable or not appropriate for use, a different baseline year may be used as approved by the director;

2. Noncommercial washing of vehicles shall be prohibited;

3. Use of water for ornamental fountains shall be prohibited; and

4. Other uses deemed by council resolution to be nonessential.

D. Stage 4. Mandatory Water Rationing – Critical Water Shortage. The council may by resolution declare a Stage 4 water shortage upon notification that the board of directors of the Sonoma County water agency has declared a reduction of greater than 40 percent in Russian River water supply delivery to the city or recommendation by the director that Stage 4 must be implemented in order to meet Stage 3 reduction goals. During Stage 4 water shortage, the restrictions set forth in subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section shall be enforced along with the restrictions in this section and any water rationing plan adopted by the council.

1. The director shall develop a water rationing plan establishing water allotments for residential, commercial, and institutional customers of the city that takes into consideration projections and estimates made by the Sonoma County water agency pertaining to the Russian River water supply and the city’s local water supply. The water rationing plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following analyses and evaluations:

a. Water allocation for city customers based on (i) the amount of water available for the city’s water service area, (ii) the nature of the customer’s use, and (iii) the economic and fiscal impacts of water supply reductions;

b. A Stage 4 water shortage rate structure for conservation “tiered” rates, drought surcharges, excess-use penalties, and fees;

c. A systematic plan for temporary service interruptions to all or part of its water system, as may be deemed appropriate to further extend limited and/or dwindling water supplies;

d. A water billing plan that identifies the finance department’s responsibilities for obtaining and monitoring customer data and water usage to effect the water rationing plan; and

e. A public outreach and notification plan for implementing temporary service interruptions and water rationing.

2. No new water connections shall be permitted during a Stage 4 water shortage except as approved by the city manager for public health and safety reasons.

3. No new water agreements to serve water shall be entered into by the city during a Stage 4 water shortage. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.080 Exceptions and application procedures for exceptions. 

Any customer may make written application for an exception to the provisions of this chapter. Exception applications shall describe in detail the reasons the customer believes an exception is justified.

A.  The city manager may grant exceptions for use of water otherwise prohibited by this chapter upon finding and determining that failure to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the applicant or public, or cause an unnecessary and undue hardship on applicant or the public, including, but not limited to, adverse economic impacts, such as loss of production or jobs.

B. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the council by submitting a written appeal to the city clerk within 15 calendar days of the date the decision is served upon the applicant along with a copy of this chapter. Upon granting any appeal, the council may impose any conditions it determines to be just and proper. Exceptions granted by the council shall be prepared in writing and the council may require the exception be recorded at the applicant’s expense.

C. If the applicant fails to appeal the decision of the city manager within the time prescribed under subsection (B) of this section, the applicant waives all rights to an appeal of the decision of the city manager and shall have failed to exhaust their administrative remedies. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.090 Violation – Enforcement. 

It is a violation for any customer to fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter or any resolution adopted in connection with this chapter. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted by any person shall constitute a separate offense. Each offense shall be enforced as either (A) an infraction, or (B) an administrative penalty enforced as set forth in this chapter. The administrative penalties for violating a provision of this chapter shall be $100.00 for the first violation, $200.00 for a second violation of the same code section within the same year, and $300.00 for the third or any subsequent violations of the same code section within the same year. If any customer responsible for a violation of this chapter is a minor or incompetent, the parents or guardians of such persons shall be deemed responsible. Each person found responsible for a violation of this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for such violation. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009).


13.10.100 Violation – Procedure for enforcement.

A. On the date of the initial site inspection or observation, the director or his/her designee shall make personal contact with the customer at the address of the water service and serve the customer with an initial notice of the violation. This initial notice shall include (1) the date the property was inspected; (2) the address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred, such as a tax assessor parcel number (A.P.N.); (3) the provision of this chapter or resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter that the person has violated and a description of the violation; (4) a description of the action necessary to correct the violation; (5) a date that sets forth a reasonable time to correct the violation prior to the imposition of the administrative penalties in SMC 13.10.090; and (6) the name, date, and signature of the code enforcement officer that observed the violation. If personal contact cannot be made, the initial notice may be left on the premises, with a copy served by certified mail to the customer, any nonoccupant property owner, and any other person the director or his/her designee determines to be responsible for a violation of this chapter.

B. Where a person deemed responsible for a violation of this chapter or resolution adopted in furtherance of this chapter fails to correct the violation within the time set forth in the initial notice, the director or his/her designee shall issue a notice and order. Each notice and order shall contain (1) the date of the first inspection when the violation was identified; (2) the address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred, such as a tax assessor parcel number (A.P.N.); (3) the section of this chapter or resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter that the person has violated and a description of how the person has violated the section; (4) a description of the action necessary to correct the violation and thereby avoid additional penalties for each day the violation continues; (5) the current amount of the penalty for the code violation(s) calculated from the date of the initial inspection; (6) an explanation of how the penalty shall be paid, the time period in which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty; (7) an order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation(s) described within administrative notice and order; (8) the name, date, and signature of the code enforcement officer; (9) a copy of this chapter; (10) a statement that the person has a right to be heard before an independent hearing officer if a hearing is requested within 15 days of the notice and order being served upon them; (11) a form to request an administrative hearing; and (12) a statement that failure to request an administrative hearing within 15 days of the date of the notice and order shall constitute waiver of the right to a hearing and failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

C. If a customer or other responsible person(s) files a timely request for a hearing, the director shall work with the city prosecutor to schedule an administrative hearing to be conducted in conformance with Chapter 1.30 SMC.

D. Where a customer or other responsible person(s) fails to timely request an administrative hearing or the hearing officer issues a decision assessing penalties against a customer or responsible person(s), those penalties may be collected in conformance with Chapter 1.30 SMC and may also be included in the customer’s water bill. (Ord. 03-2018 § 5, 2018; Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009).


13.10.110 Requiring flow-restricting devices or shutting off water.

In addition to the penalties set forth by SMC 13.10.090, the city manager or his/her designee may order the installation of a flow-restricting device or terminate water service where there is good cause. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, evidence of recurring violations of this chapter, failure to timely pay administrative penalties, or recurring failure to pay water bills. Before any installation of a flow-restricting device or termination of water service, the city manager or his/her designee must comply with the following requirements:

A. Before initiating any water termination process, the city attorney shall be contacted to ensure all pertinent statutory requirements are followed.

B. Service of written notice the city manager or his/her designee’s decisions upon any customer billed by the city, occupants of the property, and any nonoccupant property owners. This notice shall provide a copy of the city manager or his/her designee’s decisions, including the reasons for that decision; a written explanation of the good cause in support of installing the flow-restricting termination of water services; a copy of this chapter and Chapter 1.24 SMC; a form notice to appeal; a statement that the customer or other interested persons, including any other occupants of the property or any nonoccupant property owners, have a right to be heard before the council by exercising the right of appeal; city fees that may be assessed for filing an appeal; and a reference to the 15-day time limit for appealing the city manager’s or his/her designee’s final decision to the council in conformance with Chapter 1.24 SMC.

C. If a customer or any other persons with an occupancy or ownership interest of the serviced property files a notice of appeal that meets the relevant requirements of such an appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing as required under Chapter 1.24 SMC.

D. On the date of the hearing before the council, the customer and any interested persons shall be given the right to testify, call witnesses, and to present evidence relevant to concerning the matters giving rise to flow-restricting device or termination of water service.

E. After the hearing, the council may utilize their powers to either affirm, reverse, or modify the city manager’s or his/her designee’s decision. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009. Formerly 13.10.100).


13.10.120 Violation – Installation of a flow-restricting device.

If the council finds a water flow-restricting device should be installed, the council shall establish a date by which the city will install the device and the council shall further require the person(s) found responsible to reimburse the city its costs in installing the flow-restricting device. If the person(s) found responsible do not pay these installation costs after being billed for such costs by the city, the city manager may utilize the procedures contained in Chapter 1.12 SMC to recoup the city’s installation costs. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009).


13.10.130 Violation – Additional remedy. 

As an additional remedy, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 09-2009 § 1, 2009; Ord. 02-2009 § 2, 2009. Formerly 13.10.110).


Chapter 13.12 USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS

(Repealed by Ord. 97-6)


Chapter 13.16       SEWER CHARGES

(Repealed by Ord. 97-6)


Chapter 13.20       CROSS-CONNECTIONS   BACKFLOW PREVENTION

Sections:

13.20.010  Purpose.

13.20.020  Definitions.

13.20.030  Where protection is required.

13.20.040  Type of protection.

13.20.050  Responsibilities.

13.20.060  Discontinuance of service.

13.20.070  Right of entry.

13.20.080  Penalty for violation.


13.20.010  Purpose.

The purpose of these regulations is:

A.  To protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connections by isolating within the premises contamination or pollution that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises;

B.  To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption;

C.  To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water or process water used for any purpose whatsoever which jeopardize the safety of the drinking water supply;

D.  To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future.

These regulations are in accordance with the state of California Department of Public Health Administrative Code, Title 17, entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections".

It is the intent of these regulations to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazards and to apply the principle that the degree of protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. (Ord. 441 § 1, 1972).


13.20.020  Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A.  "Air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch;

B.  "Approved check valve" means a check valve that seats readily and completely and has been approved for use in this service by the city;

C.  "Approved double check valve assembly" means an assembly which has been approved for use in this service by the city;

D.  "Approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a device which has been approved for use in this service by the city;

E.  "Approved water supply" means any water supply approved by or under the public health supervision of a public health agency of the state of California, or its political subdivisions. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the State Department of Public Health reserves final judgment as to its safety and potability;

F.  "Auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the public water supply;

G.  "City" as used in this chapter means the public works director or his authorized representative;

H.  "Cross-connection" as used in these regulations means any unprotected connection between any part of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable for human consumption. (Ord. 441 § 2, 1972).


13.20.030  Where protection is required.

A.  Each service connection from the public water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system, unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the water purveyor, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.

B.  Each service connection from the public water system for supplying water to premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to permit its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the public water supply system which have been subject to deterioration in sanitary quality.

C.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises that have internal cross-connections unless such cross-connections are abated to the satisfaction of the city and approved by the state or local health department. (Ord. 441 § 3, 1972).


13.20.040  Type of protection.

The protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard as tabulated below:

A.  At the service connection to any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system with no known cross-connection, the water supply shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly;

B.  At the service connection to any premises on which a substance that would be objectionable (but not necessarily hazardous to health), if introduced into the public water supply, is handled so as to constitute a cross-connection, the public water supply shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly;

C.  At the service connection on any premises on which there is an auxiliary water supply where cross-connections are known to exist which cannot be presently eliminated, the public water supply system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. A double check valve assembly may be used in lieu of such device if local experience indicates that double check valves are reliably operated and if approved by the water purveyor and local health agency;

D.  At the service connection to any premises on which any material dangerous to health or toxic substance in toxic concentration is or may be handled, the public water supply shall be protected by an air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and receiving tank shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply shall be protected with either an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, or an approved double check valve assembly, providing the alternative is acceptable to both the water purveyor and the local health agency;

E.  At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station, the public water supply shall be protected by an air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and receiving tank shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public water supply shall be protected with an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, providing this alternative is acceptable to both the water purveyor and local health agency. Final decision in this matter shall rest with the State Department of Public Health. (Ord. 441 § 4, 1972).


13.20.050  Responsibilities.

A.  It shall be the responsibility of the city to make the determination if any service connection or the handling of substances within the premises served is deemed to constitute a hazard to the public water system and to determine the degree of hazard and establish the requirements for protection. The city shall accomplish this in conjunction with the local health agency.

B.  It shall be the responsibility of the user of the water to install and maintain the required protective device as specified by the city and to have the device inspected and tested periodically by a person approved as qualified by the city. Inspection intervals shall be one year maximum. Required interval may be less if determined by the city that a history of malfunctioning has been established or if the degree of hazard makes more frequent inspections advisable. All devices shall be disassembled for maintenance and repair at least every five years. All test results and all maintenance steps taken shall be reported regularly on forms to be provided by the city and maintained on file at the city offices. Failure to file with the city the required test and maintenance reports will require the city to consider the connection unprotected and service may be discontinued. (Ord. 441 § 5, 1972).


13.20.060  Discontinuance of service.

Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the city after reasonable notification if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises, or if any defect is found in an installed backflow preventive device, or if a backflow preventive device has been removed or bypassed, and service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.

Discontinuance of service may be summary, immediate and without notice whenever, in the judgment of the public works director of the city, such action is necessary to protect the purity of the water supply or the safety of the water system, and the public works director’s determination shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 441 § 6, 1972).


13.20.070  Right of entry.* 

The city representative assigned to inspect premises relative to possible hazards shall carry proper credentials of his office, upon exhibition of which he has the right of entry, during usual business hours, to inspect any and all buildings and premises in the performance of his duty. This right of entry shall be a condition of water service in order to provide assurance that the continuation of service to the premises will not constitute a menace to the health, safety and welfare of the people throughout the public water system. (Ord. 441 § 7, 1972).

*For right of entry provisions, see Chapter 1.08 SMC.


13.20.080  Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine and/or penalty not to exceed the maximum as prescribed in the California Penal Code. (Ord. 441 § 9, 1972).


Chapter 13.24       WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS*

Sections:

13.24.010  Policy generally.

13.24.020  Application – Determinations.

13.24.030  Expense liability.

13.24.040  Extensions.

13.24.050  Main size.

13.24.060  Fire hydrant provisions.

13.24.080  Bond or cash deposit.

13.24.100  Reimbursement agreement.

13.24.120  Reimbursements – Collection.

13.24.130  Reimbursements – Letter of entitlement.

13.24.140  Reimbursements – Mailing to applicant – Unclaimed reimbursements.

13.24.160  Connection charges.

13.24.170  Front foot charge.

13.24.180  Fees and charges for water main extensions.

13.24.200  Revision of fees and charges.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 84-2.


13.24.010  Policy generally.

The city council is desirous of adopting a water main extension policy that is fair and equitable to all developing properties. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.020  Application – Determinations.

Whenever a property owner is desirous of obtaining water service where no adequate water main exists, an application shall be made to the city engineer for water service. The city engineer shall determine the closest adequate water main, indicate the size of the main to be extended, the appurtenances required, and the limits of the extension. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.030  Expense liability.

Whenever the city engineer determines that a water main extension is necessary, the applicant will be required to install at his own expense the water main extension in accordance with engineering plans furnished by the applicant and approved by the city engineer. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the city’s design standards and this chapter. At the time water system improvements are accepted by the city, the improvements shall become the property of the city. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.040  Extensions.

In every case where a water main is to be extended to serve a parcel as shown on the Sonoma County assessor’s maps, the water main shall extend the full frontage of the parcel parallel to the extension. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.050  Main size.

The minimum size water main shall have a nominal inside diameter of six inches. In areas zoned or master-planned for high density, commercial and industrial uses, the minimum size shall be eight inches in diameter. Mains which are intended to be "dead end" lines shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter. Larger size mains may be required as determined by the city engineer based on the city master water plan. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.060  Fire hydrant provisions.

The installation of fire hydrants or provisions therefor shall be included in any main extension and the cost of such hydrants is to be paid for by the applicant. Fire hydrant location and type shall be as approved by the fire chief having authority in the area where the main extension occurs. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.080  Bond or cash deposit.

After approval of the improvement plans by the city engineer but before actual start of construction, the applicant shall furnish the city a 100 percent performance surety in the form of a bond, letter of credit, a certified check or cash in the amount of the construction cost of the main extension conditioned upon the proper performance of the contractor and upon payment by the contractor of any liens incurred for labor and materials while working on the project. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.100  Reimbursement agreement.

The water main extension agreement shall contain the following:

A.  The amount of the reimbursable costs shall be determined by the city engineer and subject to the approval of the city council.

B.  Reimbursable cost shall include water main construction costs plus an engineering cost of 10 percent of the construction cost, but no case shall exceed the front footage charge collected by the city from abutting properties as they connect to the new water main.

C.  Water service lines serving individual properties shall not be included as a reimbursable cost.

D.  There shall be no reimbursement to the applicant in excess of reimbursable costs stated in the agreement.

E.  No interest, finance or security cost shall be included in the reimbursable cost.

F.  Reimbursement shall be paid from charges collected by the city from abutting properties as they connect to the new water main.

G.  Reimbursement shall be paid to the applicant, his heirs, successors or assigns only from charges collected within 10 years from the date of the agreement. The city shall have no obligation to pay reimbursement funds collected pursuant to this chapter. Charges collected from abutting properties after 10 years shall be retained by the city.

H.  The reimbursement shall be based upon the footage parallel to the water main.

I.  An administrative cost of five percent of the total reimbursable cost shall be deducted from any monies paid to the city as payment for administering the reimbursement provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.120  Reimbursements – Collection.

Wherever the city council has approved a water main extension reimbursement agreement, the front footage charges shall be collected by the city from any parcel abutting the water main covered in the agreement at the time of development and prior to water service being provided to the abutting parcel. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.130  Reimbursements – Letter of entitlement.

When payment for reimbursement has been made, the city engineer shall prepare a letter of entitlement stating the fees collected, reference to the water main extension reimbursement agreement, the amount to be reimbursed, and the administrative charge to be retained by the city. This letter of entitlement shall be forwarded to the city finance officer for actual reimbursement under terms of the agreement. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.140  Reimbursements – Mailing to applicant – Unclaimed reimbursements.

The city finance officer shall mail the reimbursement together with a copy of the letter of entitlement to the applicant’s last known address on file with the city or the address in the water main reimbursement agreement. Any reimbursement returned or unclaimed after two years from the date of mailing will revert to the water utility’s capital improvement fund. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.160  Connection charges.

Any applicant requesting water service shall pay the water utility a connection charge merely for the right to connect to the existing system. New residential services and meters shall be one-inch minimum unless the city building official determines that a larger service size is necessary to provide fire flow required for the fire sprinkler system. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.170  Front foot charge.

Any new water customer, developer or subdivider connecting to existing mains constructed by the water utility or previous applicants shall pay a front foot charge based upon the footage that their property abuts the main. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.180  Fees and charges for water main extensions.

The city council shall, from time to time by resolution as it deems necessary and appropriate, provide for and set all charges and fees including connection charges, front footage charges, meter and lateral installation and other such installations. Said resolution may provide for automatic future adjustment of any of said rates, charges and fees by application of appropriate cost escalators as determined by the city council. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


13.24.200  Revision of fees and charges.

All fees and charges called for in SMC 13.24.150 through 13.24.190 shall be updated from time to time by the adoption of a resolution by the city council. (Ord. 2002-01 § 2, 2002).


Chapter 13.28       WELLS

Sections:

13.28.010  Incorporating Chapter 25B of the Code of Sonoma County.


13.28.010 Incorporating Chapter 25B of the Code of Sonoma County.

Chapter 25B of the Code of Sonoma County regulating the construction, placement, reconstruction and destruction of wells, test wells, test holes and observation wells as adopted by Sonoma County Ordinance No. 2326, and all subsequent amendments and additions thereto, is hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety and made a part hereof. (Ord. 90-3 § 1, 1990).


Chapter 13.32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL

Sections:

13.32.010    Title.

13.32.020    Purpose and intent.

13.32.030    Definitions.

13.32.040    Conflicts with other laws.

13.32.050    Discharge prohibitions.

13.32.060    Exceptions to discharge prohibition.

13.32.070    Discharge in violation of permit.

13.32.080    Concealment and abetting.

13.32.090    Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act.

13.32.100    Reduction of pollutants in stormwater.

13.32.110    Containment and notification of spills.

13.32.120    Inspections.

13.32.130    Enforcement.

13.32.140    Stop orders.

13.32.150    Remedies not exclusive.

13.32.160    Disclaimer of liability.

13.32.170    City authority.


13.32.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the city “stormwater management and discharge control,” and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.020 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of city of Sonoma residents; to protect water resources and to improve water quality; to cause the use of management practices by the city and its citizens that will reduce the adverse effects of polluted runoff discharges on waters of the state; to secure benefits from the use of stormwater as a resource; and to ensure the city is compliant with applicable state and federal law. This chapter seeks to promote these purposes by:

A. Prohibiting illicit discharges to the stormwater conveyance system;

B. Establishing authority to adopt requirements for stormwater management, including source control requirements, to prevent and reduce pollution;

C. Establishing authority to adopt requirements for development projects to reduce stormwater pollution and erosion both during construction and after the project is complete;

D. Establishing authority to adopt requirements for the management of stormwater flows from development projects, both to prevent erosion and to protect existing water-dependent habitats;

E. Establishing authority to adopt standards for the use of off-site facilities for stormwater management to supplement on-site practices at new development sites. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.030 Definitions.

The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 

“Development” means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the preexisting vegetated or manmade cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal, exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Development does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety.

“Discharge” shall mean the release, addition or deposit of any fluid, liquid, solid, flowing substance, or any other material or substance to the stormwater conveyance system.

“Employee training program” means a documented employee training program which may be required to be implemented by a business pursuant to a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of reducing discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system.

“Enforcement agency” means city of Sonoma.

“Enforcement official” means the public works director, or his or her designee or any agent of the city authorized to enforce compliance with this chapter.

“Erosion and sediment control plan” is a set of plans and/or specifications prepared by, or under the direction of, a licensed professional engineer or other qualified person indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control erosion and sedimentation on a development site during and after construction.

“Food establishment” means any premises, restaurant, soda fountain, cafe, diner, grocery store, fruit stand, vegetable stand, bakery, abattoir, meat processing or packing plant, dairy, ice cream parlor, and any other place where food or drink is sold or offered for sale, processed, stored, prepared or otherwise handled for sale or distribution within the city. Such term shall include any vehicle or mobile unit, shed, stand, building or structure used for the purposes of selling, distribution, processing, preparing or otherwise handling food or drink. This term shall also include frozen desserts retail preparation establishments, mobile food service units, mobile frozen dessert units, prepackaged food establishments, supermarkets, and temporary food establishments.

“Hazardous materials business plan” means a document containing detailed information on the storage of hazardous materials at a facility. Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code requires that facilities which use or store such materials at or above reporting thresholds submit this information.

“Illicit connection” means a pipe, facility, or other device, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the stormwater conveyance system regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency.

“Illicit discharge” means any discharge to a stormwater conveyance system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.

“Incidental runoff” means illicit discharges of trivial volume except where the discharge is due to facility design, excessive application, intentional overflow, intentional over-application, or negligence.

“Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means a technology-based standard established by Congress in the Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) for stormwater discharge that municipalities must meet. MEP is generally the result of emphasizing pollution prevention and source control best management practices (BMPs) primarily (as the first line of defense) and in combination with treatment methods serving as backup (additional line of defense). The MEP approach is an ever evolving, flexible and advancing concept, which considers technical and economic feasibility. As knowledge about controlling urban runoff continues to evolve, so does what constitutes MEP.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., (CWA) that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States and requires the reduction of pollutants in the discharge.

“Noncommercial vehicle washing” means the washing and rinsing of passenger vehicles on private property in which no commercial enterprise or fundraising is being conducted in the washing of those vehicles.

“Nonpoint source” means any source of water pollution that does not meet the definition of “point source” as set forth in the most current version of Section 502(14) of the Clean Water Act and incorporated into California Water Code Section 13373.

“Nonstormwater discharge” means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that is not entirely composed of stormwater.

“Plan standard” means any and/or all applicable requirements of the Water Quality Control Plan for Basin 2, adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region in 1995, and all subsequent amendments.

“Point source” means any source defined in the most current version of Section 502(14) of the Clean Water Act and incorporated into California Water Code Section 13373. Point sources include any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. Point sources do not include any agricultural stormwater discharges or return flows from irrigated agriculture.

“Pollutant” means any “pollutant” defined in Section 502(6) of the CWA or incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, the following:

A. Residential, commercial and industrial waste (such as trash, litter, fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge);

B. Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, silver, nickel, chromium, copper and nonmetals such as phosphorous and arsenic;

C. Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease);

D. Excessive eroded soil, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts that may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state;

E. Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); and

F. Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved.

“Public works director” or “director” means the director of the city of Sonoma public works department.

“Receiving waters” means all waters that are “waters of the state” within the scope of the California Water Code, including but not limited to natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean, and ground water.

“Regional Water Quality Control Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, for the San Francisco Bay Region or the designated state agency required or authorized by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, issue waste discharge requirements and dredged or fill material permits which apply and ensure compliance with all applicable provisions of the act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary, thereto, together with any more stringent effluent standards or limitations necessary to implement water quality control plans, or for the protection of beneficial uses, or to prevent nuisance.

“Stormwater” means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events, which is free of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.

“Stormwater conveyance system” means those artificial and natural facilities within the corporate limits of the city of Sonoma, whether publicly or privately owned, by which stormwater may be conveyed to a watercourse or waters of the state, including any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, aqueducts, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, and natural and artificial channels or storm drains. 

“Stormwater pollution prevention plan” means a document which describes the best management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business or construction site to eliminate illicit discharges and/or reduce to the maximum extent practicable pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system.

“Watercourse” means any natural stream, whether flowing continuously or not, that is fed from permanent or natural sources, and includes, without limitation, rivers, creeks, runs, and rivulets.

Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined above shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.040 Conflicts with other laws.

In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law or regulation, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, or permit. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.050 Discharge prohibitions.

A. Illicit Discharges. Except as provided in SMC 13.32.060, it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to make or cause to be made any illicit discharge into the stormwater conveyance system in excess of incidental runoff. Notwithstanding the exemptions provided by SMC 13.32.060(A) and (B), if the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the enforcement official determines that any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any plan standard, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to surface water(s) or watercourse(s), or is a danger to public health or safety, such discharge shall be prohibited from entering the stormwater conveyance system. 

B. Illicit Connection. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections is prohibited. This prohibition includes illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

C. Litter, Dumps, and Stockpiles. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illicit discharge is prohibited. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.060 Exceptions to discharge prohibition.

Subject to the authority granted to the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the enforcement official, the following discharges to the stormwater conveyance system are exempt from the prohibition set forth in SMC 13.32.050.

A. Any discharge or connection regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code; provided, that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations;

B. Discharges from the following activities, which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any plan standard:

1. Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources,

2. Incidental runoff,

3. Rising ground waters or springs,

4. Foundation and footing drains,

5. Water from crawl space pumps and basement pumps,

6. Air conditioning condensate and hot water temperature and pressure release drains, 

7. Noncommercial vehicle washing,

8. Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,

9. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,

10. Flows from fire suppression activities, including fire hydrant flows,

11. Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d) and California Health and Safety Code Section 25117,

12. Diverted stream flows,

13. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 35.2005(b)(20)) to separate storm sewers,

14. Uncontaminated pumped ground water;

C. Any discharge, which the enforcement official, the local health officer, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines in writing, is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety;

D. Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster, which could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by the discharger, as determined by the enforcement official. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.070 Discharge in violation of permit.

Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, grading permit, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.080 Concealment and abetting.

Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.090 Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any stop order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the CWA and/or Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13020 et seq.) and may be subject to the sanctions of those Acts including civil and criminal penalties. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.100 Reduction of pollutants in stormwater.

Any person engaged in activities which may result in pollutants or increased volumes or rates of stormwater runoff entering the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake the measures set forth below to reduce the risk of illicit discharge and/or pollutant discharge.

A. Business Related Activities – Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official may require any business in the city that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which shall, without limitation, include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors.

B. Development. All development shall incorporate best management practices to control the volume, rate and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff to comply with all applicable provisions of the city’s current NPDES permit. The city shall incorporate the requirements therein as conditions in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development. All development projects subject to such requirements shall submit sufficient evidence to demonstrate the adequacy of proposed best management practices prior to issuance of any associated land use entitlement or construction or building-related permit. Applicants are required to utilize the latest version of the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association Post-Construction Manual to design and document applicable best management practices. The owner and developer shall remain in compliance at all times with the terms, provisions, and conditions required by this chapter that are incorporated into the terms and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits.

C. Construction Activity. Every construction activity for which a building or grading permit is required, and which will result in soil disturbance due to clearing, excavation, or filling, shall submit an erosion and sediment control plan which meets the following criteria:

1. Where a building permit is required, the erosion and sediment control plan shall comply with all applicable provisions of the city’s current NPDES permit. Where coverage under the California NPDES construction general permit is obtained in addition to a building permit, the stormwater pollution prevention plan prepared prior to obtaining coverage may be submitted in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan.

2. Where a grading permit is required, the erosion and sediment control plan shall meet the applicable requirements set forth in SMC 14.20.205 in addition to all applicable provisions of the city’s current NPDES permit. Where coverage under the California NPDES construction general permit is obtained in addition to a grading permit, the stormwater pollution prevention plan prepared prior to obtaining coverage may be submitted in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan if the stormwater pollution prevention plan satisfies all applicable requirements set forth in SMC 14.20.205. 

D. Compliance with Best Management Practices. Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or nonstormwater discharges shall comply with best management practices guidelines or pollution control requirements as may be reasonably established by the enforcement official. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.110 Containment and notification of spills.

Any person owning or occupying a premises who has knowledge of any release of pollutants or illicit discharge from or across those premises which might enter the stormwater conveyance system, other than a release or discharge that is permitted by this chapter, shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and abate the release of pollutants or illicit discharge, and shall notify the enforcement agency within 24 hours of the release of pollutants or illicit discharge. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.120 Inspections.

Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the enforcement official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter. Any request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the enforcement official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit discharge, nonstormwater discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, or similar factors.

A. Sampling Authority. During any inspection, the enforcement official may take samples as necessary in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples.

B. Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Authority. The enforcement official may require monitoring, analysis and reporting of discharges from any premises to the stormwater conveyance system. Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports incurred in complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing and monitoring has been requested. 

C. Compliance Inspection Authority. In accordance herewith, the enforcement official may conduct site visits and inspections upon knowledge of discharges from any premises to the stormwater conveyance system. 

D. Fee Authority. The city has the authority to conduct inspections and collect fees for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter from any person, firm, corporation or business. 

A fee schedule for the purpose of recovering the costs to enforce this chapter may be adopted by city council resolution and may, from time to time, be amended by resolution.

E. Classified or Sensitive Information. The enforcement official shall only require classified or sensitive information in compliance with the Homeland Security Act or any other federal law that concerns security in the United States. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 04-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.130 Enforcement.

Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the enforcement official. 

A. Violations. It shall be a violation for any person to fail to comply with, violate, or cause any other person to fail to comply with or violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be enforceable as described by this chapter.

B. Procedures for Enforcement.

1. Initial Site Visit. The enforcement official, upon receiving notice or other complaint of a potential stormwater violation, will conduct a site visit to determine whether a violation exists. If the enforcement official determines a violation exists, he/she will communicate with the property owner or occupant of the property upon which the violation has occurred and/or the person causing the violation and provide to said person a verbal warning of the violation and description of the corrective action to be taken by said person. The enforcement official shall require said person to complete corrective actions as soon as possible, but no later than 72 hours following issuance of said verbal warning for point source discharges and no later than 30 days following issuance of said verbal warning for nonpoint source discharges that could pose an environmental threat.

2. Confirmation That Violation Has Ceased. The enforcement official, at his/her discretion, will conduct a follow-up site visit to determine if the violation has been corrected. If the violation has not been corrected, the enforcement official will send a written notice of violation in a letter to the property owner or occupant of the property upon which the violation has occurred and/or the person causing the violation. The notice of violation will state that a violation has occurred, a description of the violation, when the violations were observed, and a general description of the actions or measures that must be taken in order to correct the violation and a revised time frame within which corrective actions must be completed. 

C. General Penalty. The penalty for violation of this chapter is provided for under Chapter 1.12 SMC.

D. Civil Actions – Injunctive Relief. The city may elect to proceed with a civil action, including seeking injunctive relief, rather than proceed with criminal enforcement actions. Any person, firm or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, employer or otherwise, who willfully violates any provision of this chapter, or the terms and/or conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each day or portion thereof that the violation continues to exist. Any person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued, or permitted. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting the violation, the nature and persistence of such conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities, and net worth of the violator, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by the violator.

E. Additional Remedy. If it is necessary for the city to perform cleanup of the public right-of-way or public property that is affected by the violation, the cost of the cleanup shall be borne by the property owner or occupant of the property upon which the violation occurs or the person causing the violation. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 04-2011 § 2, 2011; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.140 Stop orders.

The enforcement official is hereby authorized to issue stop orders against a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship, or individual where the activities of said entity cause or contribute to violations of this title, and such stop orders shall remain in effect until such violations have been resolved. (Ord. 05-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.150 Remedies not exclusive.

Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.160 Disclaimer of liability. 

The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering, and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the state. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on the code or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


13.32.170 City authority.

The enforcement official is authorized to make any decision on behalf of the city required or called for by this chapter. (Ord. 02-2006 § 1, 2006).


Title 14 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

14.08    Repealed

14.10    Construction Codes

14.14    Repealed

14.20    Excavations, Grading and Fills

14.21    Repealed

14.22    Repealed

14.23    Repealed

14.24    Review, Rehabilitation and Abatement of Existing Seismically Unsafe Buildings

14.25    Flood Damage Prevention Regulations

14.26    Repealed

14.27    Expedited Review Process for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems

14.28    Wood-Burning Appliances

14.29    Expedited Permitting Process for Electric Vehicle Charging Stations

14.30    Nuisance Abatement

14.32    Water-Efficient Landscaping

14.36    Repealed

 


Chapter 14.08       UNIFORM CODES ADOPTED

(Repealed by Ord. 99-6)


Chapter 14.10 CONSTRUCTION CODES

Sections:

14.10.005    Findings.

14.10.010    Administrative provisions.

14.10.015    Technical codes adopted.

14.10.020    2016 California Building Code amendments.

14.10.025    2016 California Residential Code amendments.

14.10.030    2016 California Electrical Code amendments.

14.10.035    2016 California Mechanical Code amendments.

14.10.040    2016 California Plumbing Code amendments.

14.10.045    2016 California Fire Code amendments.

14.10.050    2016 California Green Building Standards Code amendments.

14.10.055    2016 California Existing Building Code amendments.

14.10.060    Board of appeals.

14.10.065    Modification of fee schedules.

14.10.070    Enforcement authority.


14.10.005 Findings.

A. The city council finds that in order to best protect the health, safety, sustainability and welfare of the citizens of Sonoma, the administrative regulations adopted herein and hereinafter referred to as the “administrative provisions” and the building standards for building construction, hereinafter referred to as the “technical codes,” and also known as the 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code and the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, including Parts 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12, shall be adopted as provided herein.

B. Based on the materials presented by and the recommendations of the city’s building official and fire chief, the city council finds that it is necessary to make procedural and administrative modifications and changes to the California Building Standards Code and to adopt certain appendices to the California Building Standards Code as specifically adopted in this chapter, to provide more efficient, economical and expeditious enforcement of the building standards of the city of Sonoma, hereinafter referred to as “the city.” The city council further finds and determines that pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 13143.5, 17958, 17958.5, 17958.7 and 18941.5 the substantive amendments to California Building Standards Code, which are adopted by this chapter, are reasonable and necessary because of local climatic, geographical or topographical conditions and do not lessen, diminish or change the standards set forth within the California Building Standards Code except as authorized by law. 

C. The city council finds and determines that pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18909(c), the “administrative provisions” adopted by this chapter are procedural and administrative in nature and are not subject to the requirements of findings pursuant to Sections 17958.5, 17958.7 and 18941.5.

D. The city council hereby makes the following express findings of necessity, as applicable, for the modifications to the California Building Standards Code:

Express Finding of Necessity No. 1: The city’s topography and terrain contain areas which are very susceptible to wildland fires, having a local climate characterized by hot, dry summers with periodic high winds which are a predominate factor in the spread of fire by burning embers that are carried by the wind to adjacent exposed areas. This is further compounded by agricultural and recreational use of lands contained within the city, as well as the open space, brush and hills that are part of and immediately adjacent to the city. These topographic and climatic conditions impact the city’s emergency services in such a way that their effects should be mitigated through appropriate amendments to the construction codes where practical.

Express Finding of Necessity No. 2: Earthquake activity represents significant potential hazards which could result in road closures, loss of housing, fires, injuries, collapsed buildings, and isolation of persons requiring assistance. Additionally, soil conditions within the city are such that liquefaction may occur during seismic activity, creating the potential for structure collapse or mudslides. There are only a limited number of thoroughfares through the city, and during periods of traffic congestion resulting from roadway obstructions, emergency services response times are increased. The city is comprised of a relatively large number of historically significant buildings which contain archaic materials and designs which present unique safety, remodeling and upgrading problems due to their age and proximity to earthquake faults. The proximity of the Rogers Creek earthquake fault, located only a few miles from the city, represents a geologic hazard that could significantly impact the city’s occupants, its emergency services and its economic well-being in such a way that the potential hazards should be mitigated through appropriate amendments to the construction codes where practical.

Express Finding of Necessity No. 3: Due to the elevation of the city in relation to sea level and periodic storms resulting in significant rainfall, flooding during the rainy season often restricts traffic, has a detrimental effect on structures, housing and their occupants and can impair emergency services’ ability to respond to life threatening emergencies. Additionally, high ground water, clay soils and the location of the “hardpan” within the city can slow rain and surface water absorption, often resulting in localized ponding and flooding. These geologic and climatic conditions impact the city in such a way that their effects should be mitigated through appropriate amendments to the construction codes where practical.

Express Finding of Necessity No. 4: The city’s climate is periodically subject to relatively dry winters and hot, dry summers. The lack of rainfall can result in water shortages and reductions in available ground water that impact the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and businesses in such a way that their effects should be mitigated through appropriate amendments to the construction codes to prohibit the use of equipment or fixtures which waste water and require water conservation measures, the efficient use of potable water, including utilization of fire-resistive construction and fire protection systems to reduce the use of water for fire-fighting, and other water-saving measures. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.010 Administrative provisions.

By adoption of the administrative provisions in this chapter the city council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of “shall,” “will,” “must” or similar terms within this section. The following administrative provisions are hereby adopted and shall apply to the technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter as may be amended herein:

SECTION 101

GENERAL

101.1 Title. The provisions of Sonoma Municipal Code Section 14.10.010 shall be known as the “administrative provisions” and shall be cited as such. These administrative provisions, together with the technical codes adopted by the city council, will be referred to herein as “this code.” 

101.2 Scope. These administrative provisions shall serve as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations in support of the technical codes adopted by the City which regulate the site preparation, construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, moving, demolition, repair, maintenance, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, building service equipment and any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures within the City. 

The provisions of each of the technical codes shall apply as follows:

101.2.1 California Building Code. The provisions of the California Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, moving, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

Exception: 

1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height, shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code.

2. Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the California Building Code shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code. Fire suppression systems for live/work units located in townhouses constructed shall conform to California Residential Code Section R313.

3. Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code where equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with California Residential Code Section R313.

101.2.2 California Residential Code. The provisions of the California Residential Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, moving, maintenance, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height.

101.2.3 California Electrical Code. The provisions of the California Electrical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of electrical systems, including but not limited to, electrical wiring, equipment, appliances, fixtures, devices, fittings and/or appurtenances, and other electrical-related systems, materials, parts or components.

101.2.4 California Mechanical Code. The provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including but not limited to, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, commercial kitchen equipment, incinerators and other energy systems. The provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall also apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.

101.2.5 California Plumbing Code. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including but not limited to, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. 

101.2.6 California Energy Code. The provisions of the California Energy Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

101.2.7 California Historical Building Code. The provisions of the California Historical Building Code shall apply to the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation or reconstruction of buildings or properties designated as qualified historical buildings or properties. 

101.2.8 California Fire Code. The provisions of the California Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, automatic sprinkler systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

101.2.9 California Existing Building Code. The provisions of the California Existing Building Code shall apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings.

101.2.9.1 Buildings not previously occupied. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose in accordance with the laws in existence at the time of its completion shall be permitted to comply with the provisions of the laws in existence at the time of its original permit unless such permit has expired. Subsequent permits shall comply with the California Building Code or California Residential Code, as applicable, for new construction.

101.2.9.2 Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, unless otherwise limited, restricted or prohibited in the California Existing Building Code or the California Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.

101.2.9.3 Building evaluation. The building official is authorized to require an existing building to be investigated and evaluated by a registered design professional when the building official determines that such evaluation is necessary to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by a proposed repair, alteration, change of occupancy, change in use, addition, relocation of an existing building, when unpermitted work has occurred, when the building has been damaged or when the building official determines that the building may be unsafe or dangerous. The design professional shall notify the building official if any potential nonconformance with the provisions of the California Existing Building Code is identified or observed.

101.2.10 California Green Building Standards Code. The provisions of the California Green Building Standards Code shall apply to the planning, design, operation, construction, sustainability, use and occupancy of all newly constructed and altered buildings or structures, unless otherwise indicated in that code.

101.3 Purpose. The purpose of these administrative provisions is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public as it pertains to building construction and the built environment and provide for the administration and enforcement of the technical codes adopted by the City. The purpose of the technical codes adopted by the City is to establish minimum building standards to safeguard the public safety, health and general welfare through sustainability, affordability, structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, light and ventilation, energy conservation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.

SECTION 102 

APPLICABILITY 

102.1 Conflict between codes. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement in the technical codes, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where conflicts occur between the provisions of the technical codes and referenced standards, the provisions of the technical codes shall apply. Where conflicts between technical codes occur, the more restrictive requirement, as determined by the Building Official, shall apply.

102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.

102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. Where references in this code are made to Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the California Building Code, California Residential Code, California Plumbing Code, California Mechanical Code, or the California Existing Building Code, the applicable corresponding provisions contained within these administrative provisions shall apply.

102.4 References to prior code. Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of this code previously adopted by the city council, shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 

102.5 Referenced codes and standards. The technical codes and standards referenced in this code and the other building and construction regulations contained in Title 14 of the Sonoma Municipal Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and other referenced codes and standards, the more restrictive provision shall apply. Where there is a conflict between a general standard and a specific standard, the specific standard shall be applicable. 

All reference to codes published by the National Fire Protection Association, the International Code Council, the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and similar code publishing organizations within the referenced standards shall be replaced by similar equivalent provisions, if available and published in the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by the City of Sonoma.

Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

102.6 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices or annexes of the technical codes shall not apply unless such appendices or annexes or provisions in which they are contained, have been specifically adopted.

102.7 Partial invalidity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.

102.8 Existing installations of building service equipment. Unless otherwise specifically required by federal, state or local laws, regulations or ordinances, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, sustainability measures, energy systems and conveyance equipment, components and systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the technical codes may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original approved design and a hazard to life, health or property has not been created by such building service equipment. 

102.9 Existing occupancy. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically required by the California Existing Building Code, the California Historical Building Code, the California Fire Code, State Housing Law, this code or any other federal or state regulation preempting these regulations, as applicable.

102.10 Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs to any electrical, mechanical or plumbing equipment, components or systems or to any structure shall conform to the applicable requirements for new construction without requiring the entire existing structure or system to comply with all of the requirements of this code, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing structure or electrical, mechanical or plumbing equipment, component or system to become unsafe or adversely affect the condition of the building. Additions, alterations and repairs to structures shall comply with the minimum requirements of this code, as applicable.

102.11 Moved Buildings. Moved buildings shall comply with the California Existing Building Code. 

102.12 Maintenance. Buildings, structures and parts thereof and electrical, plumbing and mechanical equipment, components and systems shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and proper operating condition pursuant to the applicable provisions of the technical codes or any federal or state regulation preempting the applicability and enforcement of the technical codes. 

SECTION 103

DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section or as otherwise defined in the technical codes. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. 

…ADDITION. See California Building Code Section 202.

…ALTER or ALTERATION. See California Building Code Section 202.

…APPROVED. See California Building Code Section 202.

…ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. See definition for “Nuisance.”

…BUILDING. See California Building Code Section 202.

…BUILDING, EXISTING. See California Building Code Section 202.

…BUILDING OFFICIAL. See California Building Code Section 202.

…BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT. The plumbing, mechanical, electrical and elevator equipment including piping, wiring, ductwork, fixtures and other accessories, components and devices which provide sanitation, lighting, power, security, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, cooking, fire-suppression, alarms and transportation facilities essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.

…CITY. See Section 1.04.010 of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

…DANGEROUS BUILDING. See definition for “Unsafe Structure.”

…JURISDICTION. See California Building Code Section 202.

…NUISANCE. (See definition in Sonoma Municipal Code Section 14.30.020(A)) 

…OCCUPANCY is the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

…OWNER is any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property.

…PARTY IN INTEREST means the record owner as the name and address of that person or entity appears on the last equalized assessment roll and if known, the person in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved, and if known, the holder of any mortgage, trust deed or other lien or encumbrance of record or any other known beneficiary to the building or structure or the land upon which it is located, and if known, residential tenants of a property. 

…PERMIT. See California Building Code Section 202.

…PERMITEE is the responsible party designated on a permit. The permittee shall either be the property owner, the property owner’s authorized representative or a contractor licensed to perform or oversee the permitted work.

…PUBLIC NUISANCE. See definition for “Nuisance.”

…REPAIR. See California Building Code Section 202.

…STRUCTURE. See California Building Code Section 202.

…TECHNICAL CODES are those codes adopted by the city council in Chapter 14.10.015 of the Sonoma Municipal Code containing the provisions for design, construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures and building service equipment as herein defined. 

THIS CODE refers to the provisions in this chapter, together with the technical codes adopted by the city council as amended herein.

…UNSAFE STRUCTURE. Any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described is an unsafe building provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered. For the purposes of this code, the term “dangerous building” is synonymous with the term “unsafe building.”

(a) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(b) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, obstructed or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(c) Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(d) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(e) Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.

(f) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted for such buildings.

(g) Whenever any portion of a structure has cracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

(h) Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (1) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (2) faulty construction; (3) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (4) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (5) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.

(i) Whenever, for any reason, the building, structure, or any portion thereof, including equipment regulated by this code, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose of which it is being used.

(j) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

(k) Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty percent damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

(l) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to become (1) an attractive nuisance to children or, (2) a public nuisance, or (3) freely accessible to persons for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.

(m) Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement of this code as applicable, including construction without a permit, or prohibition pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3 or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition or location of said structure or building.

(n) Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member, or portion less than fifty percent, or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than sixty-six percent of the (1) strength, (2) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (3) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics, required by law in the case of a newly-constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.

(o) Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer, fire chief or building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

(p) Whenever any building, structure or portion thereof, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, inadequate maintenance, damage from an earthquake, flood, fire or other calamity, abandonment, exposure to hazardous materials, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, faulty or unsafe gas conditions or heating apparatus, unsanitary conditions or other cause, is determined by the fire chief or building official to be a fire hazard, attractive nuisance, hazard to the life, safety or health of the public or occupants of the building.

(q) Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance or as otherwise known to common law or equity jurisprudence. 

(r) Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or portion thereof, or whenever any building or structure so abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(s) Whenever any building or structure has been abandoned or becomes vacant, is dilapidated and unsecured or open at exterior doors or windows, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers or is otherwise an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(t) Whenever any building, structure or portion thereof, whether structurally damaged or not, is dangerous to human life by reason of being located in an area which is unsafe due to hazard from landslide, settlement, or slippage or any other cause.

(u) Whenever any building, structure or portion thereof, because of unfinished, uninspected or uncompleted work required under a building permit and where the permit for the work has expired, or uncompleted work that would have been required under a building permit but where no permit has been issued, is determined by the building official to be a fire hazard, attractive nuisance, hazard to the life, safety or health of the public or occupants of the building.

(v) Whenever any building is declared to be substandard as defined in Section 17920.3 of the California Health & Safety Code.

…VALUATION or VALUE, as applied to a building and its building service equipment, shall be the estimated cost to replace the building and its building service equipment, along with all casework, appliances, fixtures, equipment and other items and appurtenances attached or connected thereto, in kind, based on current replacement costs, as determined by the building official. Valuation shall also include displays, shelving or other elements or fixtures within or immediately adjacent to an accessible route as defined by the California Building Code. Cord and plug connected equipment not otherwise regulated by this code shall be excluded from the calculation of valuation.

SECTION 104

BUILDING DEPARTMENT

104.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The building department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.

104.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the city manager.

104.3 Deputies. The building official, with the approval of the city manager, shall have the authority to appoint deputy building officials, technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees or official representatives of the Building Department. Such employees or official representatives shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

SECTION 105 

DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL

105.1 General authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.

105.1.1 Authorization to investigate. The building official is authorized to investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of any fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition.

105.1.2 Dangerous equipment. When the use of any electrical, plumbing or mechanical equipment or its installations is found to be dangerous to human life, health or property, the building official shall have the authority to have the premises disconnected from its source of electric, gas or water supply as applicable. The building official shall provide written notice of such disconnection and the causes therefor shall be given within 24 hours to the owners, the occupant, or both, of such building, structure, or premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect the equipment to its source of electric supply, or to use or permit to be used electric power in any such electrical equipment until such causes for the disconnection have been remedied to the satisfaction of the building official.

105.1.3 Delegation of authority. The building official shall be permitted to delegate to other qualified individuals such powers as necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this code.

105.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code.

105.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.

105.4 Inspections. The building official is authorized to make all required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by agencies or individuals approved by the building official for the specific purpose. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be prepared by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official may seek and engage expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.

105.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.

105.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises potentially unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

105.7 Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records of the City for the period required by the City or state for the retention of the specific public record.

105.8 Liability. The building official or his/her designee, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.

105.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

105.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official.

105.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the building official shall first find that the specific circumstance makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety requirements or structural requirements. The details of granting the modification shall be recorded and entered in the files of the building department. 

105.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction may be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code. 

105.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data may be required by the building official where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code. Supporting data may consist of valid research reports, test reports or manufacturer’s data from sources approved by the building official. 

105.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records in this same category.

SECTION 106 

PERMITS

106.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change a building or occupancy or use of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or component thereof or any accessible feature, element or component, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.

106.1.1 Annual permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an already approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing installation, the building official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application therefore to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more qualified tradespersons in the building, structure or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for the permit.

106.1.2 Annual permit records. The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The building official shall have access to such records at all times or such records shall be filed with the building official as designated.

106.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Building: 

1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, trellises, arbors, gazebos, shade structures for other than motor vehicles, and similar uses, when located on a parcel which contains an existing Group R, and/or Group U Occupancy, provided that the building complies with zoning setback requirements and the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the total height does not exceed 9 feet and the structure contains no plumbing facilities, electrical circuits or heating appliances. No more than one structure may be allowed under this exemption unless separated from another permit-exempt structure by 10 feet or more. 

2. Fences constructed of other than stone, masonry or concrete, not over 8 feet in total height. Fences constructed of stone, masonry or concrete, not over 6 feet in total height.

3. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall and retaining not more than 3 feet of material, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.

4. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.

5. Sidewalks, walkways, nonstructural concrete slabs and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route.

6. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work not otherwise altering building service equipment or subject to the accessibility requirements contained in Chapters 11A or 11B of the California Building Code.

7. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

8. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons, and are installed entirely above ground.

9. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

10. Swings and other playground equipment with a projected area less than 120 square feet and are accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings not subject to the accessibility requirements contained in Chapters 11A or 11B of the California Building Code.

11. Window awnings of Groups R-3 and U occupancies supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

12. Recovering of awnings on previously approved existing framework.

13. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 30 inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a building and do not serve a required exit door or an accessible route.

14. Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches in height and work not otherwise subject to the accessibility requirements contained in Chapters 11A or 11B of the California Building Code.

15. A tree house that does not exceed 64 square feet in floor area and 8 feet in height measured from the top of the treehouse floor to highest point on the roof and does not exceed a total height of 15 feet measured from grade plane to the top of the treehouse floor or highest point on the roof whichever is higher. 

16. Flagpoles not erected upon a building and not more than 15 feet in height above grade plane.

17. In-kind-repair or replacement of less than 32 square feet of drywall, siding, stucco or roofing within any 12 month period. 

Electrical: 

1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.

2. Reinstallation of existing attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefore.

3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location

4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

5. Minor repair work, including installation or replacement of equipment such as lamps and electric utilization equipment approved for connection to approved permanently-installed receptacles. 

6. Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, except equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.

7. Installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus or the process of manufacturing, testing, servicing, or repairing electrical equipment or apparatus.

8. Replacement of flush or snap switches, fuses, lamp sockets, receptacles, contactor or control device and other minor maintenance and repair work, such as replacing worn cords and tightening connections on a wiring device.

9. Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the Electrical Code.

10. Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.

11. Installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.

Mechanical: 

1. A portable heating appliance, portable ventilating equipment, a portable cooling unit, or a portable evaporative cooler.

2. A closed system of steam, hot, or chilled water piping within heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.

3. Replacement of any minor component part or assembly of an appliance that does not alter its original approval of the equipment and complies with other applicable requirements of this code.

4. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less and refrigerating equipment that is part of the equipment for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this code.

5. A plug-and-cord connected unit refrigeration system.

6. Portable plug-and-cord connected cooking or clothes-drying appliances.

7. Portable plug-and-cord connected ventilation or cooling equipment.

8. Portable plug-and-cord connected evaporative cooler.

9. Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 

Plumbing:

1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipes; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

3. Exterior rainwater catchment systems used for outdoor non-spray irrigation with a maximum storage capacity of 5,000 gallons where the tank is supported directly upon grade and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1 and does not require electrical power or a makeup water supply connection.

4. Exterior rainwater catchment systems used for spray irrigation with a maximum storage capacity of 360 gallons.

106.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next building department business day to the building official.

106.2.2 Minor Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary or minor maintenance or repairs to structures, including minor damage to nonstructural members, the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently-installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal, change or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting any required means of egress or accessibility requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 

106.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right.

106.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose.

Such application shall: 

1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

3. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

4. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required herein.

5. State the estimated value of the proposed work.

6. Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent.

7. Give such other data and information as required by the building official.

106.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application is incomplete or does not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application and stipulate the reasons therefor to the applicant. If, in the sole opinion of the building official, the construction documents, including plans, specifications, reports and calculations, lack sufficient information to show compliance with this code, are inaccurate, are not easily readable, are incomplete or do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application and state in writing the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

106.3.1.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in a flood hazard area as established by Sonoma Municipal Code Chapter 14.25, the building official shall examine or cause to be examined the construction documents and shall make a determination with regard to the value of the proposed work. For buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure to its pre-damaged condition. If the building official finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage has occurred or the improvement is started, the proposed work is a substantial improvement or restoration of substantial damage and the building official shall require existing portions of the entire building or structure to meet the requirements of Sonoma Municipal Code Chapter 14.25.

106.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

106.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any provision of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring subsequent correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of the City.

106.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. For the purposes of this section, work shall be considered abandoned if no required regular inspection has been conducted by the building department within any 180-day period. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

106.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

106.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The project inspection record card and approved plans for the permit, if any, shall be available for use by the building official during inspections.

106.8 Responsibility of permittee. It shall be the duty of the permittee and every person who performs work on a new or existing building or structure, including installation or repair of a building, or structure, or of accessibility features, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems of a building or structure for which this code is applicable, to comply with this code. Building permits shall be presumed to incorporate the provision that the permittee and those performing work on behalf of the permittee will carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans, with all requirements of this code and any other laws or regulations applicable thereto, whether specified or not. No approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of this code.

106.9 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. The permit applicant shall be responsible for providing reasonable access for conducting the preliminary inspection and for the payment of any fee adopted by the City for said inspection.

SECTION 107 

SUBMITTAL OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

107.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of the permit application, construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report, required checklists, energy reports, calculations, flood elevation documentation, equipment documentation, certifications and other reports and data as determined necessary by the building official shall be submitted in three sets with each permit application. 

107.1.1. Building evaluation. The building official is authorized to require an existing building to be investigated and evaluated by a registered design professional and/or a California Certified Access Specialist (CASp) when determined necessary by the building official due to the nature of the proposed work. The design professional and/or California Certified Access Specialist (CASp) shall notify the building official if any actual or potential nonconformance with the provisions of this code is found.

107.2 Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by state law or where due to the complexity or nature of the design or if special circumstances exist, the building official determines at any time that construction documents, or a portion thereof, must be prepared by a registered design professional. The building official is authorized to waive the submission of all or a portion of the construction documents or the information contained therein and any other information if it is determined that the nature of the work proposed does not require construction documents or a portion thereof to determine whether the proposed work is in compliance with this code. 

107.2.1 Information on the construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted with the application for permit and drawn upon suitable material at a size and scale acceptable for readability and document imaging as determined by the building official. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when first approved by the building official. Construction documents shall utilize common architectural drafting, symbols, graphics and techniques and shall be of sufficient detail, clarity and accuracy to correctly indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and to show in detail that it will conform to the applicable provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. One or more of the construction documents listed below shall be prepared and submitted for approval when required by the building official:

1. Site Plan 

2. Design information and elevation certificates for structures within Flood Hazard Areas.

3. Grading and Drainage Plan

4. Erosion Control and Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.

5. Foundation Plan. 

6. Floor Framing Plans. 

7. Floor Plans.

8. Electrical Plans. 

9. Mechanical and Duct Layout Plans

10. Ceiling Framing Plan

11. Roof Plan 

12. Truss Layout Plan and Truss Design Documentation

13. Roof Framing Plan 

14. Full Building Cross-Sections 

15. Foundation Details 

16. Framing or Structural Details 

17. Architectural Details

18. Exterior Elevations 

19. Interior Elevations 

20. Reflected Ceiling Plans

21. Plumbing Plan

22. Restaurant Equipment Plan 

23. Landscaping & Irrigation Plan

24. Fire Protection System Plans and Shop Drawings

25. Accessibility Plans and Details

26. Means of Egress Plan

27. Any other plans or documentation needed to show compliance with the codes, ordinance and regulations as determined by the building official.

107.2.2 Building Design Information. When required by the building official, construction documents shall include building design information including, but not limited to, applicable codes used, design occupancy classifications, construction type, building fire resistance rating, number of stories, building height, allowable and proposed building area, inclusion of fire sprinkler system, allowable and proposed occupant load calculations, exiting calculations, calculations to determine required number of restroom fixtures, accessible route of travel, disproportionate cost calculations and path of travel deficiencies for accessibility hardship claims, structural design loads and criteria, structural wind and seismic categories, wind and seismic importance factors, structural calculations, design flood elevations, CALGreen checklists and other pertinent design assumptions or information.

107.2.3 Manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where required by the building official, construction documents shall include manufacturer’s specification sheets and/or installation instructions. 

107.3 Examination of documents; plan review. When the building official determines that the necessary submittal documents, construction documents and building design information have been provided, the building official shall examine or cause to be examined construction documents for compliance with this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances. The building official may utilize or authorize the use of consultant services to perform all or a portion of the construction documents review. The applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all costs to conduct the plan review. The building official is authorized to withhold the approval of plans and a building permit application if approvals required by other governmental agencies or City departments pertaining to the work which are necessary for the work to be lawfully performed have not first been obtained.

107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved in writing or by a stamp which states, “APPROVED FOR PERMIT.” One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. One set shall be returned to the applicant and shall be available at the site of work at all times and shall be open to inspection and use by the building official or his or her authorized representative.

107.3.2 Previous approvals. The issuance of a permit based on reviewed and approved plans and specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors or omissions in said plans and specifications, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other pertinent laws and ordinances of the City. This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which an unexpired permit exists to otherwise meet a new or different technical code other than those technical codes lawfully adopted and in effect at the time of permit issuance. 

107.3.3 Phased approval and conditional authorization to proceed. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The permittee for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed with the building operation at the permittee’s own risk and without assurance that the work will be approved or that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.

107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents. Any changes or proposed changes in the work made during construction that are not in full conformance and compliance with the approved construction documents or the technical codes, shall require the resubmittal of revised construction documents for approval by the building official, as either an amended or full replacement set for the previously approved construction documents. The permittee or their designee shall be responsible for the payment of all costs to perform the plan review for amended construction documents. Any additional proposed work that was not otherwise shown or specified on the approved plans for an active permit or that would otherwise increase the valuation of an active permit shall require a new permit unless determined otherwise by the building official.

107.5 Design professional in responsible charge. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. 

The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal documents, for compatibility with the design of the building.

107.6 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as required documentation listed as deferred submittals on the approved plans but are not submitted for building department approval until after the permit has been issued. Deferral of any submittal items shall receive prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge or the project designer shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. 

Deferred submittal documents shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge, if any, who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. Deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official. The permittee or their designee shall be responsible for the payment of all costs to perform the plan review for deferred submittal documents.

107.7 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official in accordance with the City’s records retention policy, or as otherwise required by state law.

SECTION 108 

TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES 

108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

108.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements as necessary to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the public and those using the temporary structure and shall comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 31 of the California Building Code.

108.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in parts of an electric installation before all work has been fully completed. The parts covered by the temporary authorization shall comply with the applicable requirements of the technical codes.

108.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate a permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

SECTION 109 

FEES 

109.1 Payment of fees. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section and applicable state law. Permit applicants, permittees and persons in violation of any provision of this code shall pay all fees necessary to cover the full cost of providing the building department service related to the permit, activity or enforcement action in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by the city council. A permit shall not be valid until applicable fees adopted by resolution or ordinance of the city council or otherwise prescribed by law have been paid nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until an additional fee to review and approve the amendment, if any, has been paid. 

109.2 Schedule of fees. Fees for building department services necessary to bring violations of this code into compliance, verify conformance with the technical codes or to reimburse the jurisdiction for other services rendered shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution or ordinance of the city council.

109.3 Permit inspection fees. The inspection fees for each permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 

When the permit holder’s work is incomplete or changed so as to require more than one additional inspection, an additional inspection fee shall be charged at the hourly rate set forth in the fee schedule. When additional inspection fees are assessed, they shall be paid prior to scheduling any further inspections.

109.4 Plan Review Fees. The plan review fees specified in this section are separate from and in addition to permit inspection fees. The plan review fee to review compliance with the technical codes shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 

When submitting an application for a building permit, the applicant shall pay a plan review deposit in an amount determined by the building official to defray all or a portion of the cost to review the plans and other construction documentation associated with the permit application. Any portion of the deposit that is unused for plan review purposes shall be applied towards inspection and other fees assessed on the permit. If the plan review deposit exceeds the total cost of the permit, a refund of the unused balance of the deposit shall be issued to the applicant at no additional charge.

When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal documents, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the hourly rate set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the city council.

109.5 Other Fees. The city council may adopt other fees for services to be charged in connection with the issuance of a building permit or the delivery of services by the building department. 

109.6 Investigation fee; work commencing or continuing without a permit. Any person who commences or continues work requiring a permit on a building, structure, site, electrical system, mechanical system, plumbing system or conveying system without first obtaining or otherwise maintaining required permits and required inspection approvals shall be subject to an investigation fee adopted by the city council. The investigation fee shall be in addition to any other fee charged, and shall be imposed under this section to defray the costs incurred by the City in connection with its duties to monitor, review, investigate, and enforce this code. 

109.7 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition work done in connection with, or concurrently with, work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or permittee from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law or adopted by the City.

109.8 Refunds. The building official may establish a refund policy and may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected or for which services were not rendered or were only partially rendered.

109.9 Building permit valuation. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated value of the work at time of application. The estimated value of work shall include the total value of all work including materials, equipment, labor, overhead, profit, general conditions and other costs associated with the work for which the permit is being issued. The building official shall establish the permit valuation based on published valuation data as updated from time to time. If, in the opinion of the building official, the published valuation data are not readily available or are over or underestimated based on the actual work of the project, the building official may utilize any other reasonable or appropriate means of determining the permit valuation, including, but not limited to, using the applicant’s estimated value of work, obtaining detailed and complete cost estimates provided by the applicant, or applying construction cost estimating manuals. Final building permit valuation shall be determined and set by the building official.

SECTION 110 

INSPECTIONS 

110.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official or his/her designee and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 

110.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed.

110.3 Required inspections. The building official or his/her designee, upon reasonable notification, shall make the inspections set forth herein. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the approval of the enforcing agency.

110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms and reinforcing steel shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job site except where concrete is ready-mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94. 

110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping or other ancillary building trade products or equipment are installed, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing is installed, including the subfloor.

110.3.3 Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems inspection. Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection.

110.3.4 Lowest floor elevation in flood hazard areas. In flood hazard areas as established by the flood damage prevention regulations of the City, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of a flood elevation certificate, prepared and sealed by a registered design professional.

110.3.5 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire-blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved.

110.3.5.1 Moisture content verification. When required by the California Green Building Standards Code, moisture content of framing members shall be verified. 

110.3.6 Masonry inspection. Inspection of masonry construction, including reinforcing steel, shall be made prior to grouting cells.

110.3.7 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or before gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

110.3.8 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations and fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to location on property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 

110.3.9 Energy efficiency. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the California Energy Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation, fenestration, duct systems, electrical lighting and controls, heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment and controls and water-heating equipment. 

110.3.10 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections above, the building official may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with this code and other laws enforced by the building official or building department.

110.3.10.1 Special Inspections. Special inspections shall be performed in accordance with chapter 17 of the California Building Code.

110.3.10.2 CALGreen inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the California Green Building Code. Said inspections shall be made by a special inspector, hired by the permit holder, at the sole cost of the permit holder, and approved by the building official. In lieu of special inspections, the building official, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to conduct CALGreen inspections and/or utilize written documentation to verify compliance with the California Green Building Code. 

110.3.10.3 Contractor self-certification of work performed. In lieu of performing certain designated inspections and as a method of verifying compliance of a specific requirement of the technical codes, the building official may, at his/her sole discretion, accept a signed self-certification statement from a licensed contractor or other qualified individual certifying that the specific work or requirement has been properly installed or completed in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. 

110.3.11 Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is complete. The building, or portion thereof where the work occurred, shall not be used or occupied until all work has been approved by the building department and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official. 

110.3.12 Waiving of inspections for minor work. The building official may authorize the waiver of inspections for minor work or elements if the building official finds that the nature or scope of the minor work is not likely to be in violation of the technical codes.

110.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability, as determined by the building official.

110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. The building official shall cause to have the work inspected in accordance with the inspection request or as soon thereafter as the building official’s schedule may permit, subject to scheduling availability. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. The building official is authorized to withhold any requested inspection where there is reason to believe that the work has been changed from what is shown on the approved plans and no plan amendment for the changed work has been approved by the building official.

110.6 Approval required. Work shall not be performed beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder of any noted violations found or corrective work required to proceed with or complete the inspected portion of the work. Any portion of the work that does not comply with this code shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered, concealed or used until authorized by the building official.

SECTION 111 

CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

111.1 Use and occupancy. No new, relocated or altered building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing use or occupancy classification of a building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. The building official is authorized to allow temporary use or occupancy of an altered building or portion thereof, while the building is being altered when the building official finds that the nature of the work does not pose a significant hazard to the occupants or the public. The building official is authorized to withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy when the work performed or required to be performed does not receive all required inspection approvals. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the City. A certificate of occupancy presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The building official is authorized to withhold a certificate of occupancy or permit to use or occupy a structure if approvals required by other governmental agencies or City departments pertaining to the work which are necessary for the work to be lawfully completed have not first been obtained.

Exceptions: A Certificate of occupancy is not required for work exempt from a permit.

111.2 Change in use. Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in the California Existing Building Code and Chapter 11 of the California Fire Code.

111.3 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the building department or any other City department and any approvals from other agencies have been obtained as required by Section 111.1, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following: 

1. The building permit number.

2. The address of the structure.

3. The occupancy or use of the structure

4. The name of the building official or his/her designee approving the certificate.

5. Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.

In lieu of issuance of a separate certificate, the building permit together with the completed and fully signed building permit inspection record may serve as the certificate of occupancy.

111.4 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. A fee for the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, if applicable, shall be paid by the applicant prior to its issuance in accordance with the City’s adopted fee schedule. In addition, as security to guarantee the satisfactory completion of all required work, the building official may require the submittal to the building department of a refundable performance guarantee deposit in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost needed to complete the work, as determined by the building official. The performance guarantee deposit shall be refunded to the originator of the deposit following satisfactory completion of all required work and issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.

111.5 Revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke, in writing, a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this code whenever the certificate is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information or when it is determined by the building official that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of the provisions of this code.

SECTION 112 

SERVICE UTILITIES 

112.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections to a utility or source of energy for fuel, water, electricity or sewer from any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official.

112.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize and approve a temporary connection of the building or system to the utility or source of energy for fuel, water or electricity provided that the building official finds that the temporary connection is safe for the purpose intended.

112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without first obtaining building department approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.

SECTION 113 

APPEALS 

113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall serve as the “local appeals board” and the “housing appeals board” pursuant to Sections 17920.5 and 17920.6 of the California Health and Safety Code. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.

113.2 Limitations on authority. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity adversely affected by an order, decision or determination made by the building official related to the application or interpretation of this code may make application for appeal. In addition, any member of the city council may call up for review by the board of appeals any order, decision, or determination made by the building official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.

113.3 Decisions subject to appeal. Final orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code are subject to appeal to the board of appeals. 

113.4 Effect of failure to appeal. Failure to file an application for appeal in conformance with the requirements of Sections 113.5 and 113.6 shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing on the matter.

113.5 Deadline for filing of appeal. All such appeals shall be initiated by filing with the city clerk (with a copy to the building official) a written application for appeal on a form provided by the city clerk within 15 calendar days of the date the building official’s decision, notice or order (oral or written) is properly served, together with any applicable fees pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 

113.6 Contents of application for appeal. The application for appeal shall state the nature and date of the decision being appealed, the name and address of the appellant and his/her interest in the matter, the property address which is the subject of the appeal, the specific action requested by the appellant to be taken by the appeal body, the signature(s) of the appellant(s), and, unless the appeal is by a member of the city council, the reasons (in conformance with Section 113.2, above) which, in the opinion of the appellant, render the decision unjustified or incorrect.

113.7 Staying of decision or order under appeal. The filing of the application for appeal shall have the effect of staying any decision or order of the building official pertaining to said appeal or the issuance or granting of any permit, certificate or other approval which is related to the appeal unless, at the sole discretion of the building official, such decision, order or action is necessary to protect the life, health, safety, property or well-being of the public or occupants of the building. When the building official makes said determination, the building official shall notify the appellant, in writing, that the decision, order or action under appeal shall continue to be in effect until otherwise overturned by the board of appeals. 

113.8 Hearing. Upon receipt of a timely filed application for appeal in proper form and payment of the required fee, the city clerk shall set a hearing date before the board of appeals no later than 60 days after the filing of the application for appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

113.9 Hearing request by building official. The building official may, at any time, request a hearing be held by the board of appeals to review and affirm any final decision of the building official. 

113.10 Notice of hearing. Not less than 10 days prior to the hearing, the building official shall serve or cause to be served either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the notice of hearing upon the appellant. 

113.11 Action of board of appeals. Upon the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the appeal board shall render its decision, which shall be final and may not be appealed to the city council. Notice of the final decision of the board shall be mailed to the appellant by first class mail, postage prepaid.

SECTION 114 

VIOLATIONS 

114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any other provision of Chapter 14.10 of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

114.2 Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation and order to abate on the affected property owner and if known, person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, maintenance, use or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of an order or corrective work required by the building official, a correction notice or an approved plan, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The order shall also state that failure to comply with the notice or order and cure the violation within the time period allowed in the notice of violation and order to abate may result in the building official recording the notice of violation and order to abate against the subject property. The order shall advise the affected property owner and if known, the person responsible for the violation, of their appeal rights pursuant to Section 113.3 herein.

114.3 Service of notice or order. The notice of violation and order to abate shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) personally delivered to the record owner of the property involved, or (b) sent by certified mail to the record owner of the property at the address listed on the last equalized county tax assessment roll with the return receipt requested. If the notice of violation and order to abate sent by certified mail is returned showing that it was not delivered, a copy of the notice of violation and order to abate shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and a copy thereof mailed, by first class mail, to the record owner at the address listed on the last equalized county tax assessment roll. In addition to the methods of service set forth herein, the building official is authorized to post one or more copies of a placard stating any restrictions pertaining to the use or occupancy of the structure and copy of the notice of violation and order to abate in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.

114.4 Recording of notice or order. If the notice of violation and order to abate is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to record with the County Recorder’s Office, after the expiration of said time period, said notice of violation and order to abate against the property with respect to which the violation exists. Said notice must specify the nature of the violation, the provisions of this code being violated, when the building official first learned of the existence of the violations, how much time the violator had to cure the violation, and the assessor’s parcel number and street address, if any, of the subject property.

Following the recordation of the notice of violation, the building official is not required to make any inspection or review of the premises to determine the continued existence of the cited violations. It is the responsibility of the record owner, occupant or other party in interest to comply with the above provisions and to notify the building official when the violation has been corrected.

114.5 Rescission of recorded notice or order. Any person who desires to have recorded a notice rescinding the notice of violation must first obtain the necessary approvals and permit(s) to correct the violation. Once the building official determines that the work covered by such permit(s) has been satisfactorily completed, the building official shall, following a request made by the person requesting said rescission, record a notice rescinding the prior notice of violation. The person requesting said rescission shall be responsible for the payment of any fee adopted by resolution of the city council for the rescission or termination of said notice.

114.6 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the City to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 

114.7 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of this code or any other provision of Chapter 14.10 of the Sonoma Municipal Code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or allows a violation to continue without taking reasonable means to cure or abate the same after having been ordered to do so, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, is punishable as provided by Section 1.12.010 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day such person, firm or corporation violates or allows a violation to continue without taking reasonable means to cure or abate the same after having been ordered to do so. A violation of this code or any other provision of Chapter 14.10 of the Sonoma Municipal Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and is subject to nuisance abatement proceedings as provided by Section 1.12.010 and Chapter 14.30 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. 

114.8 Administrative Penalties. As an alternative to the provisions provided in this Section 114, the building official is authorized to utilize the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.30 (Administrative Penalties) of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

SECTION 115 

STOP WORK ORDER 

115.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or contrary to the approved plans or that is dangerous, substandard or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

115.2 Issuance of stop work order. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and given to the record owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent or to the person doing the work. The stop work order shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) personally delivered to the record owner of the property involved, or (b) personally delivered to the owner’s agent or to the person doing the work, or (c) sent by certified mail to the record owner of the property at the address listed on the last equalized county tax assessment roll with the return receipt requested. If a stop work order sent by certified mail is returned showing that it was not delivered, a copy of the stop work order shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and a copy thereof mailed, by first class mail, to the record owner at the address listed on the last equalized county tax assessment roll. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume.

115.2.1 Violation to remove or deface a stop work order. It shall be a violation of this code to remove, deface or mutilate any stop work order posted on a structure or site pursuant to this section without the express written permission of the building official.

115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1.12.010 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. Further, any violation of this section is deemed a public nuisance and may be subject to nuisance abatement proceedings as provided by Section 1.12.010 and Chapter 14.30 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. 

SECTION 116 

UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT 

116.1 Authority. For the purposes of this code, any applicable building, structure or equipment, including those structures that are subject to the requirements of Division 13, Part 1.5 of the California Health and Safety Code commencing with Section 17910 (State Housing Law), which by inspection or observation by the building official, has any of the conditions or defects defined as an unsafe structure, shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.

116.2 Unsafe structures prohibited. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any unsafe structure. 

116.3 Unsafe structures declared a public nuisance. Any unsafe structure or equipment regulated by this code is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to instituting any appropriate action to prevent, restrain or correct a violation of this section, the building official may abate an unsafe condition by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this section or as alternatively set forth by the nuisance abatement proceedings in Chapter 14.30 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. 

116.4 Notice of unsafe structure. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous, damaged or unsafe and if, in the building official’s opinion, such building or structure is found to be an unsafe structure as defined in this code, the building official shall give to the party in interest written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice shall require the owner, other party in interest or person in charge of the building or premises to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof and all such work shall be completed within a time frame stipulated by the building official. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements be completed, inspected and approved by the building official. The designated period within which the owner, tenant, other party in interest or person in charge is required to comply with such notice shall begin as of the date the owner or person in charge receives such notice by personal service or certified mail. If such notice is by posting, the designated period shall begin ten (10) days following the date of posting. The notice of unsafe structure shall state the rights to a hearing or appeal. The notice period shall be a minimum of thirty (30) days unless the building official deems a shorter period necessary to prevent or remedy an immediate threat to the health and safety of the public or occupants of the structure.

116.5 Service of notice of unsafe structure. The notice of unsafe structure shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) personally delivered upon every party in interest, as defined in this code; or (b) posted in a conspicuous place on the structure or property and a copy thereof mailed by certified mail with a return receipt requested to the record owner of the property involved at the address listed on the last equalized county tax roll and if known, any party in interest. 

If the notice of unsafe structure sent by certified mail is returned showing that it was not delivered, the notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place on the unsafe structure or property involved and a copy is mailed by first class mail to the record owner of the property involved at the address listed on the last equalized county tax roll. 

The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 

116.6 Recording of notice of unsafe structure. If the notice of unsafe structure is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to record with the County Recorder’s Office, after the expiration of said time period, said notice against the property with respect to the unsafe conditions and violations that exist. Said notice must specify the nature of the unsafe conditions, the provisions of this code being violated, when the building official first learned of the existence of the unsafe conditions, how much time the violator has to cure the unsafe conditions and violations, and the assessor’s parcel number and street address, if any, of the subject property.

Following the recordation of the notice of unsafe conditions, the building official is not required to make any inspection or review of the premises to determine the continued existence of the cited unsafe conditions or violations. It is the responsibility of the record owner, occupant or other party in interest to comply with the above provisions.

116.6.1 Rescission of recorded notice or order. Any person who desires to have recorded a notice rescinding the notice of unsafe structure must first obtain the necessary approvals and permit(s) to correct or remove the unsafe conditions and violations. Once the building official determines that the work covered by such permit(s) has been satisfactorily completed, the building official shall, following a request made by the person requesting said rescission, record a notice rescinding the prior notice of unsafe structure. The person requesting said rescission shall be responsible for the payment of any fee adopted by resolution of the city council for the rescission or termination of said notice.

116.7 Posting of notice to vacate. Any unsafe building ordered vacated in accordance with this section shall not be reoccupied until the unsafe conditions have been eliminated. Each such vacated building shall be locked and otherwise secured against entry and the building official shall post thereon a placard stating:

“UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY”

In cases where the building official has determined that partial occupancy of a building may be allowed, the building official shall post thereon a placard stating:

“RESTRICTED USE”

All placards posted shall indicate, in general terms, the unsafe conditions found and the date of said posting. Additional information may be placed on the placard or notice to vacate as deemed appropriate by the building official. Such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance and shall be visible to persons approaching the building or structure from a street. 

116.7.1 Proof of posting. Proof of posting of the notice to vacate shall be provided by written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person making the posting and declaring the time, date, manner and location the posting was made.

116.7.2 Violation to remove or deface posted notice to vacate. It shall be a violation of this code to remove, deface or mutilate any notice to vacate posted on a building pursuant to this section without the express written permission of the building official.

116.8 Right of hearing. Any interested party may request a hearing before the board of appeals to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished or removed. The request for a hearing shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 113 of this code. A hearing shall be requested by the building official prior to demolition or repair of an unsafe building by the City except when such demolition or repair is done under the emergency procedure set forth in this section. 

116.9 Order of board of appeals. If, after holding a hearing on the matter, the board of appeals finds that the building or structure is an unsafe structure, it shall issue a written order that includes, but is not limited to, the following: 

1. The name, address and telephone number of the City.

2. The address or location of the unsafe structure.

3. The name and address of the parties in interest.

4. A finding of fact that (a) the building or structure is an unsafe structure and nuisance and directing that it either be demolished or otherwise repaired in accordance with this code as applicable; or (b) the building or structure is an unsafe structure and nuisance and directing that it shall be vacated and that the building or structure either be demolished or otherwise repaired in accordance with this code as applicable. 

5. A list of the specific defects and violations.

6. The dates required for the commencement and the completion of either the required repairs or improvements or the demolition or removal of the building or structure or portions thereof.

7. If necessary, a statement that the building, structure, or portion thereof be immediately vacated and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the building official.

8. A statement that if the repairs or demolition necessary to remove the unsafe conditions is not made within the designated period stated in the order, the building official may then demolish or repair such portions of the structure, or may cause such work to be done, to the extent necessary to eliminate the hazard determined to exist by the board of appeals. 

9. A statement that the order by the board of appeals is not appealable to the city council.

10. A statement that all costs to enforce the order of the building official and the board of appeals and for the repairs or demolition necessary to remove the unsafe conditions incurred by the City, shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner and if not paid within 30 days of request of payment by the City, may be made a special assessment against the property involved, pursuant to Section 118.1.

11. If the building or structure, or portion thereof is residential, a statement in accordance with Section 17980(e) of the Health and Safety Code that, in accordance with Section 17274 and 24436.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred in a taxable year, and, in addition, any other notice required by Health and Safety Code Section 17980. 

116.9.1 Board of appeals termination of building official’s order. If, after holding a hearing on the matter, the board of appeals finds that the building or structure is not an unsafe structure, it shall issue a written order terminating the order of the building official.

116.9.1 Service and posting of order of board of appeals. The order of the board of appeals shall be served upon the same parties and in the same manner as required for the notice of hearing. It shall also be conspicuously posted on or about the building or structure. 

116.10 Failure to comply with order of building official. If the repairs or demolition necessary to remove the unsafe condition as set forth in the notice of unsafe structure is not made within the designated period prescribed by the building official and if a hearing has not otherwise been held by the board of appeals, the building official shall request that a hearing be held regarding the unsafe conditions and failure to comply with the order. 

116.11 Failure to comply with order of the board of appeals. If the repairs or demolition necessary to remove the unsafe condition as set forth in the order of the board of appeals is not made within the designated period the building official may then demolish or repair such portions of the structure, or may cause such work to be done, to the extent necessary to eliminate the hazard determined to exist by the board of appeals. 

SECTION 117

EMERGENCY MEASURES

117.1 Imminent danger. Where, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life or property, or where any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or where there is actual or potential danger to the occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of potential for collapse, electrical hazards, explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or material, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, or any other cause, the building official is hereby authorized to take any appropriate emergency measure described herein and order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. 

117.1.1 Posting of placards due to imminent danger. The building official and his or her authorized representatives are hereby authorized to post appropriate placards on any unsafe buildings or structures causing imminent danger to the occupants or the public and subject to these emergency measures. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such buildings or structures a placard reading:

“UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY”

In cases where the building official has determined that partial occupancy of a building may be allowed, the building official shall post thereon a placard reading:

“RESTRICTED USE”

All placards posted shall indicate, in general terms, the unsafe conditions causing the imminent danger, the date of said posting, any restrictions of the entry, use or occupancy of said building, the name or number of the posting inspector and the contact information for interested persons or occupants to obtain more information. Additional information may be placed on the placards or notice to vacate as deemed appropriate by the building official, including any to restrictions or limitations of the use or occupancy of the structure. Such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance and shall be visible to persons approaching the building or structure from a street. 

117.1.2 Unlawful to enter or use a posted structure. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or use a structure in violation of its posted placard except with a valid permit or written permission, issued by the building official, for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.

117.1.3 Unlawful to remove or deface posted placard. Once a placard has been attached to a building or structure, it shall not to be removed, altered or covered except by the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section.

117.2 Temporary emergency safeguards and repairs. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the building official there is an immediate and imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official may order the boarding up of openings, barricading, securing, temporary bracing, temporary repairs, isolation of, alteration to, demolition, or other appropriate action to render such structure temporarily safe or temporarily secure and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. In all cases, the use of demolition to abate the unsafe condition shall be limited to what is reasonably necessary to abate the immediate and imminent danger and mitigate the loss of, or damage to life, health, property.

117.3 Closing streets and sidewalks. Where necessary for public safety, the building official may temporarily close structures and temporarily order the closure of sidewalks, walkways, streets, public ways, and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.

117.4 Labor for temporary emergency safeguards and repairs. For the purposes of this section, the building official may employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work for temporary emergency safeguards and repairs as expeditiously as possible in accordance with Sonoma Municipal Code Section 3.04.090.

117.5 Costs of temporary emergency safeguards and repairs. Prior to incurring costs for temporary emergency safeguards and repairs, the building official shall obtain the approval of the city manager for said costs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The city attorney may institute appropriate action to recover costs against the owner of the premises or the owner’s authorized agent for the City costs for implementing emergency measures upon the unsafe structures or conditions in accordance with this code.

117.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.

117.8 Emergency notice. The emergency measures described herein may be implemented without any prior notice whatsoever when, in the opinion of the building official and the city manager, an imminent danger to the occupants of a building or the public exists and where immediate action is necessary to protect life, property or public safety. Whenever emergency measures have been implemented on any private property for any unsafe structure or condition the building official shall provide notice to the parties in interest, the tenant(s) of the building and the city council, as early as the circumstances will permit within 30 days following said implementation. 

SECTION 118 

RECOVERY OF COSTS

118.1 Payment of costs for enforcement. All reasonable and actual costs incurred by the City for the enforcement and abatement of an unsafe structure, public nuisance or any violation of this code, shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner and shall be paid to the City not more than 30 days from the date the invoice for said costs is mailed. The building official shall keep an account of the cost of enforcement and abatement and shall render an itemized written report of said costs to the property owner when requested.

If the property owner fails to pay the full cost of the personal obligation within 30 days from the date the invoice for services is mailed by the building official, said costs shall be confirmed by the city council and made a special assessment against the property upon which the structure stood or nuisance existed, pursuant to the procedures established by this section, which the city council adopts pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. 

The building official shall prepare and submit an itemized written report to the city council of the cost of removing and/or abating the nuisance, violation or unsafe building including, but not limited to, administrative costs, inspection costs, investigation costs, enforcement costs, attorney fees or costs, and all costs of prosecution. Before the report is submitted and reviewed by the city council, a copy of the report and notice of the time when the report will be reviewed by the city council for confirmation shall be mailed to the party in interest, certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current at least ten (10) days prior to review by the city council. The notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments, and shall otherwise be in compliance with Government Code Section 38773.5.

Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5(b), recovery of attorneys’ fees shall be limited to the prevailing party for those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding. 

The city council shall hold a hearing to determine the reasonableness or correctness of the assessment, or both. The building official shall notify, in writing, the party in interest of the city council’s decision. If the total assessment, as confirmed by the city council is not paid in full within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice from the building official, the building official shall take those actions necessary to cause a special assessment to be recorded against the parcel in the amount confirmed by the city council. From the date of such recording, such balance due shall be a special assessment against the parcel. 

The special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All the laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of County taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.

SECTION 119 

INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED

A person shall not obstruct, impede, or interfere with the building official, any representative authorized by the building official, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any unsafe building which has been ordered by the building official or the board of appeals to be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished, whenever the building official or such owner is engaged in repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such unsafe building pursuant to this code, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant hereto.

(Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.015 Technical codes adopted.

Pursuant to Section 50022.2 of the California Government Code, the following technical codes are adopted by reference as described herein and as amended by the following sections of this chapter:

A. 2016 California Building Code Volumes 1 and 2, based on the 2015 International Building Code published by the International Code Council; 

B. 2016 California Residential Code, based on the 2015 International Residential Code published by the International Code Council; 

C. 2016 California Electrical Code, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association and BNi Publications;

D. 2016 California Mechanical Code, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials;

E. 2016 California Plumbing Code, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 

F. 2016 California Energy Code published by the California Building Standards Commission;

G. 2016 California Historical Building Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission;

H. 2016 California Fire Code, based on the 2015 International Fire Code published by the International Code Council;

I. 2016 California Existing Building Code, based on the 2015 International Existing Building Code published by International Code Council;

J. 2016 California Green Building Standards Code published by the California Building Standards Commission;

K. 2016 California Referenced Standards published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.020 2016 California Building Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, the administrative regulations of Chapter 1, Division II of Part 2 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Building Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, are amended as follows:

Delete Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) in its entirety and replace with the administrative provisions contained in SMC 14.10.010.

B. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1 and No. 2 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 2 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Building Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Adopt by reference and add the following 2016 California Building Code appendices:

1. Appendix Chapter H – Signs.

2. Appendix Chapter I – Patio Covers. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.025 2016 California Residential Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, the administrative regulations of Chapter 1, Division II of Part 2.5 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Residential Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Delete Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) in its entirety and replace with the administrative provisions contained in SMC 14.10.010.

B. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 2.5 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Residential Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is further amended as follows:

1. Adopt by reference and add Appendix Chapter H (Patio Covers) of the 2016 California Residential Code appendices.

2. Adopt by reference and add Appendix Chapter V (Swimming Pool Safety Act) of the 2016 California Residential Code appendices.

C. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 2.5 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Residential Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is further amended as follows:

Amend Section R302.2 to read as follows:

R302.2 Townhouses. Walls separating townhouses located on individual separate lots or parcels and placed within 3 feet of a property line shall not be common walls. Common walls may be used for separating townhouses where no property line exists within 3 feet of a common wall. Common walls separating townhouses shall be assigned a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section R302.2, Item 1 or 2. The common wall shared by two townhouses shall be constructed without plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing. Electrical installations shall be in accordance with the California Electrical Code. Penetrations of the membrane of common walls for electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with Section R302.4.

Amend Section R302.3 to read as follows:

R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Walls separating dwelling units located on individual separate lots or parcels and placed within 3 feet of a property line shall comply with the requirements of Section R302.2 for townhouses. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be separated from each other by wall and floor assemblies having not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating where tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing.

D. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 2.5 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, known as the California Residential Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is further amended as follows:

Delete subsection R313.2 including the exception in its entirety and replace to read as follows:

R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and two- family dwellings, factory-built housing, mobile homes and manufactured homes.

Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing one- and two- family dwellings, factory-built housing, mobile homes and manufactured homes that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system unless otherwise required by the Fire Code.

R313.2.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section R313.3 or NFPA 13D.

Exception: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems installed in factory-built housing, mobile homes and manufactured homes, shall be designed and installed in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 4302.

(Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.030 2016 California Electrical Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 3 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Electrical Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Delete Annex H (Administration and Enforcement) of the electrical code in its entirety and replace and adopt in its place the administrative provisions contained in SMC 14.10.010. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.035 2016 California Mechanical Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, the administrative regulations of Chapter 1 Division II of Part 4 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Mechanical Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Delete Chapter 1, Division II (Administration) in its entirety and replace with the administrative provisions contained in SMC 14.10.010.

B. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1 and No. 2 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 4 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Mechanical Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Adopt by reference and add the following 2016 California Mechanical Code appendices: 

1. Appendix B (Procedures to be Followed to Place Gas Equipment into Operation). (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.040 2016 California Plumbing Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, the administrative regulations of Chapter 1 Division II of Part 5 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Plumbing Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Delete Chapter 1, Division II (Administration) in its entirety and replace with and adopt the administrative provisions contained in SMC 14.10.010.

B. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 3 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 5 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Plumbing Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Amend Section 713.4 to read as follows:

713.4 Public Sewer Availability. The public sewer may be considered to not be available for a proposed building or exterior drainage facility where such public sewer or a building or an exterior drainage facility connected thereto is located more than 300 feet from a proposed building or exterior drainage facility on a lot or premises that abuts and is served by such public sewer.

C. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 5 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Plumbing Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Adopt by reference and add the following 2016 California Plumbing Code appendices: 

1. Appendix A (Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System).

2. Appendix C (Alternate Plumbing Systems).

3. Appendix D (Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems).

4. Appendix E (Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks).

5. Appendix H (Private Sewage Disposal Systems).

6. Appendix I (Installation Standards for PEX Tubing Systems for Hot- and Cold-Water Distribution). (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.045 2016 California Fire Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 9 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Fire Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended by adopting by reference and adding the following appendices:

1. Appendix Chapter 4 – Special Detailed Requirements Based on Use and Occupancy. 

2. Appendix B – Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings.

3. Appendix BB – Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings.

4. Appendix C – Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution.

5. Appendix CC – Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution.

6. Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access Roads.

7. Appendix E – Hazard Categories.

8. Appendix F – Hazard Ranking. 

9. Appendix H – Hazardous Materials Management Plans and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statements 2016.

B. Based upon the express findings of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 9 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Fire Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015 and as further amended by the adoption of certain appendices, is amended to read as follows:

Amend subsection 105.6.49 to read as follows:

105.6.49 Additional permits. In addition to the permits required by Section 105.6, the following permits shall be obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention prior to engaging in the following activities, operations, practices or functions:

1. Production facilities. To change use or occupancy, or allow the attendance of a live audience, or for wrap parties.

2. Pyrotechnics and special effects. To use pyrotechnic special effects, open flame, use of flammable or combustible liquids or gases, welding, and the parking of motor vehicles in any building or location used for the purpose of motion picture, television and commercial productions.

3. Live Audiences. To install seating arrangements for live audiences in approved production facilities, production studios and sound stages. See Chapter 48.

4. Apartment, hotel, motel. An operational permit is required to operate an apartment house, hotel, or motel.

5. Bonfires or rubbish fires. An operational permit is required to kindle or authorize the kindling or maintenance of bonfires or rubbish fires.

6. Change of occupancy. An operational permit is required for any change in the occupancy, business or tenancy of any building, facility, or structure.

7. Care facilities. An operational permit is required to operate a care facility as listed:

1. Day care with an occupant load greater than eight (8) persons.

2. Residential or commercial institutional care facility, occupancies complying with Health and Safety Code Section 13235 are exempt

8. Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System. An operational permit is required for buildings and/or facilities with emergency responder radio coverage systems and related equipment.

9. Fire protection systems. An operational permit is required for buildings and/or facilities with fire protection systems and related equipment such as fire pumps, fire hydrant systems, fire suppression systems, fire alarm systems, smoke management systems, and similar systems governed by this code.

10. High-rise occupancy. An operational permit is required to operate a high-rise building as defined in Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations.

11. Institutional or residential occupancy (6 or less persons). An operational permit is required to operate an institutional or residential occupancy for 6 or less persons, except day care and residential care facilities for the elderly.

12. Institutional or residential occupancy (more than 6 persons). An operational permit is required to operate an institutional or residential occupancy for more than 6 persons. Exception: A permit is not required for large family day care providing care for less than 9 children.

13. Medical Gas Systems. An operational permit is required for buildings and/or facilities with medical gas systems and related equipment, and similar systems governed by this code.

14. Oil or natural gas well. An operational permit is required to own, operate or maintain an oil or natural gas well.

15. Organized Camps. An operational permit is required to operate an organized camp (Group-C Occupancy).

16. Public Christmas Tree Lot or Pumpkin Patch. An operational permit is required to operate a Christmas tree lot or pumpkin patch, haunted house, or similar facility that is open to the public.

17. Special Event Permit. An operational permit is required for any organized procession or assemblage of 50 or more people, which could significantly impact vehicular traffic or create a safety problem. Examples include, but are not limited to: music festivals, outdoor markets, circus, walkathons, runs, marathons, trail rides, bicycle races, celebrations, parades and other similar activities.

18. Winery Caves – Public Accessible. An operational permit is required to operate a Type-2 or Type-3 winery cave that is accessible to the public. 

19. Live entertainment. An operational permit is required to operate a business where alcohol is served, while providing live entertainment to the public.

20. Medical cannabis. Operational permits are required to operate a medical cannabis facility or operation listed below:

1. Cultivation

2. Distribution

3. Manufacturing (non-volatile)

4. Testing/lab 

21. Model rockets rental, sale or operation. An operational permit is required to operate, manufacture, import, export, possess, store, rent or sell model rockets as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 12519.

Add a new subsection 105.7.19 to read as follows:

105.7.19 Additional Construction Permits. In addition to the permits required by Section 105.7, the following construction permits shall be obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention prior to starting construction:

1. Emergency vehicle access facilities. A construction permit is required for installation or modification of roadways and roadway structures used for emergency vehicle access.

2. Excavation near flammable or combustible liquid pipeline. A construction permit is required to excavate or do any work below grade within ten (10) feet of any pipeline for the transportation of flammable or combustible liquid.

3. Fire-line underground utility piping. A construction permit is required to install, alter, or make improvements to fire-line underground utility piping. A separate utility permit from the building official is required prior to installing any private underground fire protection water piping and associated appliances.

4. Medical gas system. A construction permit is required to install a medical gas system.

5. Oil or natural gas well. A construction permit is required to drill an oil or natural gas well.

6. Roof-mounted solar photovoltaic power systems. A construction permit is required to install or modify a roof-mounted solar photovoltaic power system, with the exception of small residential rooftop solar energy systems which permit requirements are stated within Chapter 14.27 of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

Amend subsection 109.4 to read as follows:

109.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of this code, or any other section of Chapter 14.10 of the Sonoma Municipal Code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or allows a violation to continue without taking reasonable means to cure or abate the same after having been ordered to do so, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire chief, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, is punishable as provided by Section 1.12.010 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day such person, firm or corporation violates or allows a violation to continue without taking reasonable means to cure or abate the same after having been ordered to do so. A violation of this section or any other section of Chapter 14.10 of the Sonoma Municipal Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and is subject to nuisance abatement proceedings as provided by Section 1.12.010. 

Amend subsection 111.4 to read as follows:

111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1.12.010 of the Sonoma Municipal Code. Further, any violation of this section is deemed a public nuisance and may be subject to nuisance abatement proceedings as provided by Section 1.12.010.

Add a new subsection 113.6 to read as follows:

113.6 Cost recovery. Fire suppression, investigation or emergency medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 13009 and 13009.1, as may be amended from time to time. Additionally, any person(s) who negligently, intentionally or in violation of law causes an emergency response, including, but not limited to, a traffic accident, spill of toxic or flammable or combustible fluids or chemicals is liable for the costs of securing such emergency, including those costs pursuant to Government Code Section 53150, et seq, as may be amended from time to time. Any expense incurred by the Fire Department for securing such emergency shall constitute a debt of such person(s) and shall be collectable by the Fire Department in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, expressed or implied.

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “ADDITION” between “ACCESSIBLE ROUTE” and “AGED HOME OR INSTITUTION”:

ADDITION is the increase of area of an existing structure, for which a building permit has been issued, where the increase in floor area is not made exclusively for the provision of accessibility for the physically disabled.

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “MANUFACTURED HOME” between “MANUAL STOCKING METHODS” and “MOBILE HOME”:

MANUFACTURED HOME is a structure when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. (CA Health & Safety Code §18007)

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “MOBILE HOME” between “MANUFACTURED HOME” and “MARINA”:

MOBILE HOME is a structure when erected onsite, is 320 or more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. (CA Health & Safety Code §18008)

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “REMODELED” between “RELOCATABLE BUILDING (PUBLIC SCHOOL)” and “REMOTE EMERGENCY SHUTOFF DEVICE” to read as follows:

REMODELED is work requiring a building permit including, but not limited to, cosmetic or structural repairs, renovations, restorations, alterations or additions to a structure, the total valuation of which, as determined by the building official, exceeds $100,000 for buildings containing residential uses or occupancies and $150,000 for all other occupancies over any 36-month period. 

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “STRUCTURE” between “STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE” and “SUPERVISING STATION” to read as follows:

STRUCTURE is that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, regardless of property lines.

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “Umbrella Structure” between “Twenty-four hour basis” and “Unauthorized Discharge” to read as follows:

UMBRELLA STRUCTURE. A structure, enclosure or shelter with or without sidewalls or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by a central pole. (See “Membrane Structure” and “Tent”)

Amend Section 202 to add the following definition of “Unwarranted Alarm” between “Unwanted Fire” and “Use (material)” to read as follows:

UNWARRANTED ALARM. The giving, signaling or transition of an alarm notification to a public fire station or emergency communication center when such alarm is the result of a defective condition of an alarm system, system servicing testing, construction activities, ordinary household activities, false alarm or other cause when no such danger exists.

Amend subsection 304.1.2 by adding subsection 304.1.2.1 to read as follows:

304.1.2.1 Combustible Vegetation. The fire chief shall notify a property owner by U. S. Postal mail when it is determined that a property is or may become a fire hazard due to combustible vegetation. The property owner may be given the choice of performing hazard abatement work on their own behalf, or authorizing the fire chief to have the work performed. In the event that the property owner does not reply, fails to complete the abatement, or authorizes the fire chief to perform the work on the owner’s behalf, the fire chief may cause the work to be performed, then bill the property owner for the cost of such work plus an appropriate administrative fee. Upon the request of the property owner, or in the event that a property owner fails to reply to a bill for weed abatement services, the chief shall request the City Clerk to report the cost of such services to the County Tax Assessor, so that the balance due can be added to the property tax of that parcel of land.

Add subsection 304.1.4 to read as follows:

304.1.4 Defensible space – neighboring property

Persons owning, leasing, or controlling property within areas requiring defensible spaces are responsible for maintaining a defensible space on the property owned, leased or controlled by said person, within a distance of not less than 30 feet (91 467 mm) from any neighboring building structure or property line. Distances may be modified by the fire code official because of a site-specific analysis based on local conditions.

Add a new subsection 401.3.2.1 to read as follows:

401.3.2.1 Unwarranted alarm notification. Notification of emergency responders based on an unwarranted alarm may be punishable by a fine in accordance with the adopted fee schedule. In addition, the responsible party may be liable for the operational and administrative costs, incurred from the emergency response or mitigation procedures resulting from an unwarranted alarm notification.

Amend Section 402.1 by adding the following term after the term “LOCKDOWN”:

UNWARRANTED ALARM

Amend subsection 501.1 to read as follows:

501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter. Design and construction shall be in accordance with the following sections unless otherwise authorized by the fire code official in accordance with 104.9 Alternative Materials and Methods.

Add a new subsection 503.2.6.1 to read as follows:

503.2.6.1 Evaluation and maintenance. All existing private bridges and elevated surfaces that are a part of the fire department access roadway, shall be evaluated by a California licensed civil engineer experienced in structural engineering or a California licensed structural engineer, for safety and weight rating, in accordance with American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Manual: “The Manual for Bridge Evaluation,” Second Edition, or other approved standard. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges. All bridges and elevated structures providing fire department access shall be routinely maintained in accordance with Section 503.2.6 or when directed by the fire code official or authorized designee.

Amend subsection 503.3 to read as follows:

503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices or markings that include the words NO PARKING – FIRE LANE in accordance with the California Vehicle Code, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. The means by which fire lanes are designated shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.

Add the following sentence to the end of section 503.2.7:

All buildings located on slopes of greater than five percent (5%) shall also include such additional fire protection measures, as the fire chief deems necessary to mitigate access constraints.

Amend subsection 505.1 to read as follows:

505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Posted address numbers shall be those assigned by the City of Sonoma. Address numbers shall be maintained.

Exceptions: 

1. These requirements may be modified with the approval of the fire code official.

2. Illuminated address numbers are not required for existing buildings where approved; reflective numbers are to be installed.

505.1.1 Addresses for buildings. All buildings shall be issued an address by the local jurisdiction which conforms to that jurisdiction’s overall address system. Accessory buildings will not be required to have a separate address; however, each unit within a building shall be separately identified.

505.1.2 Numbers for one and two- family dwellings. Numbers for one and two- family dwellings shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. 

505.1.3 Numbers for other than one and two- family dwellings. Numbers for other than one- and two- family dwellings shall be a minimum of 12 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. Suite and unit directional numbers shall be not less than six (6) inches high with a minimum stroke width of three-quarter (0.75) inch. Numbers shall be not less than four (4) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (0.5) inch.

505.1.4 Complex directory. Where two or more buildings cannot be viewed from the public way or when determined by the fire code official, an approved illuminated complex directory, monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structures at the main entrances to the property. The complex directory, monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall comply with the requirements of the City’s sign regulations contained in Title 18 of the Sonoma Municipal Code.

505.1.5 Installation, location and visibility of addresses. All buildings shall have a permanently posted address, which shall be placed at each driveway entrance and visible from both directions of travel along the road. In all cases, the address shall be posted at the beginning of construction and shall be maintained thereafter, and the address shall be visible and legible from the road on which the address is located.

505.1. 5.1 Address signs along one-way roads shall be visible from both the intended direction of travel and the opposite direction.

505.1. 5.2 Where multiple addresses are required at a single driveway, they shall be mounted on a single post. (d) Where a roadway provides access solely to a single commercial or industrial business, the address sign shall be placed at the nearest road intersection providing access to that site.

Add a new subsection 507.1.1 to read as follows:

507.1.1 Emergency water during construction. The emergency water system shall be available on-site prior to combustible construction. Required fire hydrants shall be accepted by the City of Sonoma and conform to City of Sonoma Standard Plan 501.

Amend subsection 507.5 to read as follows:

507.5 Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.8. 

Amend subsection 507.5.1 by deleting the subsection and exception and replacing it to read as follows:

507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 150 feet (45.179 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.

Add a new subsection 507.5.7 to read as follows:

507.5.7 Fire hydrant size and outlets. Shall be in accordance with City of Sonoma standard plans, or as approved by the fire code official.

Add a new subsection 507.5.8 to read as follows:

507.5.8 Fire hydrant street marker. Fire hydrant locations shall be visually indicated in accordance with the City of Sonoma standards or as approved by the fire code official, as may be amended from time to time. Any hydrant marker damaged or removed during the course of street construction or repair shall be immediately replaced by the contractor, developer or person responsible for removal or damage.

Amend subsection 510.1 to read as follows:

510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in buildings. All buildings, Type-2 winery caves and Type-3 winery caves shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building or winery cave based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction, at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems.

Exceptions:

1. Where approved by the building official and the fire code official, a wired communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 may be permitted to be installed in lieu of an approved radio coverage system.

2. Where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not necessary.

3. In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of that facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency responder radio coverage system.

Amend subsection 901.4.1 by adding subsection 901.4.1.1 to read as follows: 

901.4.1.1 Owner Responsibilities. Where such systems and appliances are required by this or any other code, it shall be the responsibility of the owner that a person or persons familiar with the function and proper operation of such devices be in attendance whenever the premises is occupied.

Add subsection 901.11 to read as follows:

901.11 Notice of Nuisance Alarm. The officer in charge of fire units responding to a fire alarm signal shall determine whether a true emergency exists. If the officer determines that an emergency does not exist, the chief of the local fire agency or his/her authorized representative may issue a written notice of nuisance alarm to the owner or person in charge or control of the facility where the alarm signal originated.

Add subsection 901.12 to read as follows:

901.12 Unreliable Fire Alarm Systems. The fire chief of the local fire agency or his/her authorized representative may determine that a fire alarm system is unreliable upon receipt of more than four (4) nuisance alarms within a twelve (12) month period. Upon finding that an alarm system is unreliable, the fire chief of the local fire agency or his/her authorized representative may order the following:

1. For any nuisance alarm where the system is not restored, the fire chief may require the system owner to provide standby personnel as defined by Section 901.7 or take such other measures, as the fire chief deems appropriate. Persons or activities required by the fire chief shall remain in place until a fire department approved fire alarm maintenance firm certifies in writing to the fire chief that the alarm system has been restored to a reliable condition. The fire chief may require such tests, as he deems necessary to demonstrate the adequacy of the system.

2. Upon the fifth (5th) and sixth (6th) nuisance alarms from the alarm system within a twelve- (12) month period, the system owner shall pay a mitigation fee to the fire department of $150.00, plus the cost of fire engine response, for each occurrence.

3. Upon the seventh (7th) and eighth (8th) nuisance alarms from the alarm system within a twelve- (12) month period, the system owner shall pay a mitigation fee to the fire department of $300.00, plus the cost of fire engine response for each occurrence. 

4. Upon the ninth (9th) and following nuisance alarms from the alarm system within a twelve- (12) month period, the system owner shall pay a mitigation fee to the fire department of $500.00, plus the cost of fire engine response, for each occurrence. 

Amend subsection 903.2 by deleting subsections 903.2 through 903.2.11.3 and replacing to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all new buildings, factory-built housing, manufactured homes and mobile homes for which a building permit is required and in existing buildings upon a remodel or addition to a building. 

Exceptions:

1. Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies.

2. Detached structures used exclusively as a Group U Occupancy.

3. Shipping containers used as a Group S, Division 2 Occupancy.

4. Unless otherwise required in by other sections of the code, a sprinkler system shall not be required when all of the following are met:

a. The addition of floor area to a building results in a total floor area for the building of less than 4,000 square feet or the addition is less than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area of the building; and 

b. The cumulative total building permit valuation for all building permits issued for the subject building within any 36 month period, as determined by the building official, is equal to or less than $100,000 for buildings containing residential uses or occupancies and equal to or less than $150,000 for all other occupancies. 

5. In an existing multiple-tenant building that requires a fire sprinkler system, the fire chief has the authority to modify the fire sprinkler requirements when the intended use does not create any increase in fire danger and the cost of installing a complete fire sprinkler system throughout the entire building creates an unreasonable financial hardship, as determined by the fire chief.

[NOTE: Subsection numbers 903.2.1 through 903.2.11.3 are not used due to local amendments.]

Amend subsection 903.3.7 to read as follows:

903.3.7 Fire department connections. The location of fire department connections shall be approved by the fire code official. Fire department hose connections for fire suppression systems and standpipes shall be provided with approved vandal-resistant caps.

Amend subsection 903.4.2 to read as follows: 

903.4.2 Alarms. At least one exterior approved audible device activated by the water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system shall be connected to every automatic fire alarm system in an approved location, and approved audible devices shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system for the purpose of occupant notification. Actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system in all normally occupied areas for the purpose of occupant notification. If the building contains sleeping rooms, the interior alarm shall be located in or adjacent to one or more of these rooms. Otherwise, the interior alarm should be placed at a constantly attended location, or as a secondary alternative, the alarm shall be located where people are likely to be present whenever the building is occupied.

Amend subsection 904.12 to read as follows:

904.12 Commercial cooking systems. Commercial cooking equipment that produce grease laden vapors shall be provided with a Type I Hood, in accordance with the California Mechanical Code, NFPA 96, and an automatic fire extinguishing system that is listed and labeled for its intended use as follows:

1. Wet chemical extinguishing system, complying with UL 300.

2. Carbon dioxide extinguishing system.

3. Automatic fire sprinkler systems.

All existing dry chemical and wet chemical extinguishing systems shall comply with UL 300.

Exception: Public school kitchens, without deep-fat fryers, shall be upgraded to a UL 300 compliant system during state-funded modernization projects that are under the jurisdiction of the Division of the State Architect.

All systems shall be installed in accordance with the California Mechanical Code, NFPA 96, appropriate adopted standards, their listing and the manufacturers’ installation instructions.

Exception: Factory-built commercial cooking recirculating systems that are tested, listed, labeled and installed in accordance with UL 710B and the California Mechanical Code and NFPA 96.

Amend subsection 905.3.1 to read as follows:

905.3.1 Height. In other than R-3 and R-3.1 occupancies, Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout at each floor level where any of the following occur:

1. Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

2. Buildings that are three or more stories in height.

3. Buildings where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet below the highest level of fire department vehicle access.

4. Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of fire department vehicle access.

5. On the roof of buildings three or more stories in height.

Exceptions: 

1. Class I standpipes are allowed in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2. Class I manual standpipes are allowed in open parking garages where the highest floor is located not more than 150 feet (45 720 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

3. Class I manual dry standpipes are allowed in open parking garages that are subject to freezing temperatures, provided that the hose connections are located as required for Class II standpipes in accordance with Section 905.5.

4. Class I standpipes are allowed in basements equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

5. In determining the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, it shall not be required to consider:

5.1 Recessed loading docks for four vehicles or less, and

5.2 Conditions where topography makes access from the fire department vehicle to the building impractical or impossible.

Amend subsection 3101.1 to read as follows:

3101.1 Scope. Tents, umbrella structures, temporary stage canopies and membrane structures shall comply with this chapter. The provisions of Section 3103 are applicable only to temporary tents, umbrella structures, and membrane structures. The provisions of Section 3104 are applicable to temporary and permanent tents, umbrella structures, and membrane structures. Other temporary structures shall comply with the California Building Code.

These building standards govern the use of tents, umbrella structures, awnings or other fabric enclosures, including membrane (air-supported and air-inflated) structures and places of assemblage, in or under which 10 or more persons may gather for any lawful purpose.

Exceptions:

1. Tents, umbrella structures, awnings or other fabric enclosures used to cover or enclose private swimming pools and similar facilities on the premises of private one- and two-family dwellings.

2. Tents used to conduct committal services on the grounds of a cemetery.

3. Tents, umbrella structures, awnings or other fabric enclosures erected and used within a sound stage, or other similar structural enclosure which is equipped with an overhead automatic sprinkler system.

4. Tensioned membrane roof materials supported by ridged frames or installed on a mast and cable system provided such structures conform to the requirements of one of the types of construction as described in these regulations.

5. Fabric structures which are part of mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or commercial coaches governed by the provisions of Division 13, Part 2, Health and Safety Code (Department of Housing and Community Development).

Amend subsection 3102.1 by adding the following term after the term “TENT”:

UMBRELLA STRUCTURE

Add new subsection 3314.3 to read as follows:

3314.3 Where required. In buildings of combustible construction required to have automatic sprinkler system by Section 903, automatic sprinkler system shall be installed prior to construction exceeding 40 feet (12,192 mm) in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. Such automatic sprinkler system shall be extended as construction progresses to within one floor of the highest point of construction having secured decking or flooring.

Add new subsection 3314.4 to read as follows:

3314.4 Buildings being demolished. Where a building is being demolished and a sprinkler system exists within such a building, such sprinkler system shall be maintained in an operable condition so as to be available for use by the fire department. Such sprinkler system may be demolished with the building but shall not be demolished more than one floor below the floor being demolished.

Add subsection 5001.5.3 to read as follows:

5001.5.3 Electronic Reporting. All Hazardous Material Management Plans (HMMP) and Hazardous Material Inventory Statements (HMIS) shall be submitted electronically as approved by the fire code official.

Add subsection 5704.1.1 to read as follows:

5704.1.1 Tanks Storage prohibited. No existing aboveground tanks for the storage of Class I and Class II liquids outside of buildings (except LPG-Propane) shall be permitted on mercantile, residential, and other congested parcels. Existing tanks on such parcels shall be removed within one (1) year after written notice from the fire code official.

Add subsection 5704.1.2 to read as follows:

5704.1.2 Tank Storage – Other locations. New aboveground tanks for storage of Class I and II liquids on parcels not covered under Section 5704.1.2 shall be enclosed in a flammable liquid storage vault constructed in accordance with the standards of the fire department. Existing tanks on such parcels shall conform to new within one (1) year after written notice from the fire code official.

Add subsection 5704.1.3 to read as follows:

5704.1.3 Existing Tank Storage. Existing tank storage shall meet the requirements of new tank installations within one year of notice from the fire code official.

Add subsection 6107.5 to read as follows:

6107.5 Seismic Anchoring. An approved seismic anchoring system shall be installed on all permanently installed propane/LPG gas containers. 

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 Section 5.1.1.2 to read as follows: 

5.1.1.2. A supply of at least three sprinklers shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by adding Section 5.1.1.2.1 to read as follows: 

5.1.1.2.1. The sprinklers shall correspond to the types and temperature ratings of the sprinklers in the property. The stock sprinklers shall include not less than one sprinkler of all types and ratings installed.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by adding Section 5.1.1.2.2 to read as follows:

5.1.1.2.2. The sprinklers shall be kept in a cabinet located where the temperature to which they are subjected will at no time exceed the maximum ceiling temperatures specified in Table 5.1.1.6.1 for each of the sprinklers within the cabinet.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by adding Section 5.1.1.2.3 to read as follows:

5.1.1.2.3. One sprinkler wrench as specified by the sprinkler manufacture shall be provided in the cabinet for each type of sprinkler installed to be used for the removal and installation of sprinklers in the system.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by revising Section 7.6 to read as follows:

7.6 A local waterflow alarm shall be provided on all sprinkler systems.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by adding Section 8.1.2.1 to read as follows:

8.1.2.1 Garages are permitted to be protected by residential sprinklers.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by revising Section 8.3.4 to read as follows:

8.3.4 Sprinklers shall not be required in detached garages, open attached porches, detached carports, and similar structures unless otherwise required by the California Building or Fire Codes.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by adding Section 8.3.5.2 to read as follows:

8.3.5.2 At least one quick-response intermediate temperature residential sprinkler shall be installed above attic access openings.

Amend Chapter 80 – Referenced Standard NFPA 13D-16 by revising Section 11.2.1.1 to read as follows:

11.2.1.1 Where a fire department pumper connection is not provided, the system shall be hydrostatically tested at not less than 200 psi without evidence of leakage.

Amend Appendix B, subsection B101.1 to read as follows:

B101.1 Scope. The procedure for determining fire-flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be in accordance with this appendix. This appendix does not apply to structures other than buildings. Design and construction shall be in accordance with the following sections unless otherwise authorized by the fire code official in accordance with 104.9 Alternative Materials and methods.

Amend the definition of FIRE-FLOW in Appendix B, subsection B102.1 to read as follows:

FIRE-FLOW. The flow rate of a water supply, measured at 20 pounds per square inch (psi) (138 kPa) residual pressure, measured in the water main in the vicinity of the flowing hydrant, that is available for fire fighting.

Amend the definition of FIRE-FLOW CALCULATION AREA in Appendix B, subsection B102.1 to read as follows:

FIRE-FLOW CALCULATION AREA. The floor area, in square feet, used to determine the required fire flow. The fire-flow calculation area or floor area shall be the total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls that are under the horizontal projection of the roof, except as modified in Section B 104.3.

Amend Appendix B, subsection B105.1 to read as follows:

B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area which does not exceed 3,600 square feet (344.5 m2) shall be 1500 gallons per minute (3785.4 L/min). Fire-flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area in excess of 3,600 square feet (344.5 m2) shall not be less than that specified in Table B 105.1.

Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent, as approved, may be allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system

Amend Appendix B, subsection B105.2 to read as follows:

B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one-and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1.

Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent, as approved, may be allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 2,000 gallons per minute (5678 l/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B 105.1.

Amend Appendix B, Table B105.1 by deleting footnote a).

Amend Appendix C, subsection C102 to read as follows:

C102.1 Fire Hydrant Locations. Where fire hydrants are required, fire hydrants shall be provided along required fire apparatus access roads and adjacent public streets, and a fire hydrant shall be located within 50 feet of the Fire Department Connection (FDC), or as approved by the fire code official.

Amend Appendix D, Section D101 to read as follows:

D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with this appendix as amended and all other applicable requirements of the International Fire Code. This section applies to residential and commercial developments. Design and construction shall be in accordance with the following sections unless otherwise authorized by the fire code official, in accordance with 104.9 Alternative Materials and methods.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D103.1 to read as follows:

D103.1 Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be determined by the fire code official.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D103.2 to read as follows:

D103.2 Grade. The grade of fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with the local agency requirement for public streets or as approved by the fire code official.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D103.3 to read as follows:

D103.3 Turning radius. The minimum turning radius shall be determined by the fire code official.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D103.4 to read as follows:

D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45 720 mm) shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with the local agency requirements for public streets or as approved by the fire code official.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D103.4 by deleting Table D103.4.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D103.6 to read as follows:

D103.6 Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING-FIRE LANE signs complying with C.V.C. (California Vehicle Code).

Amend Appendix D, subsection D104.2 to read as follows:

(The exception to D104.2 is deleted)

Amend Appendix D, subsection D106.1 to read as follows:

D106.1 Projects having more than 50 dwelling units. Multiple-family residential projects having more than 50 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

(The exception to D106.1 is deleted)

Amend Appendix D subsection D106 by deleting subsection D106.2.

Add Appendix D subsection D106.4 to read as follows:

Multi-residential projects having more than 50 dwelling units. Hotels, motels, condominiums, apartments, townhouses and similar multi-residential projects having more than 50 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Amend Appendix D, subsection D107.1 to read as follows:

D107.1 One- or two-family dwelling residential developments. Developments of one- and two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds 50 shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the requirements of section D104.3.

(The exceptions to D107.1 are deleted.) (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.050 2016 California Green Building Standards Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express finding of necessity No. 1 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 11 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Green Building Standards Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is further amended as follows:

Adopt by reference and add Appendix Chapter A4 (Residential Voluntary Measures) and Appendix Chapter A5 (Nonresidential Voluntary Measures) of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code appendices.

Amend Section 301.1 to read as follows:

301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building measures specified as mandatory in Chapters 4 and 5 of this code, as applicable. Newly constructed buildings shall also be designed to include the prerequisite and applicable elective measures to achieve Tier 1 status as prescribed in Appendix A4 and A5 of this code, as applicable, except that the energy efficiency measures set forth in Appendix A4 Division A4.2 and Appendix A5 and Division A5.2 need not be met. Additions and alterations shall meet the requirements of Section 301 but shall not be required to meet Tier 1 status as prescribed in Appendix A4 or A5 of this code, as otherwise applicable. The building official shall develop CALGreen application checklists to be included in the design and used for construction of structures covered by this code. All buildings subject to the requirements of this code shall meet all applicable requirements of the California Energy Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6).

Amend the title and explanatory note of Appendix A4 to read as follows:

Appendix A4

Supplementary Residential Mandatory and Elective Measures

The measures contained herein that are necessary to achieve Tier 1 status shall be mandatory pursuant to Section 301.1 of this code.

Amend Appendix Section A4.201.1 to read as follows:

A4.201.1 Scope. For the purposes of meeting mandatory Tier 1 status pursuant to Section 301.1 of this code, compliance with the provisions contained in this Appendix A4 Division A4.2 need not be met. The provisions contained in this Appendix A4 Division A4.2 are entirely voluntary and are intended only as a means to encourage buildings to achieve exemplary performance in the area of energy efficiency. 

Amend Item 2 in Appendix Section A4.601.4.2 to read as follows:

2. From Division A4.2, Energy Efficiency.

2.1. No requirements for this division.

Amend the note in the last paragraph of Appendix Section A4.601.4.2 to read as follows:

Note: Checklists developed by the building official may be used to show which elective measures are selected. The building official may require the use of a specific form or checklist developed by the building official to show compliance with the provisions of Appendix A4.

Delete Appendix Section A4.602 (Residential Occupancies Application Checklist) in its entirety.

Delete Appendix Division A4.7 (Residential Model Ordinance) in its entirety.

Amend the title and explanatory note of Appendix A5 to read as follows:

Appendix A5

Supplementary Nonresidential Mandatory and Elective Measures

The measures contained herein that are necessary to achieve Tier 1 status shall be mandatory pursuant to Section 301.1 of this code.

Amend Appendix Section A5.201.1 to read as follows:

A5.201.1 Scope. For the purposes of meeting mandatory Tier 1 status pursuant to Section 301.1 of this code, compliance with the provisions contained in this Appendix A5 Division A5.2 need not be met. The provisions contained in this Appendix A5 Division A5.2 are entirely voluntary and are intended only as a means to encourage buildings to achieve exemplary performance in the area of energy efficiency.

Amend the first paragraph in Appendix Section A5.601.2.3 to read as follows:

A5.601.2.3 Tier 1. For the purposes of meeting mandatory Tier 1 status pursuant to Section 301.1 of this code, compliance with the provisions contained in Sections A5.203.1.1 and Section A5.203.1.2.1 need not be met. The provisions of those sections are entirely voluntary and are intended only as a means to encourage buildings to achieve exemplary performance in the area of energy efficiency. 

Amend the first paragraph in Appendix Section A5.601.2.4 to read as follows:

A5.601.2.4 Measures for Tier 1. In addition to the provisions of Section A5.601.2.1 above, compliance with the following measures from Appendix A5 is required for Tier 1. 

Delete Appendix Section A5.602 (Nonresidential Occupancies Application Checklist) in its entirety. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.055 2016 California Existing Building Code amendments.

A. Based upon the express finding of necessity No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 1110 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Existing Building Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is further amended as follows:

Delete subsection 407.1.1 and amend Section 407.1 to read as follows:

407.1 Conformance. No change shall be made in the use, character of use, occupancy or occupancy classification of any building unless such building is made to comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code for the new use or occupancy. Subject to the approval of the building official, the use or occupancy of existing buildings shall be permitted to be changed and the building may be occupied for purposes in other groups or occupancy classifications without conforming to all of the requirements of this code for those uses, groups or occupancy classifications, provided the new or proposed use complies with the energy and accessibility requirements of the California Building Standards Code for the intended use and provided further that the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use.

Exception: The building need not be made to comply with the seismic requirements for a new structure unless required by Section 407.4.

B. Based upon the express finding of necessity No. 2 set forth in SMC 14.10.005, Part 10 of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, known as the California Existing Building Code, as adopted by SMC 14.10.015, is amended as follows:

Adopt by reference and add the following 2016 California Existing Building Code appendices:

1. Appendix Chapter A1 – Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings.

2. Appendix Chapter A3 – Prescriptive Provisions for Seismic Strengthening of Cripple Walls and Sill Plate Anchorage of Light Wood-Frame Residential Buildings.

3. Appendix Chapter A4 – Earthquake Risk Reduction in Wood-Frame Residential Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open Front Walls. 

Amend the first sentence in Appendix Chapter A3 Section A301.2 to read as follows:

A301.2 Scope. The provisions of this chapter are voluntary and may be applied to residential light-frame wood construction containing one or more of the structural weaknesses specified in Section A303.

Amend the first sentence in Appendix Chapter A4 Section A403.2 to read as follows:

A401.2 Scope. The provisions of this chapter are voluntary and may be applied to all existing Occupancy Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of wood construction, or portions thereof, where the structure has a soft, weak or open-front wall line and there exists one or more stories above.

(Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.060 Board of appeals.

The city council is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official or the fire chief relative to the application and interpretation of the construction codes adopted by the city council. The procedure for appeals shall be that established in SMC 14.10.010. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.065 Modification of fee schedules.

The construction codes adopted in this chapter are modified by the suspension of the operation of any fee schedules contained therein whenever the city council has by ordinance or resolution adopted a different schedule or schedules. It is the intention of the city council that it shall, for administrative convenience, adopt from time to time resolutions containing fee schedules for the granting of permits under the codes adopted in this chapter and for the administration thereof. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


14.10.070 Enforcement authority.

Unless otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council, the building official of the city is the enforcement officer for all provisions of the technical codes adopted herein except that the fire chief of the city shall be the enforcement officer for all provisions of the California Fire Code and amendments thereto and all building standards adopted by and subject to the enforcement authority of the California State Fire Marshal and published in the State Building Standards Code relating to fire and panic safety and other regulations of the State Fire Marshal. (Ord. 08-2016 § 1, 2016).


Chapter 14.14       UNIFORM BUILDING CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 99-6)


Chapter 14.20 EXCAVATIONS, GRADING AND FILLS

Sections:

14.20.005    Purpose and scope.

14.20.010    Authority.

14.20.020    Definitions.

14.20.025    Permits required.

14.20.030    Fees.

14.20.035    Application contents.

14.20.040    Issuance of permit – Prerequisites.

14.20.045    Bonds.

14.20.050    Permit commencement, duration and expiration.

14.20.100    Excavating, grading and filling requirements.

14.20.200    Erosion and sediment control regulations – Intent.

14.20.205    Erosion and sediment control plans.

14.20.210    Design criteria for erosion and sediment control plans.

14.20.300    Inspection.

14.20.305    Completion of work.

14.20.310    Enforcement – Stop work order and revocation of permit.

14.20.315    Violation – Enforcement.

14.20.320    Violation – Procedure for enforcement.

14.20.325    Violation – Additional remedy.


14.20.005 Purpose and scope.

A. Purpose. It is in the public interest, and it is necessary for the promotion and protection of the public safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, general welfare and the protection of the city’s natural resources, to establish minimum requirements for grading on public or private property in order to preserve and enhance the natural beauty of the land, streams and creek banks; and reduce or eliminate the hazards of earthslides, mud flows, rock falls, undue settlement, erosion, siltation and flooding. 

B. Scope. This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedures for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading activities. Any grading activity, whether or not a permit is required, is subject to erosion and sediment control regulations as provided for in SMC 14.20.205. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.010 Authority.

The public works director, or his/her designee, has authority for administering and carrying out the provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.020 Definitions.

The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

“As-graded” means the actual surface conditions present on completion of grading.

“Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed, or within a cut or fill slope.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” are construction site controls used to protect water quality.

“Certification” means a written engineering or geologist opinion concerning the progress and completion of the work.

“City engineer” means the city engineer of the city or his/her authorized representative.

“Clearing” is any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.

“Compaction” is the densification of earth material by mechanical means.

“Contour rounding” means the rounding of cut and fill slopes in the horizontal plane to blend with existing contours or to provide horizontal variation, to eliminate the artificial appearance of slopes.

“Drainage channel or course” means a natural or artificial channel or depression of the ground that, due to its topology, periodically or continuously contains flowing stormwater on its surface, including, but not limited to, slopes, swales, ditches, channels, creeks, streams, rivers and similar waterways that carry stormwater.

“Drip line” means a line extending around a tree directly underneath the outermost branches of the tree.

“Earth material” is any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.

“Engineered grading” means grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards or with cuts or fills with any part greater than four feet in cross sectional height or depth or when otherwise designated as such by the city engineer when he/she deems necessary due to hydraulic, geologic or other site conditions or factors.

“Engineering geologist” means a professional engineering geologist registered by the state to practice in the field of engineering geology.

“Erosion and sediment control plan” is a set of plans and/or specifications prepared by, or under the direction of, a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control erosion and sedimentation on a development site during and after construction. 

“Erosion control” is a measure that prevents erosion or the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice.

“Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

“Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

“Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface. “Existing grade” is the grade prior to grading; “rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan; and “finish grade” is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

“Grading” means any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

“Grading inspector” means the city representative authorized to inspect grading activities, as designated by the public works director.

“Key” means the designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

“Permittee” is the person who is issued the permit. The permittee may also be the applicant but under all circumstances must either be the owner or an authorized representative of the owner of the property where the grading is being done.

“Phasing” is clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.

“Public works director” means the director of the city of Sonoma public works department. 

“Rainy season” means that period of time when rains begin or October 15, whichever comes first, and ending on the following April 15 or when rains cease, whichever occurs last. 

“Sediment control measures” are measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a construction site.

“Sensitive area” refers to the limits of impervious area that will be located less than 200 feet away from a natural water quality resource including a wetland, stream, pond, spring or river.

“Site” is a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof.

“Soils engineer” means a civil engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soil engineering.

“Start of construction” is the first land-disturbing activity associated with a work of improvement, including clearing and grading. 

“Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

“Variable slope” means the variation in steepness of a cut or fill slope in either a combination of the horizontal or vertical plans of the slope. (Ord. 05-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.025 Permits required.

No person, firm or corporation shall perform any grading without first having obtained a written grading permit from the building official or his/her designee. The exceptions outlined in this section shall not apply to grading within or immediately adjacent to drainage channels or courses.

A. Exceptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:

1. Excavations below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall, swimming pool, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This subsection shall not exempt from permit requirements any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure;

2. Cemetery graves;

3. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations;

4. Excavations for wells or underground storage tanks no greater than 10,000 gallons in size when work is being done under the authority of a valid county well permit or city building permit;

5. Excavation for utilities when performed by a public utility;

6. Stockpiling of dirt, rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay of 50 cubic yards or less for a period of 60 days or less; provided, that the stockpile does not obstruct a drainage course or alter the drainage of neighboring properties;

7. Exploratory excavations of 50 cubic yards or less under the direction of a soils engineer or engineering geologist;

8. An excavation of 50 cubic yards or less which is:

a. Less than two feet in depth at any given point; or

b. Does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical;

c. Outside of the special flood hazard area and does not obstruct a drainage course or alter the drainage of neighboring properties. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.030 Fees.1

A. Plan Check Fee. Before accepting a set of plans and specifications for checking, a plan check fee or deposit shall be paid by the applicant. 

B. Grading Permit Fee. A grading permit fee shall be paid by the applicant prior to issuance of a grading permit. 

C. Fees set forth in this section shall be established and may, from time to time, be amended by city council resolution. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.035 Application contents.

A. Applications for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans 24 inches by 36 inches in size prepared at a scale of no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet or at another scale acceptable to the city engineer. 

1. Title page shall identify owner’s name, owner’s mailing address, owner’s phone number, site address, assessor’s parcel number, planning application number (if any), cubic yards of cut and cubic yards of fill.

2. A vicinity sketch showing roads, adjoining subdivisions and other data to adequately indicate the site location and show its relation to the community.

3. Property lines of the property on which the work is to be performed. The widths, location and identity of all easements.

4. Location of any buildings, structures, drainage devices or public improvements within 50 feet of the proposed grading work.

5. Date, north arrow, scale and accurate contours showing the topography of the existing ground of the proposed site and at least 50 feet beyond its boundary. Indicate source and date of existing contours. Show all drainage courses, channels and creeks.

6. Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and slopes of all proposed grading shown by contours and/or other means. Contours shall be shown at intervals of not greater than five feet, and of not greater than two feet if slope of land is less than ten percent.

7. Details of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as part of, the proposed work.

8. A statement indicating the approximate amount and location of any material to be imported from or exported to areas other than that shown on the plans. Proof of permit to dispose of material to another site outside of the city may be required at the discretion of the public works director.

9. Type, circumference and drip line of existing trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or more, measured 24 inches above existing grade. Any trees or vegetation proposed to be removed shall be so indicated including protective fencing as required.

10. Estimated schedule of the grading work.

11. Specify if the property is located in a special flood hazard area as defined in Chapter 14.25 SMC.

12. Erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with SMC 14.20.205.

B. Additional Application Requirements for Engineered Grading. In addition to meeting the requirements under subsection (A) of this section, projects defined as engineered grading shall also contain the following documentation:

1. A map prepared by a civil engineer showing the location of all areas subject to stormwater runoff to and from the site and adjacent areas. A complete hydraulic analysis including the location, width, direction and quantity of flow of each watercourse shall accompany the map.

2. A soils engineering report prepared by a soils engineer, including data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions, and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria.

3. A geologist report, prepared by an engineering geologist, including an adequate description of the geology of the site and conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed work.

4. A letter from a soils engineer or engineering geologist verifying that he/she has been employed by the applicant and agrees to provide inspection, furnish as-built grading plans and submit final approval statement in accordance with this chapter.

5. The erosion and sediment control plan as provided for in SMC 14.20.205 shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall include the placement of structural and nonstructural stormwater pollution prevention controls that prevent erosion during construction and post construction. Erosion and sediment control plans for large-scale projects or when directed by the city engineer in sensitive areas shall be prepared by a certified erosion control specialist.

C. The city engineer, at his/her sole discretion, may allow waivers or deviations from the requirements specified in this section, depending on the site-specific conditions and the complexity of the work. Specific waivers or deviations from these requirements shall be made by written request by the applicant to the city engineer prior to submittal of the plans and specifications. (Ord. 05-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.040 Issuance of permit – Prerequisites.

A. No grading permit shall be issued until all required data has been approved by the planning director for conformance with CEQA, project entitlements, conditions of approval and/or zoning codes.

B. No grading permit shall be issued until all required plans and required documentation have been approved by the city engineer and all required fees have been paid.

C. In addition to the requirements of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, no grading permit shall be issued for a subdivision until:

1. All required grading bonds, subdivision improvement agreements and deeds (if applicable) have been received and approved; and 

2. The planning commission and/or city council has approved the tentative map. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.045 Bonds.

A. Posting of Bond Required. A grading permit shall not be issued for a subdivision of five lots or more or for engineered grading unless the applicant has posted a bond executed by the applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state as a surety in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of corrective work necessary to clean up and remove all debris, to eliminate all hazards or to return the land to its natural condition as much as is possible should the project be abandoned and to ensure the installation of erosion control measures in accordance with an approved erosion and sediment control plan. The bond amount shall be based upon an engineer’s cost estimate furnished by the applicant and approved by the city engineer. In lieu of a surety bond, the city may consider at the discretion of city engineer and city attorney cash bond, certificate of deposit, or instrument of credit in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. Every bond or other surety shall:

1. Comply with all of the provisions of the applicable laws, ordinances and requirements of the city attorney; and

2. Comply with all terms and conditions of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the public works director; and

3. Include conditions that the applicant shall complete all of the work under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. The public works director may, for sufficient cause, extend the time specified in the permit, but no such extension shall release the surety.

B. Term. The term of each bond shall begin upon the date of issuance of the grading permit and shall remain in effect until released by the public works director upon acceptance of completed grading improvements.

C. Failure to Complete Work. In the event of failure to complete the work and failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the public works director may order the work required by the permit to be completed to his/her satisfaction. The surety executing such bond or deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the governing agency in causing any and all such required work to be done. If the work is not completed within the time period specified in SMC 14.20.050, the permittee shall be deemed to have abandoned the project and the public works director may, in his/her discretion, order the land to be returned as much as possible to its natural condition and the surety shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the governing agency in causing such restoration work to be done. In the case of cash deposit, said deposit or any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee in whatever amount is not necessary to complete the work described. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.050 Permit commencement, duration and expiration.

The grading permit under this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:

A. Commencement. Grading, erosion control and sediment control work may commence upon issuance of the grading permit by the public works director. During the rainy season, as defined in SMC 14.20.020, grading work may not commence or recommence if erosion and sediment control measures required by SMC 14.20.205 have not been installed, implemented and maintained on the site to the satisfaction of the public works director or his/her representative. Regardless of whether a grading permit has been issued, grading shall not commence or recommence within an area that is adjacent to and/or within 50 feet of a drainage channel or course during the rainy season without specific written authorization from the public works director.

B. Duration and Expiration. If the work authorized by any grading permit under this chapter is not commenced within 180 days of the date of issuance, or as otherwise indicated on the permit, or if the work is not completed within one year of the date of issuance, or sooner if indicated on the permit, the permit shall expire and become null and void. Any permittee holding an unexpired grading permit may apply for a one-time extension of the time within which grading must be completed and approved. The public works director may extend the expiration date of the permit for a period not exceeding 180 days. (Ord. 05-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.100 Excavating, grading and filling requirements.

A. General. The following shall apply to all grading work covered by a grading permit:

1. One copy of the approved plans and approved revisions thereof, the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, and grading permit shall be kept on the site at all times during the progress of the grading and shall be made available during inspections.

2. All grading and noise therefrom, including but not limited to, warming of equipment motors, shall be subject to the city’s noise regulations and limited to the hours stated in Chapter 9.56 SMC.

3. All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated, transported or stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected, covered or contained in such a manner as to prevent any nuisance from dust, sediment, site runoff, or spillage onto adjoining property or streets. Best management practices in accordance with SMC 14.20.205 shall be incorporated in the grading activities.

4. No grading shall be conducted so as to encroach upon or alter the established gradient and riparian habitat of drainage courses except when a valid permit and other necessary approvals are obtained from the appropriate state and federal authorities and the necessary environmental review and approvals are received.

5. Whenever any portion of the work requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permittee shall obtain a right of entry from the adjacent property owner in a form acceptable to the city attorney.

6. Grading shall be designed so that lot lines are at the top of slope and with adequate property line setback from the slope to provide for required vertical slope rounding. The tops and toes of cut lines and structures shall be designed to provide for:

a. Safety of adjacent property; and

b. Safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic; and 

c. Required slope rounding for adequate foundation support; and

d. Required swales, berms and drainage facilities; and

e. Sufficient setbacks to meet applicable zoning requirements. 

7. The permittee and the grading contractor shall be responsible for the protection of adjacent properties during grading operations. Prior to commencing any grading of the site, the exterior boundaries shall be marked or staked as required by the grading inspector. Boundary markers shall be maintained throughout the grading operation. Temporary barriers and/or protective fencing shall be used when necessary to protect trees and adjacent properties.

8. Soil stabilization is required for all graded areas. Slopes, both cut and fill, shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

9. Slopes, both cut and fill, shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), unless special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, would cause the strict application of the standard to deprive such property of reasonable use. If these conditions exist, a geological and engineering analysis shall verify that steeper slopes are safe and appropriate erosion control measures are specified.

10. Cut and fill slopes shall be contour-rounded unless the city engineer finds special circumstances applicable to the property that would require deviation from this requirement.

11. Variable slopes shall be used to mitigate environmental and visual impacts of grading unless the city engineer finds special circumstances applicable to the property that would require deviation from this requirement.

12. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot vertical intervals, subject to maximum height limitations, to control surface drainage and debris on cut or fill slopes. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. 

13. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practical drainage way approved by the city and/or the Sonoma County water agency and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters after all applicable on-site stormwater runoff management, detention, and/or infiltration requirements have been met. If drainage facilities discharge on natural ground, riprap, energy dissipaters or other devices approved by the city engineer shall be constructed. 

14. All building sites shall be graded and sloped away from the building foundation with a minimum slope of two percent for a distance of 10 feet on all sides of every building. If physical obstructions or lot lines prohibit 10 feet of horizontal distance, a five percent slope shall be provided to an alternative method of diverting water away from the foundation as approved by the city engineer. Swales used for this purpose shall be sloped a minimum of two percent where located within 10 feet of the building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet of the building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of two percent away from the building. Lot surface drainage shall be directed toward approved drainage facilities at a minimum gradient of one-half percent and shall not cross property lines without the appropriate drainage facilities and/or easement.

15. No cut or fill may intrude closer than the drip line of any tree to be retained on the site unless otherwise recommended, in writing, by an arborist and approved by the city engineer.

B. Fills. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils report, fills shall conform to the following provisions:

1. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, then scarifying surface to provide a bond with new fill.

2. Fill on slopes steeper than five horizontal to one vertical (20 percent) and higher than five feet shall require benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. Bench shall be a minimum width of 10 feet. The area beyond the top of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or an approved drainage facility provided.

3. When fill is placed over a cut, the bench under the top of fill shall be at least 10 feet wide and the cut shall be made before placement of the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or engineering geologist as a suitable foundation for fill.

4. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. No rocks or similar irreducible material with a minimum dimension greater than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in fills. The city engineer may permit placement of larger rock only upon receipt and approval of a method of placement prepared by a soils engineer and under his/her direction. The following conditions shall also apply:

a. Rock disposal areas shall be delineated on grading plan.

b. Rock sizes greater than 12 inches in maximum dimension shall be 10 feet or more below finished grade, measured vertically.

c. Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines.

5. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum 90 percent of maximum density. (Ord. 05-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.200 Erosion and sediment control regulations – Intent.

The intent of these erosion and sediment control requirements is to regulate construction activities on public and private property in order to control erosion and sedimentation and to protect stormwater quality. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.205 Erosion and sediment control plans.

A. An erosion and sediment control plan, prepared by a civil engineer or other professional who is qualified to prepare such a plan, shall be submitted as part of every grading permit application and shall delineate measures to appropriately and effectively minimize soil erosion and sedimentation and comply with the design standards and construction site control measures contained in this chapter. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall include the placement of structural and nonstructural stormwater pollution prevention controls that prevent erosion during construction. Erosion control plans for engineered grading projects or when directed by the city engineer in sensitive areas shall be prepared by a certified erosion control specialist. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include all of the following as applicable to the proposed grading activity:

1. A description and delineation of the vegetative measures to be taken to minimize erosion and sedimentation;

2. A description and delineation of the temporary and permanent measures to be taken to protect manufactured or disturbed slopes from erosion by mechanical means, such as with mulches, diversion dikes, etc.;

3. The delineation of the drainage control measures to be taken;

4. The extent and manner of the cutting of trees and the clearing of vegetation, the disposal of same, and the measures to be taken for the protection of undisturbed trees and vegetation;

5. The methods to be used for the disposal of excess materials;

6. The methods to be used for the control of dust;

7. A description and delineation of the temporary and permanent measures to be taken to retain sediment on the site;

8. A description of the measures to be taken and the associated best management practices (BMP) inspection schedule to maintain the devices shown on the plan during grading operations and construction on the site;

9. The extent of disturbed ground that will exist, what streets will be paved, and what drainage devices will be installed prior to the start of each rainy season;

10. Locations of at-grade or above-ground drainage facilities and channels;

11. Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures;

12. A list of applicable permits directly associated with the grading or building activity, including but not limited to the State Water Board’s construction general permit, State Water Board 401 water quality certification, U.S. Army Corps 404 permit, and California Department of Fish and Game 1600 agreement; and

13. Any other information required by the city engineer.

B. Exemptions. An erosion and sediment control plan, as defined in this chapter, shall not be required for construction activities that do not require a grading permit; however, the property owner and contractor shall be subject to applicable best management practices for preventing and controlling erosion, sedimentation, and other stormwater impacts associated with the work, including any BMPs or plan submission requirements in Chapter 13.32 SMC. (Ord. 05-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.210 Design criteria for erosion and sediment control plans.

A. Technical Guidance. Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook, or other handbook authorized for use by the public works director, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to any off-site area. A rationale, including any applicable supporting engineering calculations, should be provided for all BMPs included in the erosion and sediment control plan. 

B. Clearing. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns, as described in the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook, shall be used to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 

C. Grading, erosion and sediment control and waterway crossings. Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook, or other handbook authorized for use by the public works director, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to any off-site area to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 

D. General Housekeeping. The following general site and good housekeeping requirements shall be implemented and are special provisions of any grading permit issued:

1. Sufficient erosion and sediment control supplies shall be available on site during the rainy season to protect areas susceptible to erosion during rain events. Contractors shall be prepared year-round to deploy erosion and sediment treatment control practices.

2. Soil disturbance work shall be conducted during dry weather whenever possible.

3. The contractor shall provide adequate materials management, including covering, securing, and segregating potentially toxic materials (asphalt, herbicides, pesticides, fertilizer, grease, oils, fuel, paints, stains, solvents, wood preservatives, etc.), and providing secondary containment for hazardous materials.

4. The contractor shall provide training and equipment to contain spills of oil and other hazardous materials.

5. Designated concrete washout areas shall be established at least 50 feet away from storm drain inlets or drainage facilities and away from the concrete truck access area so that construction traffic will not drive through wash waters. The wash out area shall have a contained area of sufficient volume to completely contain all liquid and waste concrete material plus a sufficient freeboard for rainwater.

6. Paving operations shall control run on and prevent runoff from areas being paved and be conducted in a manner that properly disposes of wastes. 

7. Sanitary facilities of sufficient number and size to accommodate construction crews shall be located away from storm drain inlets and drainage facilities, and anchored to prevent being blown over or tipped by vandals. The facilities shall be maintained in good working order and emptied at regular intervals by a licensed sanitary waste hauler.

E. Erosion Control Requirements. The following erosion control requirements shall be incorporated in the erosion and sediment control plans:

1. Projects shall be designed to avoid disturbing land in sensitive areas and to preserve existing vegetation wherever possible.

2. Engineered grading operations shall be scheduled during dry months when practical, and shall allow adequate time before rainfall begins to stabilize the soil with erosion control materials.

3. Seeding and mulching shall be done as soon as grading is complete.

4. If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, the vegetative cover shall become established within a time frame approved by the city engineer, or the city engineer may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.

5. Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization.

6. Soil stockpiles must be stabilized and/or securely covered upon forecast of rain.

7. In areas where permanent re-seeding and planting is not established at the close of the construction season, additional control measures shall be used, such as a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination, to ensure soil stabilization at the site.

8. Where runoff needs to be diverted from one area and conveyed to another, earth dikes, drainage swales, slope drains or other suitable practice shall be constructed in accordance with the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook.

9. Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site.

10. Techniques that deliver upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed when determined necessary by the city engineer.

F. Sediment Control Requirements. The following sediment control requirements shall be incorporated in the sediment and erosion control plan:

1. Linear sediment barriers shall be placed below the toe of exposed and erodible slopes, down-slope of exposed soil areas, around soil stockpiles, and at other appropriate locations along the site perimeter.

2. Street sweeping shall be conducted on an as-needed basis to remove sediment from streets and roadways and to prevent the sediment from entering storm drains or receiving waters.

3. Every storm drain inlet with the potential to receive sediment-laden runoff shall be protected in accordance with the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook. Inlet protection shall be inspected and maintained frequently.

4. Sediment basins or sediment traps shall be installed on projects where sediment-laden water may enter the drainage system or watercourses and in association with dikes, temporary channels, and pipes used to convey runoff from disturbed areas.

5. Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with other perimeter controls or other appropriate method, as described in the most recent version of the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook or other manual as approved by the public works director.

G. Waterway and Watercourse Protection Requirements. The following waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall be incorporated in the erosion and sediment control plans and implemented when applicable:

1. A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction.

2. Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work.

3. All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbook.

4. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.

H. Site Access Requirements. The following construction site access requirements shall be incorporated in the erosion and sediment control plans and implemented when applicable:

1. A temporary access road provided at all sites.

2. Other measures, such as track-out prevention devices, or as required by the grading inspector in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains. (Ord. 05-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.300 Inspection.

A. General. All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the grading inspector. The permittee shall notify the grading inspector at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction. 

B. Special Inspection. The city engineer, at his/her discretion, may require inspection and testing by an approved special inspection and/or testing agency to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter at the permittee’s expense. 

C. Inspection Responsibilities for Engineered Grading. 

1. For engineered grading it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He/she shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within his/her area of technical specialty. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor, the city engineer, and the grading inspector. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-built grading plans upon completion of the work.

2. During grading, all required test reports, compaction data and soil engineering and engineering geology reports and recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the grading inspector by the soil engineer and the engineering geologist.

3. The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes and the design of buttress fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist.

4. The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He/she shall report findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

5. The grading inspector shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring approvals and at more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

D. Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this section, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this section or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and the grading inspector. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted.

E. Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.305 Completion of work.

A. Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the city engineer shall require the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto:

1. As-built grading plan, including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities.

2. The grading contractor shall submit a statement that his work was in conformance to the as-built grading plan.



B. Final Reports for Engineered Grading. In addition to meeting the requirements in subsection (A) of this section, the following shall be required for engineered grading:

1. The soil engineer shall submit a statement certifying that, to the best of his/her knowledge, the work within his/her area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved soil engineering report. 

2. The civil engineer shall submit a statement certifying that, to the best of his/her knowledge, the work within his/her area of responsibility was done in accordance with the approved grading plan.

3. A final soils grading report prepared by the soil engineer including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes, made during grading, and their effect on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report.

4. If requested by the city engineer, a final geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist including a final description of the geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of that geology on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.310 Enforcement – Stop work order and revocation of permit.

In the event that any person doing work related to the approved grading permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the approved plans or performs the work in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or the site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the public works director may order the construction stopped by notice in writing, or may suspend or revoke the grading permit. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.315 Violation – Enforcement.

It is a violation for any person to fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter or any resolution adopted in connection with this chapter. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted by any person shall constitute a separate offense. Each offense shall be enforced as either (A) an infraction, or (B) an administrative penalty enforced as set forth in this chapter. The administrative penalties for violating a provision of this chapter shall be $100.00 for the first violation, $200.00 for a second violation of the same code section within the same year, and $300.00 for the third or any subsequent violations of the same code section within the same year. If any person responsible for a violation of this chapter is a minor or incompetent, the parents or guardians of such persons shall be deemed responsible. Each person found responsible for a violation of this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for such violation. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.320 Violation – Procedure for enforcement.

A. On the date of the initial site inspection or observation, the public works director or his/her designee shall make personal contact with the property owner, permittee or contractor at the grading site and serve the property owner, permittee or contractor with an initial notice of the violation. This initial notice shall include (1) the date the property was inspected; (2) the address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred, such as a tax assessor parcel number (A.P.N.); (3) the provision of this chapter or resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter that the person has violated and a description of the violation; (4) a description of the action necessary to correct the violation; (5) a date that sets forth a reasonable time to correct the violation prior to the imposition of the administrative penalties in SMC 14.20.315; and (6) the name, date, and signature of the code enforcement officer that observed the violation. If personal contact cannot be made, the initial notice may be left on the premises, with a copy served by certified mail to the permittee, applicant, property owner, contractor and any other person the public works director or his/her designee determines to be responsible for a violation of this chapter.

B. Where a permittee deemed responsible for a violation of this chapter or resolution adopted in furtherance of this chapter fails to correct the violation within the time set forth in the initial notice, the public works director or his/her designee shall issue a notice and order. Each notice and order shall contain (1) the date of the first inspection when the violation was identified; (2) the address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred, such as a tax assessor parcel number (A.P.N.); (3) the section of this chapter or resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter that the person has violated and a description of how the permittee has violated the section; (4) a description of the action necessary to correct the violation and thereby avoid additional penalties for each day the violation continues; (5) the current amount of the penalty for the code violation(s) calculated from the date of the initial inspection; (6) an explanation of how the penalty shall be paid, the time period in which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty; (7) an order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation(s) described within administrative notice and order; (8) the name, date, and signature of the code enforcement officer; (9) a copy of this chapter; (10) a statement that the person has a right to be heard before an independent hearing officer if a hearing is requested within 15 days of the notice and order being served upon them; (11) a form to request an administrative hearing; and (12) a statement that failure to request an administrative hearing within 15 days of the date of the notice and order shall constitute waiver of the right to a hearing and failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 

C. If a permittee or other responsible person(s) files a timely request for a hearing, the public works director shall work with the city prosecutor to schedule an administrative hearing to be conducted in conformance with Chapter 1.30 SMC.

D. Where a permittee or other responsible person(s) fails to timely request an administrative hearing or the hearing officer issues a decision assessing penalties against a permittee or responsible person(s), those penalties may be collected in conformance with Chapter 1.30 SMC. (Ord. 03-2018 § 4, 2018; Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.20.325 Violation – Additional remedy.

As an additional remedy, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 04-2010 § 1, 2010).1

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 04-2010 added two sections numbered 14.20.025. This section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 14.21 HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 99-6)


Chapter 14.22 GREEN BUILDING

(Repealed by Ord. 09-2010)


Chapter 14.23 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

(Repealed by Ord. 99-6)


Chapter 14.24 REVIEW, REHABILITATION AND ABATEMENT OF EXISTING SEISMICALLY UNSAFE BUILDINGS

Sections:

14.24.005    Findings.

14.24.010    Purpose, scope and application.

14.24.020    Definitions.

14.24.030    Preliminary building department review.

14.24.040    Notice to owner.

14.24.050    Property owner review.

14.24.060    Upgrading design – Requirements for continued use of structure.

14.24.070    Information required on plans.

14.24.080    Implementation schedule and time extensions.

14.24.090    Notification of tenants.

14.24.100    Abatement – Rehabilitation or demolition.

14.24.110    Appeals.

14.24.120    Violation – Penalty.

14.24.130    Severability.


14.24.005 Findings.

The city council finds that in order to best protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Sonoma, seismic upgrading regulations adopted pursuant to the authority provided in California Health and Safety Code Sections 19161 and 19162 should be adopted to reduce the risk of death or injury resulting from earthquake hazards in existing masonry wall or concrete wall buildings in an economically feasible manner, while preserving the historic character of the community. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 1, 2010).


14.24.010 Purpose, scope and application.

A. Purpose. The city has experienced and will continue to experience moderate to great earthquakes in the future due to its proximity to the Rodgers Creek, Hayward, San Andreas and other earthquake faults. Many buildings subject to severe earthquake hazards continue to be a serious threat to the life and safety of people who live and work in the community in the event of an earthquake. The primary goal of this chapter is to provide construction regulations designed to reduce the risk of death or injury resulting from earthquake hazards in existing masonry or concrete buildings in an economically feasible manner, while preserving the historic character of the community.

B. Scope. This chapter provides procedures for the systematic review and reconstruction of existing masonry and concrete wall buildings within the city to improve their safety in the event of an earthquake. 

1. This chapter shall apply to:

a. All buildings or portions of buildings constructed with unreinforced masonry walls;

b. The diaphragms and connections of diaphragms of all buildings constructed of concrete or reinforced masonry walls constructed or being constructed prior to September 24, 1973. Required seismic upgrading of concrete and reinforced masonry buildings may be limited to the review, analysis, design, and upgrading of the diaphragms and diaphragm connections of the building pursuant to SMC 14.24.060(D).

2. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:

a. Public schools;

b. Hospitals;

c. State-owned buildings;

d. Detached one- and two-family dwellings.

This chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems unless such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.

C. Application to Qualified Historical Buildings or Properties. Qualified historical buildings or properties shall be upgraded in accordance with the California Historical Building Code and applicable sections of the regular code. The design and upgrading provisions of the regular code may be used in conjunction with the California Historical Building Code as a method of complying with the minimum requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 2, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section or as otherwise specified in the applicable sections of the California Building Code, the California Existing Building Code, the California Fire Code, the Sonoma Municipal Code and the California Historical Building Code and their appendices thereto, where applicable and as adopted by the city council. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Where definitions vary or conflict, the building official shall determine which definition applies.

A. “Architect” means a person who is licensed to practice architecture in this state.

B. “Qualified historical building or property” shall have the same meaning as defined in the California Historical Building Code.

C. “Engineer” as used in this chapter means any professional, civil or structural engineer who is licensed or registered to practice engineering in this state.

D. “Regular code” shall have the same meaning as defined in the California Historical Building Code.

E. “Upgrading” means all work necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

F. “Unreinforced masonry building” means any building or structure containing walls constructed wholly or partly with unreinforced masonry walls.

G. “Unreinforced masonry wall” shall have the same meaning as defined in Appendix Chapter A1 of the California Existing Building Code. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 3, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.030 Preliminary building department review.

Buildings within the scope of this chapter constructed or being constructed prior to September 24, 1973, shall be subject to a preliminary review by the building official to determine the general structural characteristics, the relative safety of the building, and its general compliance with the structural requirements of the California Existing Building Code, as adopted and amended by the city council. If the structure is determined to so comply with the minimum requirements, it shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. If the building official determines that the structure does not comply, the property owner shall cause the building to be further reviewed in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14.24.050.

A. The scope of the preliminary review by the building official or his authorized representative may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

1. Location by street address and assessor’s parcel number;

2. Type of occupancy and approximate square footage;

3. Type of construction and foundations, and type of material used in construction (where observable);

4. Approximate age of construction; photos of the building exterior; construction drawings (if available);

5. Quality of maintenance, cracks and cleanliness; evidence of leaks, foundation settlement, sagging floors or rusting metal and rotting wood; general deterioration of any other building material used (where observable);

6. Building type and occupancy classification of the structure pursuant to the California Building Code;

7. General adequacy of exiting system;

8. Type and adequacy of wall and parapet anchorage (where observable);

9. Type and likely adequacy of horizontal diaphragms and wall bracing (where observable);

10. Type of interior partitions (where observable).

B. For the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter, the building official may rely on the information provided in subsections (A)(1) through (10) of this section and shall not be required to provide extensive tests in connection with the preliminary review. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 4, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.040 Notice to owner.

A. Notice to Correct Deficiencies. For each building found to not be in compliance with the requirements of SMC 14.24.060, the building official shall prepare a notice to owner to correct deficiencies. The notice to correct deficiencies shall include the following:

1. A statement to the effect that the structure has been reviewed and appears to be of the type which is prone to significant damage, including collapse, in a moderate to major earthquake;

2. The determination of noncompliance with the requirements of SMC 14.24.060;

3. Where applicable, the findings on which the determination that the building or structure does not comply is based;

4. The time schedule for abatement must be commenced and completed;

5. A statement that the property owner shall cause the structure to be further reviewed as provided in SMC 14.24.050;

6. A statement that the owner is required to provide a copy of the notice to correct deficiencies to the tenant or tenants of the structure in accordance with SMC 14.24.090.

B. Recordation. At the time that the aforementioned notice is served, the building official may file with the office of the county recorder a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to review, analyze and upgrade the building in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.050 Property owner review.

Upon notice by the building official to the property owner to correct deficiencies, the property owner shall require an engineer or architect to review and prepare an upgrading design for the subject building or structure within the time limits set forth in SMC 14.24.080. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 5, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.060 Upgrading design – Requirements for continued use of structure.

A. The required upgrading design shall be prepared by a California registered architect, structural engineer or civil engineer specializing in structural work and shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of the California Existing Building Code, including Appendix Chapter A1 or, if applicable, the California Historical Building Code as adopted by the city; 

B. Compliance is required with the fire and exiting requirements of the California Existing Building Code, the California Fire Code and, where applicable, the California Historical Building Code as such codes are amended and adopted by the city council. Requirements concerning egress, corridors, enclosed stairways, fire sprinkler systems, fire separations, fire protection and panic hardware shall be addressed. Alternative methods of fire protection, including but not limited to fire sprinkler systems and smoke detection systems, may be approved by the fire marshal and the building official;

C. Existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical and other elements or nonstructural portions of the building which are found by the fire marshal or the building official to be dangerous to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered shall be upgraded or removed in accordance with the regular code. 

D. Chords, horizontal diaphragms, connections of existing diaphragms to vertical elements and connection of collectors to existing diaphragms and new or existing vertical elements in structures shall be provided in accordance with the regular code. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 6, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.070 Information required on plans.

The review and upgrading design prepared by the engineer or architect shall be submitted to the building official and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Location by street address and assessor’s parcel number;

B. Type of occupancy, use of the building and accurate dimensions;

C. Type of construction, type of foundation, and material used in construction. Field and laboratory tests as determined necessary by the building official, the architect or the engineer shall include but not be limited to the drilling of inspection holes, the determination of the strength and quality of materials, and a general description of how these materials are integrated within the structure;

D. Comprehensive review of the adequacy and performance of the foundation;

E. Complete vertical load resume, analysis or estimate based on typical bays and details of all critical areas;

F. Investigation, review, analysis and rehabilitation design for building elements including, but not limited to, the following:

1. The ability of the unreinforced masonry walls to resist normal and in-plane seismic forces;

2. The anchorage and stability of exterior parapets and ornamentation;

3. The anchorage of unreinforced masonry, reinforced masonry and reinforced concrete walls to the floors and roof diaphragm;

4. The development of a complete bracing system to resist earthquake forces;

5. The examination for adequacy of mortar, masonry, walls, parapets, diaphragms, shear walls, bracing, ornamentation, ceilings, lights, stairs, interior partitions, diaphragm chords, ties and connections for a complete and adequate load path;

G. Verification of elements of preliminary building department review;

H. Such plans or sketches, as necessary, to describe building strengths and deficiencies;

I. Such other information or testing as required by the architect, engineer or building official;

J. Calculations, plans and specifications to show compliance with the requirements of this chapter;

K. Exceptions and/or alternatives to the specific items required by this subsection may be authorized by the building official upon review of a written request from the engineer or architect. Exceptions may only be granted when it can be demonstrated that the specific item or items are unnecessary to provide information available by other equivalent means;

L. Archaeological report and recommendations shall be provided by the owner when determined necessary by the building official or city planner due to proposed significant excavations on known sites of historic significance. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.080 Implementation schedule and time extensions.

A. Implementation Schedule.

1. An upgrading design prepared by an engineer or architect must be submitted to the building official for approval within two years of the date of the notice to owner to correct deficiencies.

2. Complete upgrading shall be completed within five years of the date of the notice to owner to correct deficiencies unless otherwise specified in a previously recorded notice to owner to correct deficiencies.

B. Time Extensions.

1. When it is demonstrated that legitimate circumstances have prevented the work described herein from being performed, the building official may extend the time required for preparation of upgrading design or completion of required upgrading work for a period of up to one year. Said circumstances and a commitment to complete the required work by a specified date shall be provided in writing to the building official by the owner prior to granting of any extension.

2. In addition to the time extension provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, any person having record title, equitable or legal interest in the subject building may request, before the city council, an extension of the time limits set forth herein. The city council may, at its sole discretion, extend the time required for preparation of upgrading design or completion of required upgrading work for any period deemed reasonable provided the following conditions are first met:

a. The circumstances dictating the need for a time extension and a commitment to complete the required work by a specified date shall be provided in writing to the city council by the owner.

b. The property owner shall agree in writing to immediately vacate the building without further notice or administrative appeal on the day following the extended required completion date, unless final inspection approval of all required upgrading work has otherwise been granted by the building department. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 99-3 § 2, 1999; Ord. 99-1 § 2, 1999).


14.24.090 Notification of tenants.

Upon receipt of notice to correct deficiencies, the building owner shall notify all current and subsequent tenants, in writing, that a review of the building has been performed and that said building may be structurally hazardous in the event of an earthquake. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.100 Abatement – Rehabilitation or demolition.

Buildings subject to the requirements of this chapter that do not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair or demolition in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

A. Rehabilitation. Qualified historical structures or properties, when rehabilitated, remodeled, repaired or upgraded, shall comply with the provisions of the California Historical Building Code. All other rehabilitated, remodeled, repaired or upgraded buildings shall meet or exceed the requirements of SMC 14.24.060 and the regular codes together with their adopted appendices where applicable and as adopted by the city council.

B. Demolition. Buildings subject to the requirements of this chapter which do not meet the requirements of this chapter may be abated by demolition. Owners of buildings located within the historic overlay district must receive approval from the design review and historic preservation commission prior to obtaining a demolition permit to demolish the structure. Prior to obtaining a demolition permit for the demolition of a qualified historical building or property, the proposed building demolition shall be reviewed by the city’s environmental review committee and shall comply with the guidelines of the California Environmental Quality Act and the requirements of this chapter.

C. Structures or portions thereof, hazards and dangerous conditions subject to the requirements of this chapter which are not abated within the time limits set forth in SMC 14.24.080 shall be considered a public nuisance and an unsafe building and shall be vacated and/or abated in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14.10.010 and/or Chapter 14.30 SMC, as determined to be applicable by the building official. In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the city council may cause any building not abated within the time limits set forth in SMC 14.24.080 to be vacated, strengthened, repaired, rehabilitated, remodeled, demolished or upgraded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and place a special assessment on the property for all costs incurred in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14.10.010 and/or Chapter 14.30 SMC. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 08-2010 § 7, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.110 Appeals.

Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official in carrying out the provisions of this chapter shall be made and filed in accordance with Chapter 1.24 SMC. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official in carrying out the provisions of the regular codes shall be made and filed in accordance with the appeal requirements of SMC 14.10.010 (Administrative provisions). Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official in carrying out the provisions of the California Historical Building Code shall be made and filed in accordance with the appeal requirements of the California Historical Building Code. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.120 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or allows a violation to continue without taking reasonable means to cure or abate the same after having been ordered to do so, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, is punishable as provided by SMC 1.12.010. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day such person, firm or corporation violates or allows a violation to continue without taking reasonable means to cure or abate the same after having been ordered to do so. A violation of this section or any other section of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and is subject to nuisance abatement proceedings as provided by SMC 1.12.010. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-2010 § 8, 2010; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


14.24.130 Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid and/or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed and adopted this chapter and each of the provisions thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of said provisions be declared invalid and/or unconstitutional. (Ord. 07-2016 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-8, 1997).


Chapter 14.25       FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS

Sections:

Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods

14.25.010  Statutory authorization.

14.25.020  Findings of fact.

14.25.030  Statement of purpose.

14.25.040  Methods of reducing flood losses.

14.25.050  Definitions.

Article II. General Provisions

14.25.060  Lands to which this chapter applies.

14.25.070  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

14.25.080  Compliance.

14.25.090  Abrogation and greater restrictions.

14.25.100  Interpretation.

14.25.110  Warning and disclaimer of liability.

14.25.120  Severability.

Article III. Administration

14.25.130  Establishment of development permit.

14.25.140  Designation of the floodplain administrator.

14.25.150  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

Article IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

14.25.160  Standards of construction.

14.25.170  Standards for utilities.

14.25.180  Standards for subdivisions.

14.25.190  Standards for manufactured homes.

14.25.200  Floodways.

Article V. Variance Procedure

14.25.210  Appeal board.

14.25.220  Conditions and variances.

Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods


14.25.010  Statutory authorization.

The legislature of the state has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.020  Findings of fact.

A.  The flood hazard areas of Sonoma are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.030  Statement of purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

A.  To protect human life and health;

B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

G.  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.  To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.040  Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.050  Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

"Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood").

"Basement" means any area of the building having its flood subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

"Breakaway walls" are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood;

2.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of floodwaters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

"Flood boundary and floodway map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").

"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

"Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway."

"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

"Historic structure" means any structure that is:

1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.  Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior.

"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

1.  The wet floodproofing standards in SMC 14.25.160(C)(3). 

2.  The anchoring standards in SMC 14.25.160(A). 

3.  The construction materials and methods standards in SMC 14.25.160(B). 

4.  The standards for utilities in SMC 14.25.170.

"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

"Market value" pertains to the structure only and is determined using any one of the following methods, as approved by the floodplain administrator:

1.  By estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed; 

2.  By using the assessed value of the structure (excluding land and exterior improvements) as determined by the tax assessor and adjusting said value to reflect actual market conditions; 

3.  By using a certified comparable property appraisal prepared by a certified or licensed appraiser.

"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

"New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

"One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood" means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the "base flood," which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

"Person" means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A1-30, AE or A99.

"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued; provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

"Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.

"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or

2.  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b.  Any alteration of an historic structure.

"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2002-09 § 1, 2002; Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).

Article II. General Provisions


14.25.060  Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.070  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

Areas of special flood hazard shall be those identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration in the scientific and engineering report entitled, "Flood Insurance Study for the City of Sonoma," and accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map," as may be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration from time to time and having the most current effective date. This flood insurance study is on file at City Hall, No. 1 The Plaza, Sonoma, California. The flood insurance study is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 97-3 § 2, 1997; Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.080  Compliance.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.090  Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance provision, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.100  Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:

A.  Considered as minimum requirements;

B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.110  Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 88-l § 2, 1988).


14.25.120  Severability.

This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).

Article III. Administration


14.25.130  Establishment of development permit.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazards, established in SMC 14.25.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage or materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;

C.  All appropriate certifications listed in SMC 14.25.150(D); and

D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.140  Designation of the floodplain administrator.

The development services administrator is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 2002-09 § 1, 2002; Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.150  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

A.  Permit Review.

1.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

2.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

3.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

B.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with SMC 14.25.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer SMC 14.25.160. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

C.  Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;

2.  Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

D.  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:

1.  The certification required in SMC 14.25.160(C)(1) (floor elevations);

2.  The certification required in SMC 14.25.160(C)(2)(c) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3.  The certification required in SMC 14.25.160(C)(3)(a) or (b) (wet floodproofing standard);

4.  The certification elevation required in SMC 14.25.180(B) (subdivision standards); and

5.  The certification required in SMC 14.25.200(A) (floodway encroachments).

E.  Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in SMC 14.25.210 et seq.

F.  Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in SMC 14.25.080. (Ord. 2002-09 § 1, 2002; Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).

Article IV. Provisions for Flood  Hazard Reduction


14.25.160  Standards of construction.

In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A.  Anchoring.

1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of SMC 14.25.190.

B.  Construction Materials and Methods.

1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

C.  Elevation and Floodproofing.

1.  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (C)(2) of this section. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the building inspector, to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 

c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

3.  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.  Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or 

b.  Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in SMC 14.25.190.

D.  Drainage Paths on Slopes in AH Zones. Within zones designated AH, adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 2002-09 § 1, 2002; Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.170  Standards for utilities.

A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.

B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.180  Standards for subdivisions.

A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B.  All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.190  Standards for manufactured homes.

All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall:

A.  Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and

B.  Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.200  Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in SMC 14.25.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of SMC 14.25.160 et seq. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).

Article V. Variance Procedure


14.25.210  Appeal board.

A.  The city council of the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

B.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

C.  In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

D.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subdivisions (C)(1) through (11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

E.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection C of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

F.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


14.25.220  Conditions and variances.

A.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

B.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

C.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

D.  Variances shall only be issued upon:

1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause;

2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

E.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions in subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to safety.

F.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. (Ord. 88-1 § 2, 1988).


Chapter 14.26       BUILDING SECURITY

(Repealed by Ord. 99-6)


Chapter 14.27 EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS

Sections:

14.27.010    Purpose.

14.27.020    Authority.

14.27.030    Definitions.

14.27.040    Applicability.

14.27.050    Solar energy system requirements.

14.27.060    Applications and documents.

14.27.070    Permit review and inspection requirements.


14.27.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, Cal. Gov’t. Code Section 65850.5) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. Nothing in this chapter is intended to create, nor shall it create, a mandatory duty upon the city or any of its officials, employees, or agents acting on behalf of the city. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


14.27.020 Authority.

The building official, or his/her designee, has authority for administering and carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


14.27.030 Definitions.

The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “Building official” means the city of Sonoma officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the California Building Code, or a duly authorized representative.

B. “Duplex” means a residential structure under single ownership containing two dwellings.

C. “Dwelling” means a room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis.

D. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1. E-mail,

2. The Internet,

3. Facsimile.

E. “Fire chief” means the chief officer of the fire department serving the city of Sonoma, or a duly authorized representative.

F. “Single-family dwelling” means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family.

G. “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means a solar energy system that meets all of the following:

1. A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

2. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city of Sonoma, and all applicable state of California health and safety standards.

3. A solar energy system that is installed on a single-family dwelling or duplex.

4. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as prescribed by the applicable section of SMC Title 19.

H. “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

1. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

2. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


14.27.040 Applicability.

This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city of Sonoma. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small residential rooftop solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance of small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall not require a permit. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


14.27.050 Solar energy system requirements.

A. All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

B. Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family dwellings, duplexes and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C. Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


14.27.060 Applications and documents.

A. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t. Code Section 65850.5(g)(1), the city shall develop an expedited permitting process which shall include the adoption of a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The city’s building official is authorized and directed to develop, modify as needed from time to time and adopt the required checklist and is further authorized to develop, modify as needed from time to time and adopt standard plan templates for small residential rooftop solar energy system permits. The expedited permitting process shall substantially conform to the applicable recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plan templates, contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. Any checklists, standard plan templates and required permitting forms and documentation required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

B. The applicant may submit the small residential rooftop solar energy system permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building department in person, by mail, or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and plan review deposits required by the building department. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


14.27.070 Permit review and inspection requirements.

A. By September 30, 2015, the building official shall develop and implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. An application that satisfies all of the requirements in the checklist for small residential rooftop solar energy systems, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. If the building official determines that an application and/or supporting documentation is incomplete for reasons that it is illegible, inaccurate or contains text, symbols or illustrations that are too small or are otherwise not easily read or is incomplete or incorrect for other reasons, the building official shall issue the applicant a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for the expedited review process.

B. The small residential rooftop solar system permit review process developed by the building official shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

C. For small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible and approved under the expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner following the installation of all work and a request for final inspection by the permittee. The one inspection may include a consolidated inspection by the building official and fire chief. However, if a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails the one inspection, one or more subsequent and separate inspections by the building official and/or the fire chief, which need not conform with this subsection, are authorized. (Ord. 06-2015 § 1, 2015).


Chapter 14.28 WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES

Sections:

14.28.010    Findings and purpose.

14.28.020    Applicability.

14.28.030    Definitions.

14.28.040    General standards for installation, reconstruction and replacement.

14.28.050    Prohibited fuels.

14.28.060    Enforcement.


14.28.010 Findings and purpose. 

The city council of the city of Sonoma finds that:

A. The California Air Resources Board adopted revised particular matter (PM10) and new particular matter (PM2.5) ambient air quality standards (AAQS) in June of 2002, and levels for the PM10 and PM2.5 AAQS were selected pursuant to California Code of Regulations Title 17, Section 70200 to protect the health of people who are sensitive to exposure to fine particles; and

B. Research indicates that wood smoke is a significant contributor to PM10 and PM2.5 levels that pose significant health risks; and 

C. The city of Sonoma desires to decrease the risk to life and property from air pollution caused by wood-burning appliances; and

D. These regulations will significantly reduce the particulate emissions from wood-burning appliances that are installed, reconstructed or replaced subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 03-2005 § 1, 2005).


14.28.020 Applicability.

A. Any person who installs a wood-burning appliance within the city of Sonoma, including the replacement or reconstruction of an existing wood-burning appliance, shall comply with this chapter. 

B. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:

1. Any wood-burning appliance specifically designed for cooking;

2. Any outdoor wood-burning appliances (appliances where the firebox opens directly to the outdoors); 

3. All gas appliances; and

4. The repair, replacement or reconstruction of wood-burning appliances located within qualified historic structures or properties. (Ord. 03-2005 § 1, 2005).


14.28.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the meaning of the words or phrases shall be as defined in this section. 

A. “Bay Area Air Quality Management District” means the air quality agency for the San Francisco Bay Area defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 40200.

B. “EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

C. “EPA-certified wood heater” means any wood heater that meets the standards in Title 40, Part 60, Subpart AAA, Code of Federal Regulations in effect at the time of installation and is certified and labeled pursuant to those regulations. An EPA-certified wood heater may be freestanding, built-in, or an insert within a fireplace.

D. “Fireplace” means any permanently installed masonry or factory-built wood-burning appliance, except a pellet-fueled wood heater, designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal to 35 to one. 

E. “Gas fireplace” means any device that burns natural or liquid propane gas as its fuel through a ceramic or otherwise noncombustible gas log that is permanently installed in the device. As used herein, “permanently installed” means that the burn pan and associated equipment cannot be removed from the masonry or metal base of the device.

F. “Pellet-fueled wood heater” means any wood-burning appliance that operates exclusively on wood pellets.

G. “Qualified historic building or property” means any site, district, or structure on existing or future national, state or local historical registers, surveys, official inventories of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, historic districts, or landmarks.

H. “Reconstruction” means to rebuild more than 25 percent of the firebox enclosure of a wood-burning appliance by means of full or partial demolition and new construction.

I. “Replacement” means to replace an existing wood-burning appliance in its entirety in the same location as previously existed.

J. “Solid fuel” means wood or any other nongaseous or nonliquid fuel. 

K. “Wood-burning appliance” means any fireplace, wood heater, or pellet-fired wood heater or any similar device burning any solid fuel used for aesthetic or heating purposes. (Ord. 03-2005 § 1, 2005).


14.28.040 General standards for installation, reconstruction and replacement. 

A. It shall be unlawful to install, replace or reconstruct a wood-burning appliance unless it is one of the following:

1. A pellet-fueled wood heater;

2. An EPA-certified wood heater; 

3. A wood-burning appliance approved for use by the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution Control District; 

4. A fireplace certified by the EPA, should the EPA develop a fireplace certification program.

B. The conversion of a gas log fireplace to burn wood shall constitute the installation of a wood-burning appliance and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

C. Any person who plans to install a wood-burning appliance shall submit documentation to the city of Sonoma building division and shall obtain a permit to verify that the appliance meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 03-2005 § 1, 2005).


14.28.050 Prohibited fuels.

A. Use of any of the following fuels in a wood-burning appliance is prohibited:

1. Garbage;

2. Treated wood;

3. Plastic products;

4. Rubber products;

5. Waste petroleum products;

6. Paints;

7. Paint solvents;

8. Coal;

9. Glossy or colored paper;

10. Particle board;

11. Saltwater driftwood.

This section shall not apply to products designed and marketed specifically for use as a fuel in a wood-burning appliance. (Ord. 03-2005 § 1, 2005).


14.28.060 Enforcement. 

It shall be unlawful and prohibited to install, reconstruct or replace a wood-burning appliance in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such violations shall be subject to enforcement and civil penalties as set forth in Chapter 1.12 SMC. (Ord. 03-2005 § 1, 2005).


Chapter 14.29 EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS

Sections:

14.29.010    Title and authority.

14.29.020    Purpose.

14.29.030    Applicability.

14.29.040    Administration.

14.29.050    Definitions.

14.29.060    Development of an expedited permitting process.

14.29.070    Permit required.

14.29.080    Applications and submittal documents.

14.29.090    Permit review requirements.

14.29.100    Appeals.


14.29.010 Title and authority.

This chapter is and may be cited as the “expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations.” The chapter is enacted pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.7 as adopted by Assembly Bill 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015). (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to create an expedited, streamlined permitting process that complies with AB 1236 and Government Code Section 65850.7 to achieve timely and cost-effective installation of electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter encourages the installation and use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to and minimizing the cost of permitting for charging stations, and by expanding the ability of residential, agricultural, and commercial property owners to install electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.030 Applicability.

This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city of Sonoma. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.040 Administration.

The building official, or his/her designee, has the authority for administering and carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.050 Definitions.

The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 

B. “Building official” means the city of Sonoma officer or other duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the California Building Standards Code.

C. “City” means the city of Sonoma.

D. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1. Email;

2. The internet; or

3. Facsimile.

E. “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on January 1, 2016, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

F. “Planning director” means the city of Sonoma officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of SMC Title 19 or a duly authorized representative.

G. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application to install an electric vehicle charging station was deemed complete. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.060 Development of an expedited permitting process.

A. No later than September 30, 2017, the building official or his/her designee shall, after consulting with the city fire department, develop, promulgate and implement an expedited permitting process consistent with this chapter that will allow the building official to administratively approve an application to install electric vehicle charging stations through the issuance of a building permit or similar nondiscretionary permit.

B. No later than September 30, 2017, the building official shall develop and adopt a submittal checklist of requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited permit review. The building official may update and amend the submittal checklist as needed from time to time. The checklist and required permit applications and forms shall be published on the city of Sonoma’s internet website. 

C. In developing the expedited permitting process and submittal checklist, the building official may refer to the recommendations contained in the most recent version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the State of California’s Office of Planning and Research.

D. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and supporting documents shall be made available for all electric vehicle charging station permit applications. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.070 Permit required.

Electric vehicle charging stations shall require a city permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, replace or maintain an electric vehicle charging station without first obtaining a permit for such work. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.080 Applications and submittal documents.

A. Every permit application for the installation, alteration and replacement of an electric vehicle charging station shall be in writing on a form provided by the city and shall additionally include as an attachment the information set forth in the submittal checklist for electric vehicle charging stations and such other information as the building official may reasonably require to carry out the purpose and satisfy the requirements of this chapter and the California Building Standards Code as amended and adopted by the city. The submittal checklist for electric vehicle charging stations shall be available on the city’s internet website.

B. The applicant may submit a permit application and associated documentation for electric vehicle charging stations to the city’s building department in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and plan review deposits required by the building department. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.090 Permit review requirements.

A. An application that satisfies all of the requirements of the submittal checklist for electric vehicle charging stations, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. If the building official determines that an application and/or supporting documentation is incomplete for reasons that it is illegible, inaccurate or contains text, symbols or illustrations that are too small or are otherwise not easily read or is incomplete or incorrect for other reasons, the building official shall issue the applicant a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for the expedited permitting process.

B. Review of the application and supporting documentation to install an electric vehicle charging station shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether it meets all health and safety requirements of local, state, and federal law and the requirements of this chapter. The requirements of local law shall be limited to those standards and regulations necessary to ensure that the electric vehicle charging station will not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety. 

C. If the building official or planning director makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the planning director may require the applicant to apply for a use permit pursuant to SMC 19.54.040.

D. The city planning commission shall not deny an application for a use permit to install an electric vehicle charging station unless it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact.

E. The building official shall not condition approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of an electric vehicle charging station by an association, as that term is defined in Civil Code Section 4080.

F. Any conditions imposed on an application to install an electric vehicle charging station shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety at the lowest cost possible.

G. Upon confirmation by the building official that a permit application and accompanying documentation are complete, meet the requirements of the submittal checklist and are consistent with the requirements of this chapter; and provided, that the proposed electric vehicle charging station will not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety; the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue the required permit to install the electric vehicle charging station.

H. Any electric vehicle charging station erected, constructed, installed, altered, replaced or to which additions are made shall comply with all of the provisions of all applicable health and safety standards and requirements of local, state and federal law, including but not limited to, the Sonoma Municipal Code. 

I. An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

J. This expedited permitting process is intended to apply only to applications for permits for electric vehicle charging stations, and will not expedite the review of any other permit applications. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.29.100 Appeals.

Appeal of a final decision by the building official or planning director shall follow the procedures established in Chapter 1.24 SMC except that an appeal of the building official’s or planning director’s decision pursuant to SMC 14.29.090(A), (B), or (C) may be appealed to the city planning commission in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 19.84 SMC. If an appeal is filed with the planning commission, the planning commission’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 04-2017 § 1, 2017).


Chapter 14.30 NUISANCE ABATEMENT

Sections:

14.30.010    Purpose.

14.30.020    Public nuisances included.

14.30.030    Abatement by civil action.

14.30.040    Abatement by proceedings before city council.

14.30.050    Form of notice.

14.30.060    Hearing.

14.30.070    Further proceedings by authorized city officer.

14.30.080    Actual abatement.

14.30.090    Cost account.

14.30.100    Special assessment.

14.30.110    Public nuisance by judicial decree.

14.30.120    Summary abatement of nuisance.


14.30.010 Purpose.

Pursuant to Government Code Sections 38771, et seq., the city council establishes the procedures set forth in this section for the purpose of the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 90-6 § 1, 1990).


14.30.020 Public nuisances included.

A. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any nuisance heretofore or hereafter defined as a nuisance by any ordinance of the city, section of this code, resolution of the city council or statute of the state. Except when provisions of this code relative to abatement procedures are in conflict with these general provisions, the specific provision shall prevail. A public nuisance further includes, but is not limited to, any unlawful obstruction or encroachment upon or to any public property, any public street, highway, right-of-way, park or building.

B. Nuisance Standards – General Property Nuisances Defined. In addition to all laws and regulations already listed or which will be listed in the future within the Sonoma Municipal Code, it shall be unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, renting, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property in the city of Sonoma to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist:

1. Refuse and waste matter which by reason of its location and character interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors or is in such a condition of deterioration that the same constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or detrimentally affects property in the surrounding neighborhood or community;

2. Polluted or stagnant water, which, because of its nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition;

3. Maintenance of property in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that same causes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties, or constitutes a hazard to persons or property including, but not limited to:

a. Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed for a period of at least six months, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction. An “unreasonable state of partial construction” is defined as any unfinished building or structure that has been in the course of construction for two years or more and where the appearance or other conditions of said unfinished building or structure constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties.

b. Unpainted buildings and those having dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. Any building on which the condition of existing paint has become so deteriorated as to permit substantial decay, checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation on 50 percent or more of the building.

c. Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally contains glass. Plywood or other materials used to cover such window space and/or doors, if permitted under this code, shall be painted in a color or colors compatible with the remainder of the building.

d. Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, hedges, structures, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, or alleys which for at least 72 consecutive hours are maintained in such condition as to be defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby properties.

e. The accumulation of dirt, litter, or debris in vestibules, doorways, or the adjoining sidewalks, passages or breezeways of a building for 72 consecutive hours or more.

f. The accumulation, disposal, keeping, scattering or dispersal of used or damaged lumber; junk; trash; debris; salvage materials; abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment; mattresses or furniture; stoves; refrigerators; sinks; toilets; cabinets; or air conditioners, water heaters, or other household fixtures; vehicles and vehicular parts; or equipment stored either (1) so as to be visible from a public street, alley, or from any adjoining property for at least 72 consecutive hours; or (2) so as otherwise to constitute a harborage for rodents or pests or a detriment to health, safety, and welfare of the occupants of the property or nearby properties, the neighborhood and/or the city. Nothing herein shall preclude the appropriate placement of stacked firewood for use on the premises.

g. Attractive nuisances dangerous to children and other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken, or neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery; lack of malfunctioning or unmaintained safety devices, safety equipment, fences or barriers, as required by the city’s building code, for pools, spas, ponds, and excavations.

h. Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on property for at least 72 consecutive hours when it is readily visible from a public street, alley or adjoining property, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property or where the property is zoned for storage of construction equipment and/or machinery.

i. Improper maintenance of any sign and/or failure to remove any sign which advertises a business or product which is no longer sold on the property.

j. Storage of inoperative, nonregistered, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or unregistered vehicles, including recreational vehicles as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 18010, for at least 72 consecutive hours.

k. Property, including, but not limited to, building exteriors which are maintained for at least 72 consecutive hours in such a condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480.

l. Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which are allowed to remain on property for at least 72 consecutive hours which are a hazardous condition to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic and/or which are likely to harbor rats, vermin, or constitute visual blight, or reduce the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or are offensive to the senses, or are detrimental to nearby properties, or which may cause a danger to public safety or are a hazard.

m. Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, or constitute visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties.

n. Any property with a pooled accumulation of hazardous material, or a hazardous material flowing onto public rights-of-way or adjacent property, or excessive accumulations of a hazardous material on paved surfaces, buildings, walls or fences.

o. The nonmaintenance of any yard which causes excessive dust or airborne pollutants to the extent that, in the opinion of the enforcement officer or the city council, it causes damage or is detrimental to nearby properties, and/or which contains the accumulation of debris, or constitutes visual blight, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby properties.

p. The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulating on the premises for an unreasonable time: dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar materials that constitute visual blight, or reduce the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or are offensive to the senses, or are detrimental to nearby properties, except when used for current excavations, construction or demolition projects for which an active building permit has been obtained. (Ord. 02-2005 § 2, 2005; Ord. 90-6 § 2, 1990).


14.30.030 Abatement by civil action.

A civil action may be brought in the name of the people of the state to abate a public nuisance as defined in this section, by the city attorney, or the district attorney or county counsel of the county, and each of said officers shall have concurrent right to bring such action for a public nuisance within this city. The city attorney shall bring such action when directed to do so by the city council. (Ord. 90-6 § 3, 1990).


14.30.040 Abatement by proceedings before city council.

If the public nuisance is to be abated by resolution and/or order of the city council, the hereinafter prescribed procedures shall be as follows:

Written notice of appearance before the city council shall be given to the property owner or owners at least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing before the city council. Service of the notice shall be made either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail to such person to be notified at the address shown upon the last tax roll or as shown upon some other public record pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office.

A copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted in front of the property on which the nuisance exists or in any other location of the property wherein it will most likely give notice to the owner or owners, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

A notice shall direct the owner or owners of the property on which the nuisance exists to appear before the city council at a stated time and place and show cause why the nuisance should not be abated as herein provided. (Ord. 90-6 § 4, 1990).


14.30.050 Form of notice.

The notice provided for by SMC 14.30.040 shall be substantially in the following form:

ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE RE ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE

TO: ___________

YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED to appear before the City Council of the City of Sonoma on the ____ day of __________, 19___, at the Municipal Court/Council Chambers, 177 First Street West, Sonoma, California at the hour of _____ p.m., or as soon thereafter as the matter can be heard, and show cause, if any you have, why that certain ________________________ __________________________ should not be condemned as a public nuisance and said nuisance be abated by its removal or __________ and why the cost of such abatement should not be assessed upon the property from which the nuisance is abated, such cost to constitute a lien upon such property until paid.

Dated this ____ day of _________, 19___.

__________________________ City Clerk

(Ord. 90-6 § 5, 1990).


14.30.060 Hearing.

A. At the time stated in this notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the proposed abatement of the public nuisance, subject to the following provisions:

1. Oath or Affirmation. All oral evidence or testimony shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. The city clerk may administer the oath. In a given case where many witnesses are expected to testify, the presiding officer or the city clerk has the discretion to have all prospective witnesses rise and be sworn at the same time at the outset of the proceedings.

a. The oath or affirmation may be administered as follows, the person who swears or affirms expressing his assent when addressed in the following form:

You do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be), that the evidence you shall give in this issue (or matter), pending before this body, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God.

2. Evidence. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise required by statute to be recognized at the hearing, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

3. Witnesses. In a contest proceeding, each side shall have these rights: to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues; to impeach any witness and to rebut the evidence against him. The presiding officer has the discretionary authority to: limit the number of witnesses to testify for each side where their testimony would be cumulative or repetitive in nature; require each side to appoint one spokesman for purposes of cross-examination; limit or curtail any abusive, argumentative, repetitive, or otherwise irrelevant cross-examination; and in conformance with other rules in this code, place reasonable time limits on the right to cross-examine and the presenting of evidence.

B. The hearing may be continued from time to time. After final action is taken by the city council on the disposition of any protests or objections which are received, the council may declare, by resolution, that a public nuisance exists and may order an appropriate city officer to abate the nuisance. The council may further order that the cost of any such abatement will be assessed upon the property from which the nuisance is abated, and that such costs shall constitute a lien upon such property until paid.

The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive, unless the owner or owners file, within 15 days after the aforesaid decision is rendered, an action and/or appeal to the court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 90-6 § 6, 1990).


14.30.070 Further proceedings by authorized city officer.

At any time within 30 days after the passage of any resolution directing the abatement of a nuisance, the city officer authorized to abate the nuisance shall serve and post a copy thereof in the manner of giving notice as prescribed in SMC 14.30.040.

Furthermore, if the city council, at the aforesaid hearing, determines that the abatement of the nuisance is likely to cause a significant depreciation in the value of the property upon which the nuisance is located, the city may order that all mortgages and/or beneficiaries under any deeds of trust of record on the property be served with a copy of the resolution in the manner prescribed in this section.

At any time following a period of five days after the serving and posting of a copy of the resolution ordering abatement as required above, the city officer may abate the nuisance as directed by the city council. (Ord. 90-6 § 7, 1990).


14.30.080 Actual abatement.

The city officer may direct any officer or his assistant, deputy, employee, contracting agent or other representative to enter upon private property for the purpose of abating the public nuisance. Should it be practicable to sell or salvage any material procured from the aforesaid abatement, it may be sold at private or public sale at the best price obtainable and an itemized account of the proceeds shall be maintained by the authorized city officer. Such proceeds, if any, shall be deposited in an general fund of the city and shall be credited against the cost of abatement as provided for herein. (Ord. 90-6 § 8, 1990).


14.30.090 Cost account.

The officer abating the nuisance shall keep an account of the cost of abatement and shall render an itemized written report to the city council, showing the cost of removing and/or abating the nuisance.

Before the report is submitted to the city council, a copy shall be posted for at least three days on the bulletin board of the City Hall, with a notice of the time when the report will be submitted to the city council for confirmation. A copy of the account and notice shall also be mailed to the owner of the property, at the address shown on the last tax roll, at least 10 days prior to submission to the city council.

At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear it and any objections by the property owner liable to be assessed for the work of abatement. Thereupon the city council may make such modifications in the report as it deems necessary, after which, by order or resolution, the report shall be confirmed. (Ord. 90-6 § 9, 1990).


14.30.100 Special assessment.

The cost of such abatement as determined by the city council shall become a special assessment and lien against the aforesaid property, which assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. (Ord. 90-6 § 10, 1990).


14.30.110 Public nuisance by judicial decree.

If a public nuisance has been declared by judicial decree, after the defendant(s) receive(s) notice of entry of judgment as prescribed by law, and the time within which an appeal may be filed has expired, all procedures of SMC 14.30.080 and 14.30.100 shall be applicable and shall be followed in the same manner as if a resolution by city council had been passed declaring a public nuisance to exist. (Ord. 90-6 § 11, 1990).


14.30.120 Summary abatement of nuisance.

A. Whenever there is imminent or immediate danger to a significant portion of the public, by the existence or continuance of any nuisance endangering the public health, welfare or safety, arising from any act, condition or use or occupation of property, or otherwise amounting to a nuisance per se, it is the duty of the city council or the appropriate officials of the city to abate such nuisance.

B. Whenever conditions exist which are immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of occupants of a dangerous structure as determined by the city council, city manager or city building official, either the building official or city manager may order the structure vacated as provided in the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Sections 403 and 404, and shall be considered as a summary abatement.

C. A summary abatement of any nuisance shall be at the sole expense of the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining it, and the expense of the nuisance, in addition to a lien on the property, shall be a personal obligation of the property owner as provided in California Government Code Section 38773, including attorneys fees and costs of a foreclosure action. (Ord. 90-6 § 12, 1990).


Chapter 14.32 WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING

Sections:

14.32.010    Purpose and authority.

14.32.020    Applicability.

14.32.030    Definitions.

14.32.035    Soil analysis report.

14.32.040    Landscape design plan.

14.32.050    Irrigation design plan.

14.32.055    Grading design plan.

14.32.060    Documentation for compliance.

14.32.070    Review requirements and procedures.

14.32.080    Other provisions.

14.32.090    Forms.

14.32.100    Provisions for appeal.


14.32.010 Purpose and authority.

A. Purpose. Section 2, Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use. This policy protects local water supplies through the implementation of a whole system approach to design, construction, installation and maintenance of the landscape resulting in water-conserving, climate-appropriate landscapes, improved water quality and the minimization of natural resource inputs.

B. Authority. The planning director, or his/her designee, has authority for administering and carrying out the provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.020 Applicability.

A. This chapter shall apply to all of the following new and rehabilitated landscape projects that require a building or grading permit, plan check, or design review:

1. New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review.

2. Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review.

3. Commercial, institutional landscaping, park landscaping, multiple-family residential and single-family residential landscaping.

4. Projects that have a completed application for a building or grading permit, plan check, or design review certificate on file with the city prior to November 31, 2015, will be governed by the city of Sonoma water efficient landscape ordinance as adopted by Ordinance No. 05-2010.

B. This chapter does not apply to:

1. Historical sites registered in the California or the National Register of Historic Places;

2. Ecological restoration or mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3. Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public;

4. Cemeteries;

5. Residential landscape backyard areas.

Landscape designers are encouraged to follow the provisions of this chapter, regardless of these exemptions. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

1. “Backflow prevention device” means an approved device installed to city standards which will prevent backflow or back-siphonage into the city potable water system.

2. “Booster pumps” are used where the normal water system pressure is low and needs to be increased.

3. “Check valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

4. “Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

5. “Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

6. “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

7. “Effective precipitation” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth and that is used by the plants.

8. “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

9. “Evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

10. “Evapotranspiration rate (ET)” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific specified time.

11. “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, and valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

12. “Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

13. “Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. “Graywater” includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12.

14. “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and nonpervious).

15. “Head to head coverage” means full coverage from one sprinkler head to the next.

16. “High-flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the point of connection that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves.

17. “High water use plants” means turf, annuals, container plantings, and other plants recognized as high water use by the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species document as it currently exists or may be amended in the future. (See http://ucanr.edu/sites/wucols/.) Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or nursery industry professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

18. “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule.

19. “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

20. “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California and/or that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources as determined by the California Invasive Plant Council (www.cal-ipc.org).

21. “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “Watersense” labeled auditing program.

22. “Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

23. “Irrigation meter” means a separate meter that measures the amount of water used for all external landscaping items.

24. “Isolation valves” are used to isolate a portion of the piping system.

25. “Landscaped area” means the entire parcel less the building footprint, driveways, and nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes, such as decks and patios, and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens, are not included. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

26. “Lateral line” means nonpressurized pipe that is located downstream of an irrigation valve (Class 200 or equivalent is acceptable).

27. “Low water use plants” means Mediterranean region and native trees, shrubs and groundcovers (such as rosemary), juniper, most native oaks, and other plants recognized as low water use by the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species document as it currently exists or may be amended in the future. (See http://ucanr.edu/sites/wucols/.) Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or nursery industry professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

28. “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet (Class 315 or Schedule 40 is acceptable).

29. “Master valve” means an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system.

30. “Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means, for design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape.

31. “Median” means an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.

32. “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density or proximity to reflective surfaces.

33. “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

34. “Moderate water use plants” means ornamental trees, shrubs, ground covers, and perennials and other plants recognized as moderate water use by the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species document as it currently exists or may be amended in the future. (See http://ucanr.edu/sites/wucols/.) Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or nursery industry professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

35. “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost or other inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature and preventing soil erosion.

36. “Nonresidential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

37. “Low-head drainage” means water that flows out of the system after the valve turns off due to elevation changes within the system.

38. “Operating pressure” means the pressure when water is flowing through the irrigation system.

39. “Overhead irrigation” means those systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., pop-ups, impulse sprinklers, spray heads, rotors, micro-sprays, etc.).

40. “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the landscaped target area; wetting pavements, walks, structures, or other nonlandscaped areas.

41. “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

42. “Plant factor” means a factor that, when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration ETo, estimates the amount of water used by needed plants. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or nursery industry professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

43. “Precipitation rate” means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.

44. “Point of connection” means the point at which an irrigation system taps into the main water supply line.

45. “Point source irrigation” means any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

46. “Pressure regulation” means a valve that automatically reduces the pressure in a pipe.

47. “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package, to request a permit, plan check or design review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.

48. “Rain sensor” means a system component which automatically shuts off and suspends the irrigation system when it rains.

49. “Recreational area” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, school yards, picnic grounds, amphitheaters, or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.

50. “Recycled water” means tertiary treated water which results from the treatment of wastewater, is suitable for direct beneficial use, and conforms to the definition of disinfected tertiary recycled water in accordance with state law.

51. “Reference evapotranspiration or ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered as determined by the city.

52. “Rehabilitated landscape” means any relandscaping project that requires a building or grading permit, plan check or design review.

53. “Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single- or multifamily homes.

54. “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area.

55. “Soil analysis report” means the analysis of a soil sample to determine nutrient content, composition and other characteristics, including contaminants.

56. “Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.

57. “Sprinkler head or spray head” means a device that delivers to the landscape water through a spray nozzle.

58. “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

59. “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

60. “Submeter” means a separate meter that is located on the private side of the water system and is plumbed to measure all water that flows only through the irrigation system. This meter is to be used by the owner to monitor irrigation water use and will not be read by the city.

61. “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

62. “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

63. “Very low water use plants” means Mediterranean region and native trees, shrubs and groundcovers such as manzanita, ceanothus, some native oaks, California poppies and other plants recognized as very low water use by the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species document (http://ucanr.edu/sites/wucols/), as it currently exists or may be amended in the future. Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or nursery industry professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

64. “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

65. “Weather-based or sensor-based irrigation control technology” uses local weather and landscape conditions to tailor irrigation schedules to actual conditions on the site or historical weather data.

66. Water Use Classification of Landscape Species (WUCOLS). Published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, and the Department of Water Resources, 2014, as it currently exists and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.035 Soil analysis report.

A. In order to identify infiltration rates, reduce runoff, and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil analysis report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:

1. Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

a. Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

2. The soil analysis shall include:

a. Soil texture;

b. Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

c. pH;

d. Total soluble salts;

e. Sodium;

f. Percent organic matter; and

g. Recommendations.

3. In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15 percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots.

4. The soil analysis report shall be made available to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans prior to submitting for landscape design review, or prior to submitting a building permit (if a grading permit is required) to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

5. If a grading permit is required, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city with the certificate of completion. If a grading permit is not required, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city with the landscape documentation package.

6. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the city with certificate of completion. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.040 Landscape design plan.

A. The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

1. Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

2. Identify each hydrozone as very low, low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use;

3. Identify new and existing trees, shrubs, groundcovers, turf, and any other planting areas;

4. Identify plants by botanical name and common name;

5. Identify plant sizes and quantities;

6. Identify recreational areas;

7. Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

8. Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

9. Identify type of mulch and application depth;

10. Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

11. Identify type and surface area of pools, fountains and water features;

12. Identify property lines, new and existing building footprints, streets, driveways, sidewalks and other hardscape features (pervious and nonpervious);

13. Identify location, installation details, and size of any stormwater best management practices, including rainwater harvesting or catchment technologies that will provide stormwater retention, infiltration, and/or treatment. Project applicants shall refer to the city or North Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board for information and approval requirements;

14. Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

15. Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

16. Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Business and Professions Code Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5, 16 CCR Section 832.27, and Food and Agriculture Code Section 6721.)

B. For each landscape project subject to this chapter applicants shall submit a landscape design plan in accordance with the following:

1. Amendments, Mulching and Soil Conditioning.

a. Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

b. Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected.

c. Incorporate compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

d. A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers or direct seeding applications. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

2. Plants.

a. Selected plants shall not cause the estimated water use to exceed the maximum applied water allowance (see calculation in maximum applied water allowance).

b. Plants with similar water use needs shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones and where irrigation is required the distinct hydrozones shall be irrigated with separate valves.

c. Very low, low and moderate water use plants can be mixed, but the entire hydrozone will be classified as moderate water use for MAWA calculations.

d. High water use plants shall not be mixed with very low, low or moderate water use plants.

e. All nonturf plants shall be selected, spaced and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic and topographical conditions of the project site.

f. Turf shall not be planted in the following conditions:

i. Slopes exceeding 25 percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25 percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

ii. Front yard landscape of single-family residential subdivisions where backyard landscape is not developer installed.

g. Turf irrigation may be considered at the discretion of the design review and historic preservation commission in the following conditions:

i. Slopes exceeding 10 percent;

ii. Planting areas eight feet wide or less;

iii. Street medians, traffic islands, planter strips or bulbouts of any size.

h. Invasive plants as listed by the California Invasive Plant Council are prohibited.

3. Water Features.

a. Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

b. Recycled water shall be used when available on site.

c. Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.050 Irrigation design plan.

A. The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

1. Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

2. Location and size of irrigation system point of connection;

3. Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, master valves, valves, sprinkler heads and other application devices, moisture sensing devices, rain sensors, check valves, quick couplers, flow sensors, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

4. Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

5. Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

6. Recycled water irrigation systems;

7. The hydrozone table;

8. The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

9. The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Business and Professions Code Sections 185500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5, 16 CCR Section 832.27, and Food and Agriculture Code Section 6721.)

B. For each landscape project subject to this chapter applicants shall submit an irrigation design plan that is designed and installed to meet irrigation efficiency criteria as described in the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) and in accordance with the following:

1. Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of 1,000 square feet but not more than 5,000 square feet (the level at which Water Code Section 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of 5,000 square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

a. A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or

b. A privately owned meter or submeter.

2. Landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger require a high-flow sensor that can detect high flow conditions and have the capabilities to shut off the system.

3. Master shut-off valves are required on all projects of 5,000 square feet or larger except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

4. Isolation valves shall be installed at the point of connection as necessary to facilitate maintenance.

5. Weather-based or other sensor-based self-adjusting irrigation controllers utilizing nonvolatile memory shall be required.

6. Rain sensors shall be installed for each irrigation controller.

7. Pressure regulation and/or booster pumps shall be installed so that all components of the irrigation system operate at the manufacturer’s recommended optimal pressure.

8. Irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff or overspray onto nontargeted areas.

9. Relevant information from the soil analysis report, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

10. The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

11. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

12. Point source irrigation is required where plant height at maturity will affect the uniformity of an overhead system.

13. Minimum 24-inch setback of overhead irrigation is required where turf is directly adjacent to a continuous hardscape that flows into the curb and gutter.

14. Slopes greater than 15 percent shall be irrigated with point source or other low-volume irrigation technology.

15. A single valve shall not irrigate hydrozones that mix high water use plants with moderate, low, or very low water use plants.

16. Trees shall be placed on separate valves.

17. Sprinkler heads, rotors and other emission devices on a valve shall have matched precipitation rates.

18. Head to head coverage is required unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s specifications.

19. Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on all risers.

20. Check valves, where site conditions exist such as grade changes, shall be installed to prevent low-head drainage. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.055 Grading design plan.

Where slopes exceed 10 percent, a grading plan drawn at the same scale as the planting plan that accurately and clearly identifies finished grades, drainage patterns, pad elevations, spot elevations and stormwater retention improvements shall be submitted with the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan. The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.060 Documentation for compliance.

A. The following documentation is to be presented to the city at each of the three steps of review defined below. This documentation is required for compliance with this policy.

1. Step 1: Final Landscape Design Review.

a. For those landscape projects that require landscape design review applicants shall submit the following documentation to the city:

i. Soil analysis report and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations;

ii. Completed maximum applied water allowance;

iii. The landscape design plan;

iv. A conceptual irrigation design plan or statement which describes irrigation methods and design actions that will be employed to meet the irrigation specifications of this chapter.

2. Step 2: Building Permit/Plan Check.

a. The following shall be reviewed and approved prior to a building permit being issued:

i. Maximum applied water allowance and the planting design as submitted at Step 1 in connection with the design review or utilities certificate application;

ii. The irrigation design plan drawn at the same scale as the landscape design plan.

3. Step 3: Completion of Installation.

a. Upon installation and completion of the landscape, applicant shall submit the certificate of completion.

i. The certificate must be accompanied by an irrigation audit that contains the following:

A. Operating pressure of the irrigation system,

B. Distribution uniformity of overhead irrigation,

C. Precipitation rate of overhead irrigation,

D. Report of any overspray or broken irrigation equipment,

E. Irrigation schedule including:

1. Plant establishment irrigation schedule;

2. Regular irrigation schedule by month including: plant type, root depth, soil type, slope factor, shade factor, irrigation interval (days per week), irrigation run times, number of start times per irrigation day, gallons per minute for each valve, precipitation rate, distribution uniformity and monthly estimated water use calculations;

3. Verification that a diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones is kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes.

ii. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape;

iii. In large projects or projects with multiple landscapes an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15 percent will satisfy this requirement;

iv. An irrigation maintenance schedule time line must be attached to the certificate of completion that includes routine inspections, adjustment and repairs to the irrigation system, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, pruning and weeding;

v. A final inspection shall be performed by city staff to verify policy compliance. Advanced notice is required for all inspections. Building permit final approval shall not be completed until the landscape inspection is approved. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.070 Review requirements and procedures.

Projects shall be subject to the following review requirements and procedures:

A. Landscape Design Review. Landscape design review shall be conducted prior to plan check.

1. Administration. Landscape design review of projects shall be conducted by the design review and historic preservation commission, except as follows, in which case landscape design review shall be conducted by the planning director or his/her designee:

a. Rehabilitated landscape project for a single-family home.

b. Rehabilitated landscape project for an existing multifamily development with a landscaped area less than or equal to 2,500 square feet.

c. Rehabilitated or new landscape project for a single-family home (which includes entitled subdivisions) that are not part of a new subdivision, planned development, or within the historic overlay zone area, provided the following criteria are met:

i. No turf is planted; and

ii. Only medium and low water use plants are planted; and

iii. No overhead irrigation sprinklers are installed. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.080 Other provisions.

A. The planning director or his/her designee will consider and may allow the substitution of design alternatives and innovation which may equally reduce water consumption for any of these requirements.

B. The planning director or his/her designee will accept documentation methods, water allowance determination, and landscape and irrigation design requirements of the state of California model water efficient landscape ordinance instead of SMC 14.32.040 and 14.32.050 where it can be demonstrated that the state procedure will more effectively address the design requirements of the project. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.090 Forms.

Applicant shall submit all required documentation for compliance pursuant to SMC 14.32.060 on forms approved by the city engineer or his/her designee, including but not limited to maximum applied water allowance form, hydrozone table form, and certificate of completion form. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


14.32.100 Provisions for appeal.

Appeal of a decision made by the planning director, design review commission, or planning commission shall follow the procedures as established in Chapter 1.24 SMC. (Ord. 02-2017 § 1, 2017).


Chapter 14.36 VIOLATION – PENALTY

(Repealed by Ord. 09-2010)


Title 15 (Reserved)


Title 16  SUBDIVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 2003-02)


Title 17 (Reserved)


Title 18       SIGNS AND DISPLAY ADVERTISING

Chapters:

18.04  General Provisions

18.12  Permits/Administration

18.16  General Regulations

18.20  Specific Regulations

18.28  Prohibitions

18.32  Nonconforming Signs

18.40  Variances

18.44  Abatement and Enforcement

18.50  Definitions

18.60  Appendices


Chapter 18.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

18.04.010    Purpose and intent.

18.04.020    Applicability.


18.04.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of controlling and regulating signs within the city of Sonoma is to protect and benefit the public health, safety and general welfare of the city, its merchants, and property owners by ensuring compatibility with the city’s unique historic character and with its adopted plans; to safeguard and enhance property values and protect public and private investment in buildings and open space; to protect and enhance the appearance of the city as a place in which to reside and work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit and trade; to assure proper and efficient expression through visual communications involving signs compatible with the character and environment of the city; to protect night views of the city with regard to lighting displays; to encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business and for information to the public; to prevent visual clutter, excessive and confusing sign displays and to reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians; and to protect the neat, clean, orderly, and attractive appearance of the city. The intent of this title is to provide uniform standards for the regulation of signs, including but not limited to the number, type, size, materials, placement, and design of signs, and including the prohibition of signs which are found to be garish, excessively brilliant, and/or inappropriate to the character of the city, while not intending to discourage creative design. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.04.020 Applicability.

The regulations of this title shall be applicable to all persons, businesses, and other enterprises seeking to erect or otherwise display a sign in the city of Sonoma, and to all signs within the city of Sonoma. An existing sign refinished for a use other than the original use shall be considered to be a new sign and is subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 18.12 PERMITS/ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

18.12.001    Compliance required.

18.12.010    Application for permit.

18.12.020    Administrative review.

18.12.030    Sign review.

18.12.040    Findings.

18.12.050    Appeal.

18.12.060    Other permits required.

18.12.070    Submittal requirements.

18.12.080    Life of permits – Expiration.

18.12.090    Exemptions.

18.12.100    Permit records.

18.12.110    Variance provision.


18.12.001 Compliance required.

No person or business shall erect, install or maintain any sign in any zone except in a manner consistent with and subject to the limitations and regulations of this title and in accordance with the following procedures and regulations. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.12.010 Application for permit.

Any person, business or other enterprise wishing to erect, display, move, alter, or replace any sign within the limits of the city of Sonoma shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the planning division, except for those signs specifically listed under SMC 18.12.090, Exemptions, or made otherwise exempt under this title. All applications must be determined to be complete prior to consideration or review. No permit shall be issued unless a finding is made that the sign or signs subject to the permit shall be installed and maintained in a manner consistent with the provisions of this title including the provisions of SMC 18.60.010, Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs, and SMC 18.60.030, Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.12.020 Administrative review.

A. Allowance for Administrative Review. The following sign applications shall be considered and acted upon by administrative review by the planning director or his or her designee, subject to the regulations in this title, the design guidelines for signs (SMC 18.60.010, Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs) and the limitations listed below:

1. Replacement of existing conforming signs;

2. Relocation of previously approved signs;

3. New wall signs of 10 square feet in area or less;

4. New projecting or hanging signs of six square feet or less per side;

5. Temporary signs or banners for community events that are larger than six square feet or posted in a public place, and beacons or flashing lights for community or special events;

6. Temporary business signs pending review by the DRHPC for permanent business signage;

7. Window signs that cover less than 10 percent of the aggregate area of each window facing a public right-of-way;

8. Portable freestanding signs that are consistent with SMC 18.20.140.

B. Limitations on Administrative Review. Notwithstanding the allowances set forth in subsection (A) of this section, administrative review shall not be applicable when the application would result in:

1. More than two signs for the business;

2. Lettering of informational text that exceeds four inches in height;

3. Illumination;

4. A sign in a residential zone;

5. A new multi-tenant sign;

6. A roof sign;

7. A permanent freestanding sign; or

8. Such other signs as specifically made subject to DRHPC review throughout the provisions of this title.

In such cases, the application shall be referred to the DRHPC.

C. Plaza and Highway 12 Corridor. The planning director or his or her designee may, upon finding that a sign has high visibility within the Plaza and historic area or the Highway 12 corridor, determine that administrative review is not appropriate, and may require design review as under SMC 18.12.030. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.12.030 Sign review.

The DRHPC shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications or conditions all applications for a sign permit in accordance with all chapters and sections of this title, all applicable titles and chapters of this code, and the appendices accompanying this title (SMC 18.60.010, Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs, and SMC 18.60.030, Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards), except for sign applications determined by the planning director or his or her designee to be within the purview of administrative review as described under SMC 18.12.020, Administrative review, or exempt as under SMC 18.12.090, Exemptions, or upon appeal from the planning director pursuant to SMC 18.12.050, Appeal. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.12.040 Findings.

A. Basic Findings. In order to approve any application for sign review, the review authority must make all of the following findings:

1. The proposed signage complies with applicable policies and regulations, as set forth in this sign ordinance (except for approved variances), all other city ordinances, and the general plan;

2. On balance, the proposed signage is consistent with the purpose and intent expressed by SMC 18.04.010 and the applicable guidelines for signs set forth by SMC 18.60.010, Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs; and

3. The proposed signage is harmonious and consistent overall with the location of the site, including adjacent and surrounding development and its environmental features.

B. Proposed Signage within the Historic Overlay District. In addition to the basic findings set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the review authority must make the following additional findings for any project located within the historic overlay district:

1. The proposed signage will not impair the historic character of its surroundings;

2. The proposed signage substantially preserves the qualities of any significant historic structures or other significant historic features on the site. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015).


18.12.050 Appeal.

Any action taken by the planning director or his or her designee may be appealed to the DRHPC. Any action taken by the DRHPC may be appealed to the city council as set forth under SMC Title 19. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.040).


18.12.060 Other permits required.

In addition to the requirements of this title, all signs shall be in conformance with applicable requirements of the California Building Code as adopted with amendments by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes). Whenever required by Chapter 14.10 SMC, the owner shall obtain a building permit prior to installation. Illuminated signs shall require an electrical permit in accordance with the current version of the electrical code adopted within Chapter 14.10 SMC. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.050).


18.12.070 Submittal requirements.

An application for a sign permit shall contain all of the following, which shall be provided to the planning division in order to be considered a complete application:

A. A completed application for sign review on the city’s form;

B. Payment of the appropriate fee;

C. Supplemental information, as follows:

1. A scale drawing(s) of each proposed sign, no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, accurately depicting all size dimensions, including lettering (height(s), width/length(s), thickness), and appearance, including all text, copy, logos or symbols, borders, colors, other design features, materials, structural support and bracing components, lighting, and all other relevant elements. Colors may be indicated by writing the names of the colors to be used, with color samples provided at the DRHPC meeting, or by submission of color chips or a colored rendering. Scale drawings shall include a section view, as well as face view, if relevant to a full description of the sign.

2. Building elevations, drawn to scale in an 11-inch-by-17-inch or smaller format, showing the placement of each sign on the building face, and profiles of the building and sign for projecting signs. For existing buildings, photographs may be used, with an overlay or other form of simulation for the proposed sign. (This requirement may be waived by the planning director.)

3. A site plan, drawn to scale in an 11-inch-by-17-inch or smaller format, showing the location of buildings, parking, streets, and drives relevant to any proposed sign, and indicating the location of all signs. The site plan should clearly depict the primary and secondary street frontage. (This requirement may be waived by the planning director.) (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.060).


18.12.080 Life of permits – Expiration.

Unless specified as temporary or given an expiration date as a condition of approval by the planning director or the DRHPC, a sign permit shall expire upon the occurrence of:

A. The permanent closing or ending of a business or enterprise;

B. A business or enterprise moving from the location where the sign was permitted;

C. A new permit being granted for a replacement sign;

D. Three months after removal of the sign from the premises;

E. One year from the date of issuance if the permit is not used (the sign is not erected) within that time period;

F. Immediately upon a determination that the sign has not been erected in conformance with any permit, has not been maintained in conformance with any permit, is in violation of any provision of this title, the SMC, or any other applicable ordinance, city rule or regulation, or has become a nuisance or other sanitary or health hazard.

Except as specifically stated within this title, permits for nonexempt temporary signs shall expire three months from the date of issuance of the permit, or 48 hours after the end of an event or purpose for which the sign is erected, whichever is less, unless otherwise specified with an expiration date by the planning director or his or her designee or the DRHPC. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.070).


18.12.090 Exemptions.

The following signs may be erected without a permit provided they are not illuminated and contain no reflective painted material. These signs shall not be included in the measurement of total allowable sign area on a site:

A. Identification, directional, or information signs not exceeding one square foot in area, and four in number.

B. Bulletin boards containing public or institutional information not exceeding eight square feet in area when on the premises of public, religious, or charitable institutions or locations available to the public, such as shopping centers, and set back at least 10 feet from the street right-of-way.

C. Official traffic signs or other municipal governmental signs, legal notices, advertisements prescribed by law, signs indicating the location of buried utility lines or a notice posted by a governmental official in the scope of his or her duties.

D. Construction signs not to exceed one in number for each construction site and not to exceed 16 square feet in commercial zones nor six square feet in other zones. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the commencement of construction, and shall be removed before final inspection is approved by the building official.

E. Subdivision Signs. One information sign is permitted for each subdivision. Such signs shall not be erected prior to construction and shall be removed within 10 days of all units being initially sold. The sign shall be located on the subdivision premises, and shall not exceed 24 square feet. This subsection shall not prohibit a permanent subdivision identification sign from being erected with a permit.

F. Special community event signs and/or banners advertising a community-wide event of general interest and sponsored by a noncommercial community group, provided the sign not exceed six square feet, nor be displayed for longer than 15 consecutive days.

G. Street address signs with lettering no larger than six inches high. Notwithstanding anything in this section, these signs may be illuminated and may contain reflective paint or material.

H. Minor repairs to a sign to keep it in a well-maintained condition as required by this title, or any repair to a sign conforming with this title so long as the repair does not result in an increase in the size of the sign, or alter the sign in a way which results in a violation of any condition of approval or of this title.

I. Grand opening signs, and temporary event signs and/or banners, limited to one in number, and for a period not to exceed 15 consecutive days, three times per year.

J. Identification signs on vehicles indicating the name and/or nature of the business for which the vehicle is used, if attached in a permanent manner.

K. Real estate signs conforming to SMC 18.20.155. However, certain real estate signs shall require discretionary review by the planning director or his or her designee or the DRHPC as provided for in SMC 18.20.155(C), (D)(4), and (G). Such signs shall be displayed for no longer than the sale or lease of the property being advertised is completed or 18 months if the property is not sold or leased within that time.

L. Political signs, ideological, religious, or signs having any other message which are displayed within 90 days prior to a valid election held within the city may be displayed without a permit, subject to the following regulations:

1. Size. Each sign shall not exceed eight square feet in area or a total aggregate sign area of 32 square feet on a single parcel.

2. Time. Each sign shall be removed within 10 days following the election.

3. Unimproved Property. If the signs pertain to a valid election and are to be displayed on unimproved property, the candidate shall file written approval of the property owner and a deposit of $25.00 with the city clerk for the signs, to be refunded upon removal of the signs.

4. Signs shall not be displayed on public property.

M. Gold lettering on a window is exempted only from inclusion in the aggregate sign area of a building, and is otherwise subject to the city’s permit requirements. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2002-07 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.080).


18.12.100 Permit records.

A copy and record of each sign permit issued shall be kept on file with the city. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.090).


18.12.110 Variance provision.

Creative design is not intended to be discouraged by the provisions of this title; therefore a variance from these regulations may be approved consistent with Chapter 18.40 SMC, Variances. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.12.100).


Chapter 18.16 GENERAL REGULATIONS

Sections:

18.16.001    Compliance required.

18.16.010    Number of signs.

18.16.020    Size of signs.

18.16.021    Aggregate sign area.

18.16.022    Maximum size.

18.16.031    Sign location.

18.16.032    Signs in residential zones.

18.16.040    Maintenance.

18.16.050    Compliance with regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission.


18.16.001 Compliance required.

All signs within the city of Sonoma shall comply with all applicable regulations of this title and chapter. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.010 Number of signs.

There shall be no more than two separate signs for any one business or enterprise, except as specified under Chapter 18.20 SMC, Specific Regulations, or unless one or more of the conditions listed below apply:

A. Where a property or structure is designed for more than one business occupancy, each occupancy is authorized to have two signs.

B. If a business provides access to a parking area with a rear entrance available to the general public, an additional sign no greater than three square feet shall be permitted at the rear access point.

C. If a parcel has a primary frontage greater than 200 feet, an additional sign shall be permitted.

D. Where a business is located in a courtyard, alleyway, or is not visible from street frontage or parking area, an additional sign may be permitted. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.020 Size of signs.

No sign permit shall allow for the aggregate sign area of any structure or property to be exceeded. No building, property or parcel shall have installed or erected upon it any sign or signs which in the aggregate exceed the aggregate sign area permitted in SMC 18.16.021 and 18.16.022. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.021 Aggregate sign area.

A. Primary Street Frontage. For the first 30 feet of primary frontage of the parcel, the allowable aggregate sign area shall be three square feet of sign area for each five lineal feet of primary frontage. For primary frontage of more than 30 feet, two additional square feet of sign area shall be permitted for each five lineal feet of primary frontage in excess of 30 feet.

B. Secondary Frontage. In addition to the above, one square foot of sign for each five lineal feet of parcel frontage on a secondary street shall be allowed.

C. Forty-Foot Sight Distance. In addition to subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the allowable aggregate sign area may be increased by 50 percent if the structure involved and the sign are located more than 40 feet from the centerline of the street on which they face. The increased aggregate sign area shall not increase the maximum sign sizes as provided below or in the specific regulations.

D. One-Hundred-Fifty-Foot Site Distance. If the sign and the structure involved are more than 150 feet from the centerline of the street on which they face, the aggregate sign area permitted may be increased by an additional 25 percent to that allowed by the 40-foot sight distance in subsection (C) of this section. If this section applies, the individual sign sizes as permitted by subsections (E) and (F) of this section may also be increased by 25 percent.

E. Minimum Allowed Sign Area. Any business not having the necessary frontage (or floor area as in subsection (F) of this section) to permit at least six square feet of aggregate sign area shall, in any event, be permitted six square feet of aggregate sign area.

F. Multiple Businesses. Where two or more businesses or occupancies exist in any one building, the aggregate sign area shall be prorated among tenants in direct proportion to the floor area for each use.

G. Multisided Signs. In computing sign area of a strictly two-sided sign (back-to-back), each face shall be multiplied by 0.75. Multisided signs other than double-faced signs, constructed with faces at any angle, shall be counted as one sign per face. Other signs constructed in the form of a cylinder, sphere or similar figure shall be considered as one sign and the total surface area shall be computed as sign area. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.022 Maximum size.

No sign shall exceed 48 square feet in total area. Each face of a double-faced sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.031 Sign location.

Signs shall be located only on the property of the use or business being identified, unless the property or business has no street frontage, in which case signage may be located on a property that contains street frontage that is in front of or adjacent to the subject property, with written permission of the property owner. No other off-site signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.032 Signs in residential zones.

No signs shall be allowed in residential zones except as otherwise permitted by SMC 18.12.090 and as follows:

A. Except for bed and breakfasts and home occupations, one non-illuminated identification sign no larger than five square feet may be allowed for a permitted business within the historic overlay district, or for a legal, nonconforming business in a residential zone.

B. One subdivision or apartment identification sign is allowed for each project in any residential zone. Such signage shall be permitted only on the site of the use being identified. The sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in area, with a maximum horizontal length of five feet. In the case of freestanding signs, a maximum of seven square feet per sign with a maximum horizontal length of five feet is allowed.

C. Bed and breakfast signs shall be limited to two square feet in area, and one in number.

D. No window display of products, nor signs advertising the location of a home occupation, shall be permitted in a residential zone. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.040 Maintenance.

The owner of any sign shall properly maintain all parts and supports of the sign. Signs and sign structures shall be maintained at all times in a state of good repair and finish, with all braces, bolts, and structural parts and supporting frames and fastenings free from deterioration, rot, rust and loosening. No person shall maintain, or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him/her, any sign which is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated or otherwise dilapidated or unsafe. The planning director or his or her designee shall give written notice to the owner of any sign determined to be improperly maintained. After 30 days, any sign not properly maintained or removed shall be deemed to be noncompliant with this section, in violation of this code, and subject to the abatement provisions of this title. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.16.050 Compliance with regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, no sign shall be constructed, erected, installed or maintained in any manner that conflicts with any rule, regulation or order of the California Public Utilities Commission pertaining to the construction, operation, and maintenance of public utilities. 

Nothing in this section shall extend the time for a sign that is exempt under SMC 18.12.090 to be displayed in accordance with that section. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 18.20 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS*

Sections:

18.20.001    Conditions – Conflicts.

18.20.110    Banners.

18.20.120    Freestanding (or monument) signs.

18.20.130    Illuminated signs and/or exterior business lighting.

18.20.140    Portable freestanding signs.

18.20.150    Projecting signs.

18.20.155    Real estate signs.

18.20.160    Roof signs.

18.20.170    Service station signs.

18.20.180    Shopping center signage.

18.20.190    Wall signs.

18.20.200    Window signs.

*Code reviser’s note: Sections 18.20.011 through 18.20.020 of this chapter were editorially renumbered as 18.20.110 through 18.20.200 to prevent duplication of numbering after the amendments of Ordinance 03-2011.


18.20.001 Conditions – Conflicts.

The following regulations provide additional specificity for signs under the categories of types of signs, types of businesses, or particular locations. Where regulations of this chapter conflict with regulations under Chapter 18.16 SMC, General Regulations, the regulations of this chapter shall apply. Any permit issued pursuant to this title shall be subject to the following conditions in addition to those conditions set forth in the permit. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.20.110 Banners.

Decorative banners and flags may be used for grand opening or special events for a maximum period of 15 consecutive days, or for holidays for a period of no more than 45 total days per year and may be permanently displayed if first approved by the DRHPC. In no event shall advertising copy be displayed on any banner. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.011).


18.20.120 Freestanding (or monument) signs.

A. Number. Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per parcel or property.

B. Height. The top of a freestanding sign, including the sign structure, shall not exceed 12 feet.

C. Placement. Every freestanding sign shall be wholly on the property occupied by the use or uses identified or advertised, and no less than six feet from the nearest roadway or public pedestrian sidewalk or walkway, whichever is closer. Any variance to the provisions of this section shall, in addition to other findings required by SMC 18.40.030, require a finding that the sign will not limit, restrict, impede, or impair sight distance or visibility. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.012).


18.20.130 Illuminated signs and/or exterior business lighting.

A. Intent. Illumination of signs and of business frontage, facilities, and products is a very sensitive issue in the city of Sonoma. Although it is recognized that illuminated signs and exterior advertising lighting may allow identification of businesses and their products at night, illuminated signs are considered generally inappropriate except for businesses which normally operate in the evening hours. Exterior night lighting of commercial areas should produce no glare, spillage, or excessively bright lighting. Where illumination is determined essential or permissible by the DRHPC or the planning commission, it shall be as subdued as possible, allowing for legibility. The DRHPC recognizes that new technologies have been developed related to illuminated signs and would like to promote creativity in the design of illuminated signs. Special consideration should be given to the historical significance of the surrounding area while considering the historical appropriateness of the sign. In addition, an illuminated sign shall not flash, blink, move, or scintillate.

B. Restrictions.

1. Size. Interiorly illuminated signs, where permitted, shall not exceed 27 square feet in area. Each face of a two-sided interiorly illuminated sign shall not exceed 18 square feet. Exteriorly illuminated signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Each face of a two-sided exteriorly illuminated sign shall not exceed 21 square feet in area.

2. Brilliance. No sign or exterior business lighting shall be permitted that produces glare or light spillage, or that is more intense than is necessary to legibly illuminate a sign or exterior area. Signs and exterior lighting that are excessively brilliant are prohibited. Where lighting is provided, it shall be subdued. In determining whether a sign or exterior lighting is excessively brilliant, consideration shall be given to the following:

a. The size of the sign or area to be lit;

b. The percentage of the white or light-colored portions of the sign or exterior area, or potential for light reflection of areas to be lit;

c. The brightness or level of lighting for the sign or area;

d. The distance from the public right-of-way;

e. The proximity of surrounding signs and other exteriorly lit businesses; and

f. The nature of the surrounding area.

Whenever a sign or business lighting is to abut a residential area, the DRHPC shall consider the illumination times, the location of the sign and/or lighting, the height and direction of the light sources, and the level of light and its intensity.

3. Illumination. Exterior illumination of signs or exterior business areas shall be accomplished through lights concealed from all public areas so that the light source is not visible. Flood lights shall be shielded on all sides but that facing the sign or exterior area. Flood lights for exterior lighting must be concealed in some manner (including landscaping or a building feature) and be directed only toward areas where specifically needed. No light spillage or glare shall be allowed into areas not intended to be lit or onto neighboring properties. It is recommended that the surface brightness shall not be greater than 100 foot-lamberts.

All illuminated signs or exterior business areas shall be lit with the minimum necessary level of lighting to provide legibility or subtle security lighting at normal sight distances. Interiorly illuminated signs are prohibited in residential zoning districts.

4. Illuminated Window Signs. One illuminated window sign no more than two square feet in area may be permitted. Such a sign shall be counted as one sign, and shall be included in the aggregate sign area. A neon sign shall be considered an illuminated window sign.

5. Illuminated signs and exterior lighting shall conform to the lighting standards in SMC 18.60.030, Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards, and applicable sections of the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards.

6. Within 60 days after the installation and lighting of an illuminated sign and/or exterior lighting, the DRHPC shall require alteration of the intensity if the sign or lighting violates any of the provisions herein or the guidelines and standards of SMC 18.60.010, Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs, or SMC 18.60.030, Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards.

7. Any existing sign which is determined by the DRHPC, planning commission, or city council to violate any of the above provisions shall be subject to reduction of intensity or to the provisions of this title regarding abatement and enforcement (Chapter 18.44 SMC). (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.013).


18.20.140 Portable freestanding signs.

A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to minimize the use of portable freestanding signs in order to minimize visual clutter and conflicts on sidewalks and to ensure that when portable freestanding signs are allowed that they are harmonious with their surroundings and distinctive in their design and creativity. Portable freestanding signs shall be allowed only when approved by the planning director or his or her designee upon a finding that special circumstances exist regarding the applicant’s business location that require a freestanding portable sign. Examples of such special circumstances include, but are not limited to: (1) the business is not visible from the street on which it lies; (2) options for permanent signs have been exhausted; or (3) some other valid physical justification. Portable freestanding signs shall be designed so as to be compatible with the architecture of the building in which the applicant’s business is located and compatible with other buildings on the same block and in the same vicinity as the applicant’s business. Generic design, prefabricated A-frame signs, and plastic material shall be discouraged.

B. Portable freestanding signs may be approved by the planning director or his or her designee anywhere in the city in conformance with this section except in commercial shopping centers with approved sign programs and on sidewalks surrounding the Plaza with the exception of the Place des Pyrenees. Examples of portable freestanding signs that may be approved administratively include signs consisting of a dry erase board face featuring a black background, wording that is primarily hand-drawn, and a border finish that includes brushed steel, maple, or reclaimed wood.

C. An applicant that moves his or her business to a new location must apply for a new approval if the applicant desires to place a portable freestanding sign at the new business location. Approval for a portable freestanding sign at one location is not transferable to another location.

D. The following limitations shall apply to portable freestanding signs:

1. If the lineal feet of street or alley frontage at the location at which an applicant desires to place a portable freestanding sign is less than 40 feet, the maximum allowable size of a freestanding sign shall be five square feet. The freestanding sign shall not exceed a maximum width of 24 inches and a maximum height of 48 inches.

2. If the lineal feet of street or alley frontage at the location at which an applicant desires to place a portable freestanding sign is 40 feet or greater, the maximum allowable size of a freestanding sign shall be six square feet. The freestanding sign shall not exceed a maximum width of 30 inches and a maximum height of 48 inches.

3. Portable freestanding signs shall be of stable construction and braced as necessary to prevent collapse or toppling. If a sign has wheels, the wheels must be capable of locking.

4. Portable freestanding signs shall be located on the property of the business which it advertises or on the sidewalk fronting that property. Portable freestanding signs for businesses located in alleys shall be located within five feet of the entrance of the alley business. Portable freestanding signs shall not be placed on the street. Portable freestanding signs located on sidewalks shall be located within two feet of the building frontage or the interior of a sidewalk. Portable freestanding signs shall be located so as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic or disabled person access and shall not be placed in a location that presents a hazard. A minimum sidewalk clearance of five feet shall be required. Portable freestanding signs shall not have any moving parts, projections, or lighting.

5. Only one portable freestanding sign shall be allowed per business. Portable freestanding signs authorized by the planning director or his or her designee shall not be counted against the number and aggregate sign area to which a property is otherwise entitled under this title.

6. No more than two portable freestanding signs shall be displayed at any time at one business property, except that each business located on an alley may be permitted to display one portable freestanding sign, except that the Place des Pyrenees alley businesses may be permitted to display a maximum of three portable freestanding signs at any one time at a business property.

7. Portable freestanding signs shall be displayed only during business hours.

8. There shall be at least 10 feet between portable freestanding signs, except that the Place des Pyrenees alley businesses shall be permitted a four-foot spacing between portable freestanding signs.

9. As a condition to the authorization of portable freestanding signs by the planning director or his or her designee, the applicant shall be required to furnish to the city proof of insurance and to execute an agreement obligating the permittee to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any action, claim or expense that may occur as a result of the placement of the portable freestanding sign on any sidewalk or public right-of-way. Any person who fails to furnish the required proof of insurance and indemnification in connection with the placement of a portable freestanding sign shall be in violation of this chapter and the sign shall be subject to immediate removal by the city.

10. At such time as vehicular traffic is no longer permitted at the Place des Pyrenees, portable freestanding signs shall no longer be permitted. All authorizations for portable freestanding signs issued by the planning director or his or her designee shall immediately terminate and be of no further force or effect. All temporary freestanding signs placed at the Place des Pyrenees after the date traffic is no longer permitted shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

E. Applications for portable freestanding signs that do not meet the limitations set forth above shall be subject to the review and approval of the DRHPC, which may, but is not required to, permit exceptions to the dimensional standards set forth above if it finds that:

1. The circumstances of the sign location or design necessitate the granting of such exceptions in order to provide adequate visibility, address unique site conditions, or provide for enhanced design quality or creativity; and

2. The proposed exception to dimensional standards is consistent with the intent of this section; and

3. The proposed exception to dimensional standards, if granted, would not result in the approval of a portable freestanding sign that is in excess of 72 inches in height. (Ord. 09-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.017).


18.20.150 Projecting signs.

A. Size. Projecting signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area on each side.

B. Placement. Projecting signs shall not project over four feet from any wall surface nor be closer than four feet to any curb line of a public street. No projecting sign shall extend above the top level of the wall upon or in front of which it is situated, or in the case of buildings having sloping roofs, above the eaves of the roof.

C. Clearance. Any sign which is suspended or projects over any public or private walkway or walk area shall have an overhead clearance of at least seven feet. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.015).


18.20.155 Real estate signs.

A. Intent. Real estate signs for the purpose of advertising a property is for sale or lease shall be permitted provided such signs conform to the requirements of this section and are limited in duration to the time period established under SMC 18.12.090 or as may be extended under this section.

B. Real estate signs (commercial, corporate) shall conform to the following requirements:

1. Number, Display. One sign advertising that a property is for sale, lease or exchange is permitted on each building frontage to be displayed on the subject property by the owner or his/her agent, and may include the owner’s or agent’s name, address, and telephone number.

2. Size. Real estate signs may be two-sided and shall be no larger than eight square feet per side. Real estate signs for large properties (over 25,000 square feet of building area) may be two-sided and shall be no larger than 32 square feet per side.

C. Real estate signs (commercial, noncorporate) shall require review by the DRHPC. Real estate signs shall be compatible with the architecture of the building they advertise. Generic design, prefabricated signs, and the use of plastic materials are discouraged.

D. Real estate signs (residential, one to four units) shall conform to the following requirements:

1. Number, Display. One real estate sign advertising that a property is for sale, lease or exchange may be displayed on the subject property by the owner or his/her agent, and may include the owner’s or agent’s name, address, and telephone number.

2. Size. Real estate signs may be two-sided and shall be no larger than eight square feet per side (not including riders and toppers).

3. Freestanding Real Estate Signs. The sign shall be attached to a post (or posts), no larger than four inches square, driven into the ground so that the top of the sign shall not be over six feet above the ground surface. There are two types of additional signs that may be placed on a real estate sign: a rider and a topper. A maximum number of two riders may be placed on the freestanding sign. One topper sign shall be allowed. There are two sizes of allowable rider signs: standard (24 inches by 18 inches); and premium (24 inches by 30 inches). One type of topper is allowed: 24 inches by six inches.

4. Additional freestanding real estate riders or toppers may be allowed subject to the discretion of the planning director or his or her designee.

E. Temporary/Portable Open House Signs. A maximum of two temporary “Open House” signs shall be allowed for any property, with their display limited to the hours that the property is available for viewing. The size of each “Open House” sign shall be limited to 24 inches wide by 18 inches in height.

F. Real estate sign (five or more units) shall conform to the following requirements:

1. Number, Display. A maximum of one real estate sign advertising that properties are for sale, lease or exchange may be displayed on the subject property by the owner or his/her agent, and may include the owner’s or agent’s name, address, and telephone number.

2. The real estate sign may be two-sided and shall be no larger than 32 square feet per side.

G. Renewal. Real estate signs (five or more units) may be displayed for up to 18 months as provided under SMC 18.12.090. After 18 months, DRHPC review is required and a sign permit application shall be submitted consistent with SMC 18.12.010. If the DRHPC determines that the sign has been maintained in a state of good repair and finish, then the DRHPC may allow the display of the sign to continue for a reasonable period of time as determined by the DRHPC.

H. Vacant Lots. Freestanding signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line. Signs may be two-sided and shall be no larger than eight square feet per side. On parcels in excess of one acre, a 16-square-foot real estate sign shall be permitted. The sign shall be attached to a post driven into the ground so that the top of the sign shall not be over six feet above the surface of the ground. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.025).


18.20.160 Roof signs.

Roof signs shall only be permitted when the silhouette of the sign is not in conflict with the silhouette of the rooflines of the building. Roof signs on flat roofs are prohibited. No roof sign shall be more than two feet in height. The top of a roof sign shall not exceed or rise above the lowest 25 percent of the height of the roof. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.016).


18.20.170 Service station signs.

Service station signs shall be subject to all other applicable regulations of this title including the allowable aggregate sign area, with the exception of the number of signs allowable. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, service station signs shall be subject to the following limitations:

A. Freestanding company identification signs, limited to one, shall not exceed 18 square feet on one side, and may be double-faced and illuminated. Identification signs on canopies, limited to a total of three, shall not exceed 10 square feet each. The design review and historic preservation commission (DRHPC) may, at its discretion (subject to SMC 18.12.030), exclude logos from the limitations on numbers of signs; however, it shall review all such sign copy and their proposed locations.

B. In addition to identification signs, additional signs may be permitted as follows:

1. Price signs, limited to one, shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall be permanently affixed (nonportable). Price signs may be double-faced and illuminated.

2. One owner identification sign not to exceed three square feet in area. The sign shall not be illuminated or double-faced.

3. Miscellaneous signs, such as small accessory signs, credit card signs, automated teller machine signs, car wash signs, and food service signs, and other similar signs, shall not count toward the aggregate sign area; provided, that the DRHPC approves their size and location. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.027).


18.20.180 Shopping center signage.

In addition to and notwithstanding the number and sizes of signs listed under SMC 18.16.010 and 18.16.020, one additional identification sign may be permitted for a shopping center. The total area of the additional sign shall not exceed 60 square feet, with no single face of a double or multisided sign larger than 40 square feet. Illuminated shopping center signage shall conform to the sizes under the illuminated signs section (SMC 18.20.130), unless granted a variance by the DRHPC.

A shopping center may develop a sign program for all tenants within the center which, after approval by the DRHPC, may be administered by the shopping center administration. Signs not in conformance with the approved program must be reviewed by the planning director or his or her designee or the DRHPC in accordance with Chapter 18.40 SMC. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.028).


18.20.190 Wall signs.

Wall signs projecting over the property line, including a light box or other part thereof, shall not exceed a thickness of 12 inches. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.018).


18.20.200 Window signs.

Permanent or temporary window signs shall not cover more than 20 percent of the aggregate area of each window facing a public right-of-way. Permanent window signs (except as specified in SMC 18.12.020(A)(7)) shall require review by the DRHPC, and shall be included in the total aggregate sign area allowable for the site. Display of temporary window signage shall not exceed 90 days per year. Illuminated window signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions of SMC 18.20.130, Illuminated signs and/or exterior business lighting. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.20.019).


Chapter 18.28 PROHIBITIONS

Sections:

18.28.001    Generally.

18.28.010    Permit required.

18.28.021    Prohibited signs – Abandoned signs.

18.28.022    Prohibited signs – Advertising signs.

18.28.024    Prohibited signs – Excessive brilliance.

18.28.026    Prohibited signs – Moving signs.

18.28.027    Prohibited signs – Animated signs.

18.28.028    Prohibited signs – Vehicle signs.

18.28.034    Prohibited locations – Obstructions.

18.28.035    Prohibited locations – Residential zones.

18.28.036    Prohibited locations – Sign posting in a public place.

18.28.037    Prohibited locations – Signs within rights-of-way.

18.28.038    Prohibited locations – Traffic safety.


18.28.001 Generally.

The following regulations specify prohibitions regarding signage displays in the city. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.010 Permit required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, directly or indirectly, to install, erect, move, alter, replace, suspend or attach any sign, or do any structural work in connection with a sign within the city limits without first securing a permit from the planning director or his her designee as provided in this title, except for as expressly listed in SMC 18.12.090, Exemptions. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.021 Prohibited signs – Abandoned signs.

No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him/her, any sign which has been abandoned. A firm which has gone out of business shall have 30 days from the date of closing of the business to remove the sign. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.022 Prohibited signs – Advertising signs.

Except as provided by SMC 18.20.155, Real estate signs, no sign shall be erected or used for advertising purposes of any kind except such signs as shall be located on a place of business, enterprise or calling, and used solely for naming, designating or identifying such business, enterprise or calling. No sign shall advertise or display the make, brand name, or manufacturer’s name of any product, article or service except when essential to and entirely integral with naming, designating or identifying the business, enterprise, or calling, or when advertising a product which is carried by that business under a legally recognized franchise or a written exclusive sales agreement. Illuminated beer or other illuminated product advertising signs are specifically prohibited. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.024 Prohibited signs – Excessive brilliance.

No sign or exterior lighting associated with a business shall be permitted that produces glare or light spillage onto other properties or into areas not intended to be lit, or that is more intense than is necessary to adequately illuminate the sign or exterior area. Light boxes and signs that are determined to be excessively brilliant by the DRHPC, and/or conflict with any criteria within SMC 18.60.030, Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards, are prohibited. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.026 Prohibited signs – Moving signs.

Moving sign structures, pennants, whirligigs, reflectors, reflective signs, moving lights, flashing lights, feather signs, and visible gaseous discharges are specifically prohibited except as permitted under SMC 18.12.020, Administrative review. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.027 Prohibited signs – Animated signs.

No person or animal shall use, carry, or wear any sign displaying a commercial message on private or public property, except as may be required by ordinance or law. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015).


18.28.028 Prohibited signs – Vehicle signs.

No signs shall be located, displayed or attached on any motor vehicle except “For Sale” signs, and/or identification signs indicating the name and/or nature of the business for which the vehicle is used. Such an identification sign shall be attached to the vehicle in a permanent manner, including attachment by magnetic means, and shall be only incidental to the purpose of the vehicle. This section shall not apply to signs for noncommercial purposes. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.034 Prohibited locations – Obstructions.

No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of the sign or its support is attached to or will interfere with the free use of any fire escape, exit, or standpipe, or obstruct any required door, venting system, window, disabled access, or public right-of-way. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.035 Prohibited locations – Residential zones.

Interior illuminated signs are prohibited in any residential zone. Home occupation signs are prohibited in residential zones. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.036 Prohibited locations – Sign posting in a public place.

No person, firm, or corporation, except a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty, shall paste, paint, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster or advertisement or notice of any kind, except construction warning signs, or cause the same to be done, on any curbstone, lamp post, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, wall, fence or tree, upon any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public property, except as may be required by ordinance or law. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.037 Prohibited locations – Signs within rights-of-way.

No permanent sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way except for the posting of official government notices by a representative of that agency, a franchised public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way. No temporary or portable sidewalk sign shall be so placed without an encroachment permit compliant with Chapter 12.20 SMC. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.28.038 Prohibited locations – Traffic safety.

No sign shall be erected in such a manner that it will, or may reasonably be expected to, interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic, or obstruct a traffic line of sight. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 18.32 NONCONFORMING SIGNS

Sections:

18.32.010    Signs rendered nonconforming.

18.32.020    Modification of nonconforming signs.


18.32.010 Signs rendered nonconforming.

Any sign which was in compliance with existing laws as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, but that becomes legally nonconforming on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title by the amendment of this title, or subsequent to the effective date becomes legally nonconforming by reason of annexation to the city of territory upon which the sign is located, shall be permitted to remain until such time as one or more signs of the business are replaced, moved, or altered in any manner, at which time all signage for the business shall conform to this title. While they remain in place, such signs are considered to be legal nonconforming signs. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.32.020 Modification of nonconforming signs.

No nonconforming sign shall be in any manner altered, reconstructed or moved without being made to comply in all respects with the provisions of this title; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the normal maintenance or repair of any nonconforming sign nor the repainting of the face thereof until it is removed or made conforming as provided herein. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 18.40 VARIANCES

Sections:

18.40.001    Authority.

18.40.010    Application.

18.40.020    Procedure.

18.40.030    Findings.


18.40.001 Authority.

The DRHPC may grant a variance in accordance with the procedure specified below and authorize a specific exception to any regulation of this title. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.40.010 Application.

An application for a variance from the provisions of this title shall be filed on a regular sign application form, accompanied by plans, sketches, and a narrative that clearly depict and describe the proposal and the exception required, along with the appropriate filing fee. A narrative shall explain and justify why a variance is necessary. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.40.020 Procedure.

A. Public Hearing. The DRHPC shall hear the variance item at a regular or special meeting of the commission.

B. Granting of the Variance. The DRHPC has final authority to grant the variance if it makes all of the findings in accordance with this chapter and any other variance findings specifically required to be made for the applicable sign by this title. The DRHPC may require such terms or conditions to the granting of the variance as are deemed necessary and reasonable to secure the objectives of this title.

C. Noncompliance and Revisions to the Variance. Noncompliance with or violation of terms or conditions of a variance shall constitute cause for revocation of the variance. Revisions to the terms or conditions of a granted variance shall require a new application and public hearing.

D. Effective Date. The variance shall become effective and be issued 15 days after the date the DRHPC grants the variance, unless an appeal has been filed, in which case the variance shall not be issued unless and until the granting of the variance is affirmed on appeal.

E. Appeals. Appeals shall be taken according to SMC 18.12.050, Appeal. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.40.030 Findings.

The DRHPC may grant a variance if it makes all of the following necessary findings:

A. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, not resulting from any act of the owner or applicant, apply to the location under consideration and not generally to other businesses or properties in the vicinity;

B. Strict adherence to a regulation may cause unnecessary hardship or prohibit the exercise of creative design, and the application submitted is extraordinary and outstanding in design;

C. The exception is the minimum necessary to serve its intended use;

D. The exception is in conformance with the purpose and intent of this title;

E. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public interest or welfare, or injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 18.44 ABATEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

18.44.001    Generally.

18.44.010    Abatement.

18.44.020    Enforcement.

18.44.030    Penalties.


18.44.001 Generally.

Abatement and enforcement of this title shall be accomplished according to Chapter 1.12 SMC, General Penalty, and according to the regulations listed below. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.44.010 Abatement.

Signs, except legal nonconforming signs as described above, which do not comply with the regulations of this title or a sign’s associated permit, shall be immediately and completely removed (including any structure and/or supports), or abated as determined by the planning director and/or the police department in accordance with the following paragraph.

A warning letter or citation shall be issued by the planning, public works, or police department to request compliance with this title, and shall give a specific time period for rectification. If compliance is not reached within the time period specified, or if the noncompliance or offense is repeated or continued, a citation from the police department shall be issued or other legal action may be taken by the city as described under SMC 18.44.020(B), Public Nuisance. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.44.020 Enforcement.

A. Inspections. The planning director may, at any time, make such inspections as may be necessary or appropriate to ascertain whether a sign will comply or is complying with the purpose and intent of this title. An appeal of an adverse determination by the planning director may be made to the architectural review commission.

B. Public Nuisance. A violation of the provisions of this title is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city prosecutor or city attorney, on direction of the city council, may institute necessary legal proceedings for the abatement or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such steps as may be necessary to accomplish those ends.

C. Unsafe, Unlawful Signs. Should any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein become unsafe, insecure, a menace to the public, or should it be constructed, erected or maintained in violation of this title, or should the same no longer advertise a bona fide business conducted or a product or service sold on the premises, or which no longer serves its purpose, the planning director shall abate the sign as under SMC 18.44.010, Abatement, or legal action may be pursued by the city as under subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.44.030 Penalties.

Citations issued for violation of any portion of this title shall be according to Chapter 1.12 SMC, General Penalty. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this title may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor at the discretion of the city attorney and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 SMC. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he/she shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 18.50 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.50.001    Generally.

18.50.010    A-board sign or sidewalk sign.

18.50.020    Abandoned sign.

18.50.030    Advertising – Advertising copy.

18.50.040    Advertising sign.

18.50.045    Aggregate sign area.

18.50.047    Animated sign.

18.50.050    Awning or canopy sign.

18.50.060    Banner sign.

18.50.070    Building face.

18.50.080    Construction sign.

18.50.090    Design review and historic preservation commission.

18.50.100    Directional sign.

18.50.110    Erect.

18.50.115    Feather sign.

18.50.120    Flag sign.

18.50.130    Freestanding sign.

18.50.140    Frontage.

18.50.150    Hanging sign.

18.50.160    Identification sign.

18.50.170    Illuminated sign.

18.50.180    Information sign.

18.50.190    Informational text.

18.50.200    Legal, nonconforming use (or business).

18.50.210    Mobile sign.

18.50.220    Moving signs.

18.50.230    Occupational nameplate.

18.50.240    Permanent sign.

18.50.250    Planning director.

18.50.260    Political sign.

18.50.270    Portable freestanding sign.

18.50.280    Primary street frontage – Primary frontage.

18.50.290    Projecting sign.

18.50.300    Real estate sign (commercial, corporate).

18.50.310    Real estate sign (commercial, noncorporate).

18.50.320    Real estate sign (residential, one to four units).

18.50.330    Real estate sign (five or more units).

18.50.340    Rider sign.

18.50.350    Roof sign.

18.50.360    Shopping center.

18.50.370    Sidewalk sign.

18.50.380    Sign.

18.50.390    Sign area.

18.50.395    Sign program.

18.50.400    Temporary sign.

18.50.410    Topper sign.

18.50.420    Wall sign.

18.50.430    Window sign.


18.50.001 Generally.

For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this chapter. For other words and phrases not found herein, this title shall utilize the definitions found in SMC Title 19. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.010 A-board sign or sidewalk sign.

“A-board sign or sidewalk sign” means a portable (typically double-sided) sign designed to stand independently upon a surface on which it is placed: a two-legged support sign in the form of the letter “A.” (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.020 Abandoned sign.

“Abandoned sign” means any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer exists. Thirty days after a business has ceased operation, or has gone out of business, signs for that business shall be presumed to have been abandoned. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.030 Advertising – Advertising copy.

“Advertising” or “advertising copy” means any form of nonpersonal promotion of ideas, goods, and/or services usually paid for by an identified sponsor including but not limited to, product logo, brand name, or other product identifying information. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.040 Advertising sign.

“Advertising sign” means a sign which calls attention to particular goods or services, other than those which identify the basic name or function of the enterprise located on the premises, whether or not such goods or services may be offered on the premises. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.045 Aggregate sign area.

“Aggregate sign area” means the total sign area of all signs located on a property or that portion of the property described by the provision of this title in which this term is being employed. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015).


18.50.047 Animated sign.

“Animated sign” means a sign carried or worn by a person or animal, including an A-board sign, costume, placard, or similar device. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015).


18.50.050 Awning or canopy sign.

“Awning or canopy sign” means a sign applied, attached, or painted on the surface of an awning or canopy. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.060).


18.50.060 Banner sign.

“Banner sign” means a sign which is made of quality material attached on four sides. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.070 Building face.

“Building face” means the general outer surface of a main exterior wall of a building. Rectangular buildings generally have four faces. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.080 Construction sign.

“Construction sign” means a sign located on a site where construction is underway, giving information concerning what is being constructed and/or by whom the work is being done. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.50.090 Design review and historic preservation commission.

“Design review and historic preservation commission (DRHPC)” means the commission, duly appointed by the city council, which is charged with conducting sign and architectural review for the city. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.100 Directional sign.

“Directional sign” means a sign which gives direction to, or the location of, a point of general interest; a sign, the purpose of which is to facilitate or control the efficient or safe movement of pedestrians or vehicles. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.090).


18.50.110 Erect.

“Erect” means to build, erect, install, construct, hang, place, relocate, enlarge, substantially alter, attach, suspend, paint, post, maintain, or display. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.100).


18.50.115 Feather sign.

“Feather sign” means a tall, thin flag mounted on long plastic or bamboo poles that bend with the wind. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015).


18.50.120 Flag sign.

“Flag” means a sign which is made of a durable (not rigid) quality material that is attached on one side. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.130 Freestanding sign.

“Freestanding sign” means a permanent sign which is self-supporting, standing on and attached to the ground and not attached to or projecting over any building or building projection. Such signs may be supported from the ground by one or more uprights, poles, or posts, with or without braces. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.110).


18.50.140 Frontage.

“Frontage” means the portion of a property parallel and adjacent to a public street. If there is more than one structure housing a separate business on a parcel, the frontage of each will be the measurement of the building portion fronting on the street plus a proportionate amount of the open area between those buildings, determined according to the frontage of each building. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.120).


18.50.150 Hanging sign.

“Hanging sign” means a sign suspended from a building structure, canopy, or other feature. See SMC 18.50.290, Projecting sign, and SMC 18.50.420, Wall sign. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.130).


18.50.160 Identification sign.

“Identification sign” means a sign identifying the premises on which it is displayed by stating the name and/or general nature or description of the enterprise located there. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.140).


18.50.170 Illuminated sign.

“Illuminated sign” means a sign with lighting applied to it, either in the form of exterior illumination, lighting applied to the sign from an outside source, or in the form of interior illumination, a sign lit from within the sign structure, including neon signs and light boxes. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.150).


18.50.180 Information sign.

“Information sign” means a sign used to convey information concerning the property upon which the sign is placed. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.160).


18.50.190 Informational text.

“Informational text” means writing on a sign that provides information about content, direction, description, address, or phone number, supplemental or accessory to the title or name on the sign. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.170).


18.50.200 Legal, nonconforming use (or business).

“Legal nonconforming use (or business)” means a use which is not a permitted use in the location where it is found according to the current zoning ordinance, but is allowed by conditional use permit, variance, or by virtue of operating continuously in the same location prior to the adoption of the current zoning regulations. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.180).


18.50.210 Mobile sign.

“Mobile sign” means any permanent or temporary sign mounted on a vehicle, trailer or on portable supports. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.190).


18.50.220 Moving signs.

“Moving signs” means signs and/or sign structures and light displays that are exhibited expressly to get attention through the use of motion, including pennants, whirligigs, flags, reflectors, reflective signs, moving lights, flashing lights, and visible gaseous discharges. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.200).


18.50.230 Occupational nameplate.

“Occupational nameplate” means a sign limited to name, occupation, and hours of business. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.210).


18.50.240 Permanent sign.

“Permanent sign” means a sign for which a sign permit is approved and issued with no time limit in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.220).


18.50.250 Planning director.

“Planning director” means the planning director of the city of Sonoma, or his/her equivalent or authorized deputy. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.230).


18.50.260 Political sign.

“Political sign” means any sign advocating preference for political parties, platforms, ideologies, and/or candidates for public office. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.240).


18.50.270 Portable freestanding sign.

“Portable freestanding sign” means a portable (typically double-sided) sign, of creative design, designed to stand independently upon a surface on which it is placed. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.280 Primary street frontage – Primary frontage.

“Primary street frontage” or “primary frontage” means the street frontage on which the address of the building or lot is based. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.250).


18.50.290 Projecting sign.

“Projecting sign” means any sign that extends or projects outward from a building or structure. Any sign erected or suspended under a marquee, porch, portal, or walkway-covering type structure and placed generally perpendicular to the wall of the adjoining building shall be deemed a projecting sign. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.260).


18.50.300 Real estate sign (commercial, corporate).

“Real estate sign (commercial, corporate)” means any sign that advertises that a commercial or new development property is for sale or lease by a real estate company. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.310 Real estate sign (commercial, noncorporate).

“Real estate sign (commercial, noncorporate)” means any sign that advertises that a commercial or new development property is for sale or lease by an individual, not a real estate company. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.320 Real estate sign (residential, one to four units).

“Real estate sign (residential, one to four units)” means any sign that advertises that a residential property (four or fewer units) is for sale or lease. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.330 Real estate sign (five or more units).

“Real estate sign (five or more units)” means any sign that advertises that a residential development (five or more units) is for sale or lease. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.340 Rider sign.

“Rider sign” means a sign that attaches to the bottom of a real estate sign. There are two sizes of allowable rider signs: standard (24 inches by 18 inches); and premium (24 inches by 30 inches). (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.350 Roof sign.

“Roof sign” means any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building, including the roof of any porch, walkway covering, or similar structure. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.270).


18.50.360 Shopping center.

“Shopping center” means any combination of four or more commercial businesses on a single or commonly owned or leased parcel of land where common vehicular access from the street and common parking facilities are provided. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.280).


18.50.370 Sidewalk sign.

See SMC 18.50.270, Portable freestanding sign. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.290).


18.50.380 Sign.

“Sign” means any writing, pictorial representation, symbol, logo, insignia, banner, placement of lighting, or any other feature of similar character of any material, which is used to identify, announce, direct attention to, or advertise, or which is used to decorate or illuminate for commercial purposes, or provide direction or information, which is erected on the ground or on any bush, tree, rock, wall, post, fence, building, structure, vehicle, or in or on anyplace whatsoever, which is normally visible from the exterior of a building and includes window signs. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.300).


18.50.390 Sign area.

“Sign area” means the area or size in square feet of the smallest geometrical form enclosing the total exterior surface of a sign with one exposed exterior surface; or the aggregate area of all sign surfaces of a sign with more than one exposed exterior surface, as measured above. For strictly two-sided signs (back-to-back), each face, as measured above, shall be multiplied by 0.75 to obtain the aggregate area.

If any structural element which supports a sign is designed, painted, or otherwise arranged so as to substantially contribute to the advertising qualities of the sign, such structural elements shall be included in the smallest geometrical form used to compute the area of the sign. Signs consisting solely of self-supporting block letters shall be the aggregate of the geometric form enclosing each letter when all of the following conditions apply:

A. One foot or more separates each letter;

B. The background for each face shall be the face of the building or roof upon which the letters are supported; and

C. There is no frame or other design device connecting the letters. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.310).


18.50.395 Sign program.

“Sign program” means a sign plan which identifies the placement, construction, size, materials, colors, texture, method of lighting, and other related requirement (including window signs) for those signs that are subject to the plan. The plan should address sign consistency, sign patterns, and manner in which signs attach to the building. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015).


18.50.400 Temporary sign.

“Temporary sign” means any sign for which a sign permit is approved and issued in accordance with the provisions of this title, with a time limit. As used in this section, “temporary” means for a period of no more than 90 days, or sooner if a date certain for removal is stated in the permit; any sign installed as a temporary sign pursuant to a permit granted pursuant to this section shall be removed before the sooner of the date required for removal in the permit or on or before 90 days after installation. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.320).


18.50.410 Topper sign.

“Topper sign” means a sign that attaches to the top of a real estate sign. Topper signs may not exceed 24 inches by six inches. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011).


18.50.420 Wall sign.

“Wall sign” means a sign posted on, painted on, suspended from, or otherwise affixed to the wall of any building or structure in an essentially flat position, or with the exposed face of the sign placed approximately parallel to the plane of the wall. Any sign erected or suspended from a canopy, porch, portal, or similar covering structure, and placed approximately parallel to the adjoining building wall, shall be deemed a wall sign. (Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.330).


18.50.430 Window sign.

“Window sign” means any sign secured, applied, or painted to the inside or outside of any window, or otherwise located such that the sign can be seen through a window, which is less than four feet from the sign and be visible from the exterior of the building. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000. Formerly 18.50.340).


Chapter 18.60 APPENDICES

Sections:

18.60.010    Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs.

18.60.030    Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards.

18.60.050    Repealed.


18.60.010 Appendix A – Design guidelines for signs.

General Purpose.

The purpose of architectural review of signs is to ensure that their design and placement will be compatible with the buildings on, or near to which, they are located, and will further the unique and pleasant atmosphere of Sonoma through a variety of attractive signs. The applicant should be aware of Sonoma’s character before designing a sign and should design it with the style of the building and the ambience of the town in mind. A sign should be architecturally a part of the design of the building that it is identifying rather than a feature independent of and in conflict with the design of the building.

The following guidelines should assist the designer in determining what would be appropriate and what would not be appropriate. These guidelines have been categorized into various elements of signage, including size, material, color, letter style, lighting, placement, and logos, symbols or pictures. These elements, however, must fit together to create the sign, which in turn must be considered on the basis of its total appearance.

Note: These design guidelines are general, and should be used only as a guide in designing a sign. They are based on the existing buildings in town, but may not cover every situation.

Size.

Although the maximum size of the sign is controlled by this title, the size of the sign shall be considered in relation to the building mass involved and the other elements mentioned herein, especially the sign’s placement. A flat wall sign can be considerably larger than other types of signs as flat signs are not generally obtrusive. Projecting signs normally encroach into the right-of-way and need less size to be noticeable. Detached, freestanding signs are the most obvious type of sign, and therefore also need considerably less size than a wall sign, nor are they dependent on a building structure for placement, but can be placed to the best advantage on the site.

Larger signs are justified in areas where business is primarily dependent upon vehicular traffic while smaller signs can be sufficient for pedestrian traffic areas. A sign out of proportion in size with others in the area is not to be encouraged, even though possibly within the maximum of this title. Any sign permitted to exceed the maximum sign size as established by this title by reason of any additional size permitted must be determined to be unobtrusive, necessary and not out of proportion to other signs in the area.

Materials.

Materials should be considered in relation to the building involved as well as to the town in general. Sign materials chosen should be geared to the architecture and materials of the building for which the sign is being designed.

Adobe-Spanish Style Buildings: For “adobe” and “Spanish style” buildings, where stucco, cement block, slumpstone and so forth are the main components, natural wood with painted or carved lettering is the most appropriate sign material, as it was the signing material used with this type of construction in historical times.

Brick and Stone Buildings: A brick or stucco building of the early 20th century style is most adaptable to a painted wooden sign or even exposed neon tubing on plastic. A permit for a neon sign will be granted only in exceptional cases (when the design of the sign is especially pleasing and appropriate with the building).

Wooden or “Old West” Buildings: Wooden Victorian style buildings echoing the late 19th, early 20th century and Old West period are generally most compatible with painted or natural wood signs. At times, some alternate material might be made to resemble wood or can have a similar effect. For example, plastic may be made to resemble natural or painted wood in color, but the total effect is rarely that of the copied material. Great care should be taken in designing plastic signs with interior illumination because such signs may be incongruous with historic architecture. When plastic is to be used, careful attention should be given to all of the other elements of design.

A number of the 19th and 20th century buildings have made excellent use of painted signs on the windows. Again, great care should be taken when using this signing method as, when used improperly, it can present a cluttered appearance to the window. When used properly, this signing method can be very appropriate and emphasize the period of the building.

Color.

The color(s) of a sign should be harmonious and complementary to the colors of the building on or near which it is to be located. Fewer colors will generally produce the most attractive sign. The colors should also be reasonably compatible with the general character of Sonoma (psychedelic or phosphorescent colors really do not belong in Sonoma). In some cases, the color of the sign can make a rather incompatible material more compatible with the building.

Letter Style.

The letter style to be used on a sign should also be based on the architectural style of the building. Simple block letters are generally most compatible with the Mexican style buildings.

More intricate lettering is generally appropriate for the wooden Victorian style. There are numerous styles of lettering that could be used including Old English, Stencil, Cloister, and Quill Script. Block lettering would also be appropriate for the Victorian and early to middle 20th century buildings. For those buildings more recently constructed and having no particular architectural style, simpler letter styles are probably the most desirable.

Lighting.

It must be recognized that illuminated signing is a development of the 20th century. However, it is recognized that illuminated signs have some advantage over some nonilluminated signs in identifying businesses at night. Generally, illuminated signs are inappropriate except for businesses which normally operate in the evening hours.

For those cases where illumination is determined essential by the design review and historic preservation commission, it shall be as subtle as possible. Whenever a sign is to abut a residential area, the illumination times and location of the sign will be carefully considered.

Exterior Illumination: Illumination from concealed lights is the most appropriate means of illumination for most signs. It is also the most preferable method of illumination for maintaining the historical integrity of the sign and the building. Such flood lights should not be excessive in brilliance and must be shielded. Flood lights must be concealed in some manner (landscaping or a building feature is often used).

Interior Illumination: Interior illumination is generally most appropriate for smaller signs or signs a distance away from the Plaza area. Within the Plaza area large interior illuminated signs are not complementary to the character of most of the shops, though smaller signs might be designed with careful attention to the other elements so that they would be harmonious with the area. The less white or light-colored surface there is on a sign, the less glaring an illuminated sign will be. Darker colors will tone down the lighting of a sign considerably. Illumination levels shall be kept to the minimum necessary to provide legibility at normal sight distances. No interiorly illuminated sign is allowed in any residential zoning district.

Placement.

Proper placement of the sign basically depends on the movement of the possible customer traffic within the area and the type of business involved. If the business is on an arterial street, the sign will have to be obvious to fast moving vehicular traffic. Projecting or detached signs or more obvious wall signs are therefore appropriate. If the business is in, or on the fringes of, a heavily traveled pedestrian area, small projecting signs or flat wall signs are adequate to identify the business to the slower traffic, which is probably giving their entire attention to the stores they are passing. Detached permanent signs are, in most cases, unnecessary and unattractive in pedestrian-oriented areas.

It has been found that small sidewalk signs placed during business hours may add interest and direct foot traffic to shops; however, specific guidelines have been established to prevent an excessive number of signs. Second story or multiple suites will be encouraged to share sidewalk sign space to eliminate congestion. Where a sidewalk sign already exists, there will be, as a general rule, 18 feet between it and any adjacent sidewalk sign; however, each case will be studied individually. A judiciously placed projecting sign may offer better identification than a sidewalk sign in some locations. Placement of a sidewalk sign shall be as approved by the design review and historic preservation commission.

The placement of signs should also take into consideration the architectural style of the building. For Spanish style buildings, flat wall signs, very small projecting signs, and low profile detached signs are in keeping with the historic feeling and aesthetic appearance of the building. Flat wall signs and smaller projecting signs, as well as painted window signs, are most appropriate for wooden Victorian style buildings. Larger freestanding signs generally tend to fail to carry the historical continuity of Sonoma, and should be considered carefully before being proposed.

Architectural treatment of the supporting mechanism of the signs can make them more compatible with the building involved and with the rest of the town. This can be accomplished by mounting the sign in a planter, covering the post with various building materials, or using materials for the entire sign which have been suggested earlier as being complementary to the building involved.

Roof signs are regulated stringently by this title. Placement of a sign on a roof interrupts the architectural lines of a building, oftentimes making the building appear cluttered. Roof signs should be used only when the silhouette of the sign is not in conflict with the silhouette of the rooflines of the building.

The placement of any new sign or replacement of an existing sign shall not obstruct the visibility of an existing sign whenever it can be avoided.

Logos, Symbols, and Pictures.

For certain types of businesses, a logo or symbol is an integral part of identification, such as the various oil company logos, the mortar and pestle symbol for drug stores, and the cocktail glass for an on-sale liquor establishment. For such businesses, it will normally be appropriate for such symbols to be included in identification signs. Such symbols should be in proper scale considering the overall size of the sign, and should be only supplementary to the total identification information of the sign. Other businesses may wish to use a symbol or picture as a means of identifying the nature of the business. This might be done in a subtle manner according to the guidelines suggested for colors and materials. It is suggested that only one logo or symbol be used for a single business, and that, in general, the size of the logo, symbol or picture be kept small. (Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2011 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.60.030 Appendix B – City of Sonoma lighting application standards.

	 	Watts per square foot generally required for measure in bold

	Application	Maximum Footcandles (3′ above ground level)	Tungsten-Halogen	Mercury Units	Metal-Halide	High-Pressure Sodium

	Automobile Sales	 	 	 	 	 

	Front row	50	10.0	4.5	2.9	2.0

	Remainder	10	1.5-1.8	0.68-.81	0.44-.52	0.3-.36

	Billboards/Signs	 	 	 	 	 

	Good contrast	20-50	4.3-10.0	1.94-4.5	1.25-2.9	0.86-2.0

	Poor contrast	50-100	10.0-20	4.5-9	2.9-5.8	2.0-4

	Buildings	 	 	 	 	 

	Light surfaces	15	1.2/3.3	.54/1.5	.35/.96	.24/.66

	Medium surfaces	10-20	2.2-4.3	1-1.94	.64-1.25	.44-.86

	Dark surfaces	50	10	4.5	2.9	2

	Parking Lots	 	 	 	 	 

	Attendant parking	2	0.38	0.17	0.11	0.075

	Industrial lots	1	0.13-.15	0.06-.07	0.037-.044	0.026-.03

	Self-parking lots	1	same	"	"	"

	Protective/Security	 	 	 	 	 

	Gates and entries	5	1.2	0.54	0.35	0.24

	Building surrounds	1	0.15-.19	0.07-.09	.044-.055	0.03-.04

	Roadways	 	 	 	 	 

	Along buildings	1	0.24	0.11	0.07	0.05

	Open areas	.5	0.08-.1	0.036-.045	0.023-.029	0.02

	Service Stations	 	 	 	 	 

	Front and canopy areas	20-50	4.3	1.94	1.25	0.86

	Rear areas	5-10	1.2	0.54	0.35	0.24

	Shopping Centers	 	 	 	 	 

	Neighborhood	5	0.65	0.29	0.19	0.13

	General commercial	5	same	"	"	"

	Heavy traffic	10	1.5-1.8	0.68-.81	0.44-.52	0.3-.36

	Parking areas	5	0.65	0.29	0.19	0.13

	Buildings-front	5	0.24	0.11	0.07	0.05

	Storage Yards	 	 	 	 	 

	Active	20	3.6-4.3	1.6-1.94	1.04-1.25	0.72-.86

	Inactive	1	0.15-.19	0.07-.09	0.044-.055	0.03-.04

(Ord. 01-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


18.60.050 Appendix C – Applicable Business and Professions Code sections.

Repealed by Ord. 01-2015. (Ord. 2000-9 § 1, 2000).


Title 19 INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES

Chapters:

Division I. Enactment and Applicability

19.01    Purpose and Effect of Development Code

19.02    Interpretation of Development Code Provisions

19.03    Land Use Permit Requirements

Division II. Community Design

19.10    Zones and Allowable Uses

19.12    Streetscape

19.14    Block Structure

Division III. Project Design

19.16    Planning Area Standards

19.18    Northeast Planning Area

19.20    Central-East Planning Area

19.22    Southeast Planning Area

19.24    Northwest Planning Area

19.26    Central-West Planning Area

19.28    Southwest Planning Area

19.30    Gateway District

19.32    Broadway Corridor

19.34    Downtown District

19.36    West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway Corridor

19.38    Open Space Districts

Division IV. General Site Planning and Development Standards

19.40    General Property Development and Use Standards

19.42    Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone

19.44    Affordable Housing and Density Bonuses

19.46    Fences, Hedges and Walls

19.48    Parking and Loading Standards

19.50    Special Use Standards

19.51    Public Art Program

Division V. Planning Permit Procedures 

19.52    Applications: Filing and Processing

19.54    Planning Permit Approval or Disapproval

19.56    Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions

Division VI. Subdivisions

19.60    Applicability and Administration of Subdivision Regulations

19.61    Subdivision Map Approval Requirements

19.62    Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements

19.63    Tentative Map Filing and Processing

19.64    Parcel Maps and Final Maps

19.65    Condominiums and Condominium Conversions

19.66    Lot Line Adjustments and Parcel Mergers

19.67    Certificates of Compliance

19.68    Reversions to Acreage

19.69    Dedications and Exactions

19.70    Improvement Plans and Agreements

19.71    Surveys and Monuments

Division VII. Development Code Administration

19.80    Administrative Responsibility

19.82    Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Parcels

19.84    Appeals

19.86    General Plan and Development Code/Zoning Map Amendments

19.88    Public Hearings

19.90    Enforcement of Development Code Provisions

Division VIII. Definitions

19.92    Definitions

Division IX. Growth Management

19.94    Housing Allocation Process


Chapter 19.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT CODE

Sections:

19.01.010    Title.

19.01.020    Purpose of development code.

19.01.030    Authority, relationship to General Plan.

19.01.040    Applicability of the development code.

19.01.050    Standards.

19.01.060    Guidelines.

19.01.070    Responsibility for administration.


19.01.010 Title.

SMC Title 19 is and may be cited as the Sonoma development code, hereafter referred to as “this development code.” (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.01.020 Purpose of development code.

This development code carries out the policies of the City of Sonoma General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the city of Sonoma. This development code is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of residents, and businesses in the city. More specifically, the purposes of this development code are to:

A. Implement the General Plan by encouraging the uses of land designated by the General Plan;

B. Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the city that will assist in protecting the unique character of the community and its neighborhoods;

C. Conserve and protect the city’s natural beauty, including scenic views, hillside open space, and historic and environmental resources;

D. Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan transportation, water supply, sewerage and other public facilities and utilities;

E. Minimize automobile use and congestion by promoting pedestrian and bicycle-oriented development, safe and effective traffic circulation, and adequate off-street parking facilities; and

F. Ensure compatibility between residential and nonresidential development and land uses through careful site planning and building design. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.01.030 Authority, relationship to General Plan.

A. This development code is enacted based on the authority vested in the city of Sonoma by the state of California, including but not limited to the State Constitution; the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 65000 et seq.); the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410 et seq.); and the California Health and Safety Code.

B. This development code is the primary tool used by the city of Sonoma to carry out the goals, objectives, and policies of the Sonoma General Plan, hereafter referred to as the “General Plan.” (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.01.040 Applicability of the development code.

This development code applies to all land uses, structures, subdivisions, and development within the city of Sonoma, as provided by this section.

A. New Land Uses or Structures – Changes to Land Uses or Structures. In order to lawfully establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, relocate, or replace any use of land or structure, compliance shall be required with the applicable requirements of Division II, Community Design, Division III, Project Design, and Division IV, General Site Planning and Development Standards, or, where applicable, Chapter 19.82 SMC, Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Parcels.

B. Issuance of Building or Grading Permits. Building, grading, or other construction permits for new development and redevelopment or for the expansion or intensification of a building or use may be issued by the city when:

1. The proposed land use and/or structure satisfy the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations; and

2. The city planner determines that the site was subdivided in compliance with Division VI of this development code, Subdivisions.

See SMC 19.03.030 for exemptions.

C. Subdivision of Land. Any subdivision of land proposed within the city after the effective date of this development code shall be consistent with the density and minimum lot size requirements of Division II, Community Design, the subdivision regulations of Division VI, Subdivisions, and all other applicable requirements of this development code.

D. Continuation of an Existing Land Use. An existing land use is lawful only when it was legally established in compliance with all applicable regulations, and when it is operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code, including Chapter 19.82 SMC, Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Parcels.

E. Existing Violations. Existing land uses that were in violation of city zoning regulations applicable before the effective date of this development code are in violation of this development code. These uses shall continue to be in violation unless they conform to the current provisions of this development code.

F. Effect of Development Code Changes on Projects in Progress. A land use permit application that has been accepted by the city as complete prior to the effective date of this development code or any amendment shall be processed according to the requirements in effect when the application was accepted as complete. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.01.050 Standards.

A. Minimum Requirements. The standards of this development code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever this development code provides discretion to a city official or body, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than those in this development code, as may be necessary to promote orderly land use development and the purposes of this development code.

B. Other Requirements May Still Apply. Nothing in this development code eliminates the need for obtaining any permit, approval or entitlement required by other provisions of the municipal code or complying with the regulations of any city department, or any county, regional, state, or federal agency.

C. Conflicting Requirements. Any conflicts    between different requirements of this development code, or between this development code and other regulations, shall be resolved in compliance with SMC 19.02.020(F), Conflicting Requirements. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.01.060 Guidelines.

A. Suggestive. Although the guidelines of this development code are strongly recommended, they shall be considered suggestive in that the decision-making authority may approve a discretionary permit for a proposed project even though it fails to comply with one or more guidelines. Noncompliance with guidelines shall not be used as a basis to deny ministerial permits.

B. Role in Discretionary Review. The decision-making authority shall consider applicable guidelines in its review of applications for discretionary planning and subdivision permit approvals. The failure of a proposed project to comply with applicable guidelines may be used by the decision-making authority as a basis for denial. To approve a project that fails to comply with applicable guidelines, the decision-making authority must find that substantial reasons exist that justify the noncompliance. 

C. Conflicting Guidelines. Any conflicts between different guidelines of this development code shall be resolved at the discretion of the decision-making authority. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.01.070 Responsibility for administration.

This development code shall be administered by the Sonoma city council, the planning commission, the design review and historic preservation commission, and relevant city officials, in compliance with SMC Title 2, Administration and Personnel, and Chapter 19.80 SMC, Administrative Responsibility. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.02       INTERPRETATION OF DEVELOPMENT CODE PROVISIONS

Sections:

19.02.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.02.020  Rules of interpretation.

19.02.030  Procedures for interpretations.


19.02.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this development code. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the provisions of this development code. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.02.020  Rules of interpretation.

A.  Authority. The city planner is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this development code.

B.  Language.

1.  Abbreviated Titles and Phrases. For the purpose of brevity, the following phrases, personnel and document titles are shortened hereafter in this development code. The city of Sonoma is referred to hereafter as the "city." The city of Sonoma development code is referred to hereafter as "this development code." The city council is referred to as the "council." "Buildings and structures" are referred to hereafter as "structures."

2.  Terminology. When used in this development code, the words "shall," "must," "will," "is to" and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words "includes" and "including" shall mean "including but not limited to..."

3.  Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this development code, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in this development code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. Time limits will extend to the next working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday.

4.  State Law Requirements. Where this development code references applicable provisions of state law (for example, the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable state law provisions as they may be amended from time to time.

C.  Zoning Map Boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map, the following rules are to be used in resolving the uncertainty:

1.  Where district boundaries approximately follow lot, alley, or street lines, the lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be construed as the district boundaries;

2.  If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location of the boundary will be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map; and 

3.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the street or alley will be included within the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned street or alley.

D.  Allowable Uses of Land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements, the use shall not be allowed, except as follows.

1.  Similar Uses Allowed. The city planner may determine that a proposed use not listed in Division II is allowable for the purposes of accepting an application for processing, and the review authority may approve an application for an unlisted use, if all of the following findings are made:

a.  The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the proposed use are substantially similar in nature and intensity (particularly in terms of effects on the environment and on adjacent uses) to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zoning district as allowable, and will not involve a higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the district;

b.  The proposed use will meet the purpose/intent of the zoning district that is applied to the site; and

c.  The proposed use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan and any specific plan.

2.  Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the city planner determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is equivalent to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required and what other standards and requirements of this development code apply.

3.  Planning Commission Determination. The city planner may forward questions about equivalent uses directly to the planning commission for a determination at a public meeting (a public hearing is not required).

E.  Standards as Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of this development code, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless stated otherwise (e.g., height limits and site coverage requirements for structures are maximums, not minimums). 

F.  Conflicting Requirements.

1.  Development Code and Other Municipal Code Provisions. If conflicts occur between different requirements of this development code, or between this development code and other municipal code provisions, the most restrictive shall apply.

2.  Specific Plans. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this development code and standards adopted as part of any specific plan, the requirements of the specific plan shall apply.

3.  Private Agreements. The requirements of this development code shall not be interpreted as repealing, abrogating, or annulling any easement, covenant, or deed restriction imposed on private property. However, all land uses and development shall comply with the requirements of this development code, regardless of the provisions of any private covenant, deed restriction (including conditions, covenants, and restrictions). The city shall not enforce any private covenant, restriction, or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant, restriction, or agreement. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.02.030  Procedures for interpretations.

Whenever the city planner determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this development code are subject to interpretation generally or as applied to a specific case, the city planner may issue an official interpretation. Interpretations may also be requested in compliance with this section.

A.  Request for Interpretation. A request shall be written, specifically state the provision(s) in question, and provide any information to assist in their review.

B.  Record of Interpretations. The city planner will maintain a complete record of all official interpretations, available for public review, and indexed by the number of the section that is the subject of the interpretation. Official interpretations shall be:

1.  In writing, and shall quote the provisions of this development code being interpreted, and explain their meaning or applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation;

2.  Distributed to the council, relevant commission, city attorney, city clerk, and department staff; and

3.  Maintained in all copies of the development code used by the department.

C.  Appeals and Referral. Any interpretations of this development code by the city planner may be appealed to the planning commission as provided by Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals. The city planner may also refer any interpretation to the planning commission for a determination. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.03 LAND USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

19.03.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.03.020    Requirements for development and new land uses.

19.03.030    Exemptions from land use permit requirements.

19.03.040    Temporary uses.

19.03.050    Additional permits or approvals may be required.


19.03.010 Purpose of chapter.

This chapter describes the general requirements of this development code for the approval of proposed development and new land uses by the city. Land use permit requirements for specific land uses are instead established by SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements, and Division IV, General Site Planning and Development Standards. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.03.020 Requirements for development and new land uses.

No use of land or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, allowed or replaced unless the use of land or structures complies with the following requirements:

A. Allowable Use. The land use shall be identified by SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements, as being allowable in the zoning district applied to the site. The city planner may determine whether a particular land use is allowable, in compliance with SMC 19.02.020, Rules of interpretation.

B. Land Use Permit Requirement. Any land use permit or other approval required by this development code shall be obtained before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in SMC 19.03.030, Exemptions from land use permit requirements. The land use permit requirements of this development code are established by SMC 19.02.020(D), Rules of interpretation – Allowable Uses of Land).

C. Development Standards. The use and/or structures shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this development code, including the development standards of Division II, Community Design, and Division III, Project Design, and the requirements set forth in Division IV, General Site Planning and Development Standards.

D. Conditions of Approval. The use and/or structures shall comply with any applicable conditions imposed by any previously granted land use permit.

E. Legal Parcel. The use of land and/or structure shall only be established on a parcel of land which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and Division VI of this development code, as applicable at the time the parcel was created.

F. Development Agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with all applicable development agreements approved by the city council. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.03.030 Exemptions from land use permit requirements.

The land use permit requirements of this development code do not apply to the activities, and/or structures identified by this section, which are allowed in all zoning districts subject to compliance with this section.

A. General Requirements for Exemption. The activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by subsection (B) of this section, are exempt from the land use permit requirements of this development code only when:

1. The activity or use is established and operated in compliance with all applicable standards of this development code;

2. The activity or use is not part of a larger project for which a discretionary permit is required;

3. The activity or use is not restricted or controlled by a previously granted discretionary permit;

4. Any permit or approval required by regulations other than this development code is obtained in compliance with SMC 19.03.050, Additional permits or approvals may be required.

B. Exempt Activities and Uses. The following activities, uses of land and/or structures are exempt from the land use permit requirements of this development code when in compliance with subsection (A) of this section, except that a zoning clearance (SMC 19.54.020) is required whenever a building permit is required for any of these activities or uses.

1. Decks, Paths and Driveways. Decks, platforms, on-site paths, and driveways that are:

a. Not required to have a building permit or grading permit by SMC Title 14, Buildings and Construction;

b. Not over 30 inches above natural grade and not over any basement or story below; and

c. Unenclosed except for a safety railing with a maximum height of 42 inches.

2. Fences – Residential Zoning Districts. Fences in the residential zoning districts are exempt from land use permit requirements as provided by Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls.

3. Interior Remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the gross floor area within the structure, or change the permitted use of the structure.

4. Portable Spas, Hot Tubs, and Fish Ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds, and similar structures, that do not: exceed 120 square feet in total area including related equipment; contain more than 2,000 gallons of water; or exceed three feet in depth, and are outside required front and street-side setbacks. These facilities shall be located at least three feet from side or rear property lines.

5. Repairs and Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if:

a. The work does not change the approved land use of the site or structure, or add to, enlarge or expand the area occupied by the land use, or the floor area of the structure; and 

b. Any exterior repairs employ the similar materials and design as the original construction (commercial uses, only).

6. Small Residential Accessory Structures (Portable). A single portable structure per lot or unit, including premanufactured storage sheds and other small structures in residential zoning districts that:

a. Are exempt from building permit requirements in compliance with SMC Title 14 and the Uniform Building Code;

b. Are less than 120 square feet in gross floor area and no more than eight feet in height; and

c. Are outside required front and street-side setbacks.

7. Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or public agency of underground or overhead utilities intended to service existing or nearby approved developments (i.e., water, gas, electric, telecommunication, supply or disposal systems, including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar facilities and equipment), but not including new transmission lines and structures. Satellite and cellular telephone antennas are subject to Chapter 5.30 SMC, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

8. Walls, Retaining Walls. Wooden, concrete and masonry walls less than 30 inches in height located in compliance with subsection (B)(2) of this section, and retaining walls (retaining earth only) that result in grade changes of 30 inches or less and are not required to have a grading permit. (Ord. 07-2018 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.03.040 Temporary uses.

Requirements for establishing a temporary use and/or activity (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, and similar uses and activities) are in SMC 19.54.030, Temporary use permits. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.03.050 Additional permits or approvals may be required.

A land use that complies with the permit requirement or exemption provisions of this development code may still be subject to the permit requirements of other municipal code provisions, or other agencies, before the use is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this development code shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by:

A. Sonoma Municipal Code. Any other municipal code provisions, including: building, grading, or other construction permits if they are required by SMC Title 14; or a business license if required by SMC Title 5; or

B. Other Jurisdictions. Any applicable county, or any regional, state or federal agency regulations.

All necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or establishing a new use. The applicant shall be responsible for determining whether any additional permits are necessary. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.10 ZONES AND ALLOWABLE USES1

Sections:

19.10.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.10.020    Zoning districts established.

19.10.030    Overlay zoning districts and standards.

19.10.040    Zoning map adopted.

19.10.050    Allowable land uses and permit requirements.


19.10.010 Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes the zoning districts within the city, determines how the zoning districts are applied to property on the zoning map, and establishes planning permit requirements for new land uses and development. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.10.020 Zoning districts established.

The city of Sonoma shall be divided into the zoning districts described in this section, to implement the City of Sonoma General Plan land use designations. The following zoning districts are hereby established, and are shown on the official zoning map (see SMC 19.10.040). The uses of land allowed within each zoning district and the planning permit requirements applicable to the allowable uses are determined by SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements.

A. Residential Zoning Districts.

1. R-HS (Residential – Hillside) District. The R-HS zoning district is applied to hillside areas of the city that are suitable for very-low density single-family residential and agricultural land uses. The maximum allowable density is one dwelling unit per 10 acres. The R-HS zoning district is consistent with the Hillside land use designation of the General Plan.

2. R-R (Residential – Rural) District. The R-R zoning district is applied to areas where the city intends to preserve low density, single-family neighborhoods with rural character. The maximum allowable density is two dwelling units per acre. The R-R zoning district is consistent with the Rural Residential land use designation of the General Plan.

3. R-L (Residential – Low Density) District. The R-L zoning district is applied to areas primarily suitable for detached single-family dwellings and duplexes. Clustered housing and other types of residential development may be allowed with a planned development permit (SMC 19.54.070). The minimum density for new residential construction is two dwelling units per acre and the maximum density is five dwelling units per acre. The R-L zoning district is consistent with the Low Density Residential land use designation of the General Plan.

4. R-S (Residential – Sonoma) District. The R-S zoning district is typically applied to parcels of three acres or more in size, and is intended to provide areas suitable for a broad range of housing types, including housing affordable to low and moderate income households. The R-S zoning district is intended to promote creativity in project design, variety in lot sizes and unit types, and development that will fit in with surrounding neighborhoods. The minimum density for new residential construction is three dwelling units per acre and the maximum density is eight dwelling units per acre. Subject to use permit review, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses may be allowed, in accordance with SMC 19.14.030, Neighborhood commercial development. The R-S zoning district is consistent with the Sonoma Residential land use designation of the General Plan.

5. R-M (Residential – Medium Density) District. The R-M zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for medium density, multifamily residential development. The minimum density for new residential construction is seven dwelling units per acre and the maximum density is 11 dwelling units per acre. The R-M zoning district is consistent with the Medium Density Residential land use designation of the General Plan.

6. R-H (Residential – High Density) District. The R-H zoning district is applied to areas suitable for high density residential development, particularly in areas of transition between commercial or mixed use zoning districts. The minimum density for new residential construction is 11 dwelling units per acre and the maximum density is 15 dwelling units per acre. The R-H zoning district is consistent with the High Density Residential land use designation of the General Plan.

7. R-O (Residential – Housing Opportunity) District. The R-O zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for very high density residential development. The intent of this zoning district is to provide areas suitable for low and very low income households and for high density attached housing types. The minimum density for new residential construction is 15 dwelling units per acre and the maximum density is 25 dwelling units per acre. The R-O zoning district implements the Housing Opportunity Site land use designation of the General Plan.

8. R-P (Residential – Mobile Home Park) District. The R-P zoning district is applied to the city’s three mobile home parks. Only uses consistent with the continued operation of these sites as mobile home parks are allowed. The maximum residential density is seven dwelling units per acre. The R-P zoning district is consistent with the Mobile Home Park land use designation of the General Plan. 

B. Commercial Zoning Districts.

1. C (Commercial) District. The C zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for a range of commercial land uses including retail, tourist, office, and mixed uses. The maximum residential density is 20 dwelling units per acre. The C zoning district is consistent with the Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

2. C-G (Commercial-Gateway) District. The C-G zoning district is applied to the Four Corners and Verano Triangle areas, prominent commercial entrances into the city that require sensitive site design. The maximum residential density is 20 dwelling units per acre. The C-G zoning district is consistent with the Gateway Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

3. Residential Component. In applications for new development on properties of one-half acre in size or larger for which a discretionary permit is required, a residential component is required, unless waived by the planning commission. A residential component should normally comprise at least 50 percent of the total proposed building area. Circumstances in which the residential component may be reduced or waived include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. The replacement of a commercial use within an existing tenant space with another commercial use.

b. The presence of uses or conditions incompatible with residential development on or adjacent to the property for which a new development is proposed.

c. Property characteristics, including size limitations and environmental characteristics, that constrain opportunities for residential development or make it infeasible.

d. Limitations imposed by other regulatory requirements, such as the Growth Management Ordinance.

C. Mixed Use Zoning District.

1. MX (Mixed Use) District. The MX zoning district is intended to allow for higher density housing types, such as apartments and condominiums, both separately and in conjunction with commercial and office development, in order to increase housing opportunities, reduce dependence on the automobile, and provide a pedestrian presence in commercial areas. Under this designation, longstanding commercial and industrial uses in otherwise residential areas may be preserved and, subject to use permit review, modified or intensified. The maximum residential density is 20 dwelling units per acre. The MX zoning district is consistent with the Mixed Use land use designation of the General Plan.

2. Residential Component. In applications for new development for which a discretionary permit is required, a residential component is required, unless waived by the planning commission. A residential component should normally comprise at least 50 percent of the total proposed building area. Circumstances in which the residential component may be reduced or waived include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. The replacement of a commercial use within an existing tenant space with another commercial use.

b. The presence of uses or conditions incompatible with residential development on or adjacent to the property for which a new development is proposed.

c. Property characteristics, including size limitations and environmental characteristics, that constrain opportunities for residential development or make it infeasible.

d. Limitations imposed by other regulatory requirements, such as the Growth Management Ordinance.

3. Commercial Component. In applications for new development for which a discretionary permit is required, a commercial component may be required, unless waived by the planning commission. Circumstances in which a commercial component may be waived include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. The replacement, expansion, or alteration of a residential use within an existing residential or mixed use development.

b. The presence of uses or conditions incompatible with commercial development on or adjacent to the property for which a new development is proposed.

c. Property characteristics, including size limitations and environmental characteristics, that constrain opportunities for commercial development or make it infeasible.

d. Interference with the objective of maximizing housing opportunities, especially affordable housing and other housing types that meet community needs as identified in the Housing Element.

e. Limitations imposed by other development regulations, including applicable requirements and guidelines of the development code.

D. Special Purpose Zoning Districts.

1. A (Agriculture) District. The A zoning district is applied to existing agricultural areas within the city. The intent of the zoning district is to protect these parcels for productive agricultural uses. The maximum residential density is one dwelling unit per 10 acres. The A zoning district is consistent with the Agricultural land use designation of the General Plan.

2. Pk (Park) District. The Pk zoning district is applied to parkland of a variety of types, from intensively developed playing fields and recreational facilities (including museums and recreation centers), to natural open spaces where development is limited to trails. The Pk zoning district is consistent with the Park land use designations of the General Plan.

3. P (Public Facilities) District. The P zoning district applies to areas appropriate for a variety of public and quasi-public land uses. The P zoning district is consistent with the Public land use designations of the General Plan.

4. W (Wine Production) District. The W zoning district is applied to winery facilities. Only winery-related land uses are suitable for this designation. The W zoning district is consistent with the Wine Production land use designation of the General Plan. (Ord. 03-2016 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 03-2004 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.10.030 Overlay zoning districts and standards.

A. Purpose. Overlay zoning districts regulate new and existing land uses by providing guidance for development in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary zoning district and subarea. These overlay districts apply to areas where important site, environmental, cultural, and other compatibility issues require particular sensitivity in project planning.

B. Applicability. The requirements of the overlay districts apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this development code. In the event of any perceived conflict between the requirements of the overlay districts and any other provision of this development code, the most restrictive shall control.

1. Mapping of Overlay Districts. The applicability of any overlay zoning district to a specific site is shown by the overlay zoning map symbol established by this section being appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district on the zoning map (for example, R-L/H) or by the use of shading and other graphical means as depicted on the zoning map.

2. Allowed Land Uses, Permit Requirements, Development Standards. Except as may be provided by this development code for a specific overlay zoning district:

a. Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by this chapter may be allowed within an overlay district, subject to any additional requirements of the overlay district;

b. Development and new land uses within an overlay district shall obtain the land use permits required by this chapter for the primary zoning district; and

c. Development and new land uses within an overlay district shall comply with all applicable development standards established by Division III, Project Design, and Division IV, General Site Planning and Development Standards. 

C. Overlay Districts and Their Requirements.

1. /C (Creek Setback) District. The /C overlay district is intended to preserve the environmental integrity and riparian habitat of the city’s creeks, and to ensure that new land uses near the creeks are developed safely. Development within the /C overlay district shall be evaluated in accordance with the procedures, standards and guidelines set forth in SMC 19.40.020, Creekside development.

a. Applicability. The /C overlay district applies to areas identified on the zoning map adjacent to Sonoma, Nathanson, and Fryer Creeks.

b. Permit Requirements. Playgrounds, sports fields, erosion control projects, parking areas, and any other modifications to existing structures shall require use permit approval.

c. Special Standards. Proposed uses and structures shall be located above the adopted flood elevation standard in compliance with Chapter 14.25 SMC, Flood Damage Prevention Regulations. Disturbance of native vegetation shall be minimized and proposed development shall include a landscaping plan identifying appropriate riparian habitat enhancement measures.

2. /H (Historic) District. The /H overlay district is intended to preserve structures that are historically and/or culturally significant.

a. Applicability. The /H overlay district is applied to historic sites and areas as identified on the zoning map.

b. Permit Requirements for Increased Residential Densities and Alternative Uses. As set forth in Chapter 19.42 SMC, Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone, increased residential densities and limited office or commercial land uses may be allowed with use permit approval if found to be consistent with the intent of preserving existing historic structures and the historic context of the site.

c. Permit Requirements for New Construction, Additions, Renovations, and Relocations. As set forth in SMC 19.54.080, Site design and architectural review, the design review and historic preservation commission shall review any new commercial buildings and additions or exterior changes to existing commercial buildings, new multifamily development and additions or exterior changes to multifamily structures, additions to single-family dwellings resulting in a 50 percent or greater increase in floor area, and the relocation of any primary structure.

d. Permit Requirements for Demolition. As set forth in SMC 19.54.090, Demolition permit, the design review and historic preservation commission (DRHPC) shall review proposed demolitions of structures within the district.

3. /O (Open Space) District. The /O overlay    district is intended to recognize sites that are designated to remain substantially undeveloped and in a natural condition. This designation is only applicable to properties that are publicly owned or for which open space or development easements have been obtained.

a. Applicability. The /O overlay district is applied to sites and areas as identified on the zoning map.

b. Permit Requirements. The development of any new building or parking area shall require use permit approval.

c. Special Standards. New construction within the /O overlay district shall only be allowed if it is found that the natural character of the site and its value as open space will not be diminished. This designation is not intended to preclude environmental enhancement and restoration projects or the provision of public access, such as trails.

4. /P (Plaza Retail) District. The /P overlay district is intended to preserve the vitality of Sonoma’s historic downtown area as a predominantly retail center.

a. Applicability. The /P overlay district is applied to sites and areas as identified on the zoning map.

b. Permit Requirements for Office Uses. Use permit approval is required for the establishment or expansion of any office use, where not already allowed by use permit, within any new or existing ground-floor tenant space having frontage along a public street or a major pedestrian arcade (defined as the Mercato, the Place des Pyrenees, and the El Paso).

c. Findings for Office Uses. In order to approve a use permit as required under subsection (C)(4)(b) of this section, the planning commission must find, in addition to the basic use permit findings set forth in SMC 19.54.040(E), that the proposed use due to specific circumstances related to its size, nature or location will not detract from the retail and pedestrian character of its immediate environs or the plaza generally, or that the office use is necessary for the economic viability of the site or its surroundings. 

d. Prohibition on Formula Restaurants, Large. Formula restaurants, large are prohibited within the plaza retail district. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2012 § 1(A), 2012; Ord. 08-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.10.040 Zoning map adopted.

The council hereby adopts the City of Sonoma Zoning Map (incorporated herein by reference). The boundaries of the zoning districts and overlay zoning districts established by SMC 19.10.020 and 19.10.030 shall be shown upon the zoning map. The zoning map shall be interpreted in compliance with SMC 19.02.020(C), Zoning Map Boundaries. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.10.050 Allowable land uses and permit requirements.

A. Purpose. This section determines which land uses are allowed in each zoning district established by SMC 19.10.020, Zoning districts established, and the land use permit required to establish each use.

B. Allowed Land Uses. The uses of land allowed by this development code in each zoning district are identified in Tables 2-1, 2-2, 2-3 and 2-4, along with the type of planning permit required for each use. These tables provide for land uses that are:

1. Permitted subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code, subject to first obtaining a zoning clearance (SMC 19.54.020), and any building permit or other administrative permit required by the municipal code. These are shown as “P” uses in the tables; 

2. Allowed subject to the approval of a use permit (SMC 19.54.040), and shown as “UP” uses in the tables.

Note: where the last column in the tables (“Specific Use Standards”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may also apply.

C. Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed in the tables or are not shown in a particular zoning district are not allowed, except as otherwise provided by SMC 19.02.020(D), Rules of interpretation – Allowable Uses of Land), or SMC 19.03.030, Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements.

D. Standards for Parcels with Multiple Zoning Districts. Where an existing parcel is zoned in two or more zoning districts, each portion of the parcel in a separate district shall be developed/used in compliance with the requirements of the applicable district. (Ord. 07-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Table 2-1

Residential Uses and Permit Requirements  

	Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Districts (1)	Permit Required by District (2)	P	Use permitted

	UP	Use permit required

	L	License required

	–	Use not allowed

	Land Use (1)	R-HS	R-R	R-L	R-S	R-M	R-H	R-O	R-P	Specific Use Regulations

	 

	AGRICULTURE, RESOURCE AND OPEN SPACE USES

	Animal Keeping	P	P	UP	–	–	–	–	–	Chapter 8.08 SMC

	Crop Production and Horticulture	P	P	UP	–	–	–	–	–	 

	Produce Stands for On-Site Production	P	P	UP	–	–	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.070

	MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES

	Existing Uses	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	SMC 19.82.020 

	RECREATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

	Equestrian Facilities	UP	UP	–	–	–	–	–	–	 

	Parks and Playgrounds	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	–	 

	Religious Facilities	–	–	UP	UP	UP	UP	–	–	 

	Schools – Public and Private	–	–	UP	UP	UP	UP	–	–	 

	RESIDENTIAL USES (2)

	Commercial Cannabis Activities (Except Delivery Services as Indicated Below)	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Cannabis Delivery Services (Destination Only)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Duplex	–	–	UP	P	P	UP	UP	–	 

	Emergency Shelters	–	–	–	–	UP	UP	UP	–	SMC 19.50.033

	Home Occupation	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.035

	Live/Work Facilities	–	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	 

	Mobile Home Park	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	UP	SMC 19.50.035

	Multifamily Dwelling (Four or Fewer Units)	–	–	–	UP	P	P	P	–	 

	Multifamily Dwelling (Five or More Units)	–	–	–	UP	UP	UP	P	–	 

	Personal Indoor Cannabis Cultivation (4)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(A)

	Personal Outdoor Cannabis Cultivation (4)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(B)

(Prohibited if multifamily dwelling or mobile home)

	Residential Accessory Structures	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 

	Residential Care Homes, Six or Fewer Clients	–	–	P	P	P	–	–	–	 

	Residential Care Homes, Seven or More Clients	–	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	 

	Single-Family Dwellings	P	P	P	P	P	UP	–	–	SMC 19.50.035

	Accessory Dwelling Units	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.090

	Accessory Dwelling Units, Junior	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.090

	Supportive Housing (3)	P	P	P/UP	P/UP	P/UP	P/UP	–	–	 

	Transitional Housing (3)	P	P	P/UP	P/UP	P/UP	P/UP	–	–	 

	RETAIL TRADE AND SERVICES

	Art, Antique, Collectible and Gift Sales	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Artisan Shops	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Bed and Breakfast Inns (B&Bs)	UP	UP	UP	–	–	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.030

	Child Day Care Center	–	UP	UP	UP	UP	UP	UP	–	 

	Child Day Care: Small Family Day Care Home	–	UP	UP	UP	UP	UP	–	–	 

	Child Day Care: Large Family Day Care Home	–	–	UP	UP	UP	UP	UP	–	 

	General Retail	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Governmental and Public Facilities	–	UP	UP	UP	UP	UP	UP	–	 

	Libraries and Museums	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Medical Services – Extended Care	–	–	–	UP	UP	–	–	–	 

	Offices, Professional and Administrative	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Personal Services	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Restaurant	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	–	 

	Senior Residential Care Facilities	–	–	–	–	UP	–	–	–	

	Telecommunications Facilities, Commercial	See Chapter 5.30 SMC, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities	 

	SPECIAL PURPOSE USES

	Public Utility Facilities	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 

	Public Utility Equipment	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P 	 

	Notes:

1.    See SMC 19.10.050(C) regarding uses not listed. See Division VIII for definitions of the listed land uses.

2.    New residential developments subject to the city’s growth management ordinance (Chapter 19.94 SMC).

3.    Supportive and transitional housing shall be subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. For example, such housing structured as single-family is permitted in the R-HS, R-R, R-L and R-S residential zones, whereas supportive and transitional housing structured as multifamily is limited to the R-M and R-H residential zones and the mixed use zone.

4.    Personal cultivation of cannabis (indoor and outdoor) only allowable in conjunction with residential use subject to SMC 19.50.032.

(Ord. 01-2019 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 08-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 07-2018 § 3, 2018; Ord. 05-2018 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 01-2017 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-2014 § 2(A), 2014; Ord. 06-2010 § 1, 2010).


Table 2-2

Commercial Uses and Permit Requirements  

	Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Zoning Districts (1)	Permit Required by District (2)	P	Use permitted

	UP	Use permit required

	L	License required

	–	Use not allowed

	WTUP	Wine tasting use permit

	Land Use	C	CG	Specific Use Regulations

	 

	MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES

	Artisans/Craft Product Manufacturing	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Food and Beverage Manufacturing	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Furniture/Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Recycling Facilities – Reverse Vending Machines	UP	P	 	 	 

	Recycling Facilities – Small Collection Facilities	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Research and Development (R&D)	UP	–	 	 	 

	Warehousing, Wholesaling and Distribution	UP	–	 	 	 

	RECREATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

	Clubs, Lodges and Private Meeting Halls	–	UP	 	 	 

	Community Centers	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Health/Fitness Facilities	P	UP	 	 	 

	Indoor Amusement/Entertainment Facilities	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Libraries and Museums	P	P	 	 	 

	Nightclubs and Bars	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Outdoor Commercial Recreation	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Religious Facilities	P	–	 	 	 

	Schools – Specialized Education and Training	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Studios for Art, Dance, Music, Photography, Etc.	P	UP	 	 	 

	Theaters and Auditoriums	UP	UP	 	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL USES (4)

	Emergency Shelters	UP	UP	SMC 19.50.033

	Live/Work Facilities	UP	UP	SMC 19.50.050

	Multifamily Dwelling (Four or Fewer Units)	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Multifamily Dwelling (Five or More Units)	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Personal Indoor Cannabis Cultivation (7)	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(A)

	Personal Outdoor Cannabis Cultivation (7)	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(B) (Prohibited if multifamily dwelling or mobile home)

	Single-Room Occupancy Housing	UP	–	 	 	 

	Supportive Housing	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Transitional Housing	UP	UP	 	 	 

	RETAIL TRADE

	Accessory Retail Uses	P	P	 	 	 

	Adult Business	UP	–	 	 	 

	Art, Antique, Collectible and Gift Sales	P	P	 	 	 

	Artisan Shops	P	UP	 	 	 

	Auto and Vehicle Sales/Rental	UP	–	 	 	 

	Building Material Stores	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Cannabis Delivery Services (Destination Only)	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Commercial Cannabis Activities (Except Delivery Services as Indicated Below)	–	–	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Drive-In and Drive-Through Sales	UP	–	 	 	 

	Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores	P	P	 	 	 

	General Retail	P	P	 	 	 

	Grocery Store	P	P	 	 	 

	Music Venue	L	L	Chapter 5.34 SMC

	Outdoor Retail Sales and Activities	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Plant Nurseries and Garden Supply Stores	P	P	 	 	 

	Restaurant	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Second Hand Stores	P	P	 	 	 

	Shopping Center	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Special Event Venue	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Wine Tasting Facilities/Wine Bars	WTUP	WTUP	SMC 19.50.120

	Tap Rooms	UP	UP	SMC 19.50.130

	SERVICES

	Banks and Financial Services	P	P	 	 	 

	Bed and Breakfast Inns (B&Bs)	UP	UP	SMC 19.50.030

	Business Support Services	P	UP	 	 	 

	Child Day Care Facilities	P	P	 	 	 

	Drive-In and Drive-Through Services	UP	–	 	 	 

	Equipment Rental	UP	–	 	 	 

	Governmental and Public Facilities	P	P	 	 	 

	Hotel or Motel	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Medical Services – Clinics, Offices, Laboratories	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Medical Services – Hospitals	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Mortuaries and Funeral Homes	UP	–	 	 	 

	Offices, Professional and Administrative	P	UP	 	 	 

	Personal Services	P	P	 	 	 

	Storage – Outdoor	UP	–	 	 	 

	Storage – Personal Storage Facility (Mini-Storage)	UP	–	 	 	 

	Telecommunications Facilities, Commercial	See Chapter 5.30 SMC, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

	Auto Parts Sales	P	–	 	 	 

	Vacation Rental	–	–	SMC 19.50.110

	Vehicle Services, Car Washes	UP	–	 	 	 

	Vehicle Services, Repair and Maintenance	UP	–	 	 	 

	Vehicle Services, Service Station	UP	–	SMC 19.50.100

	Repair Services, for Consumer Products	P	UP	 	 	 

	SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT

	Commercial Development, Large	UP	UP	Chapter 5.34 SMC

	Development Adjacent to a Residential Zone (4)	UP	UP	 	 	 

	Formula Business, Small	P/UP (5)	P	SMC 19.50.035

	Formula Business, Large	UP	UP	SMC 19.50.035

	Formula Restaurant, Large	UP/– (6)	UP	SMC 19.50.035

	Shopping Center, Reconfiguration	UP	UP	 	 	 

	SPECIAL PURPOSE USES

	Public Utility Facilities	–	–	 	 	 

	Public Utility Equipment	P	P	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.    See SMC 19.10.050(C) regarding uses not listed. See Division VIII for definitions of the listed land uses.

2.    New residential developments subject to the city’s growth management ordinance (Chapter 19.94 SMC).

3.    Supportive and transitional housing shall be subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. For example, such housing structured as single-family is permitted in the R-HS, R-R, R-L and R-S residential zones, whereas supportive and transitional housing structured as multifamily is limited to the R-M and R-H residential zones and the mixed use zone.

4.    Defined as new commercial construction or an addition to an existing commercial building, having an area of 1,000 square feet or greater.

5.    Use permit required within the historic overlay zone.

6.    Prohibited in /P plaza retail district. See SMC 19.50.035.

7.    Personal cultivation of cannabis (indoor and outdoor) only allowable in conjunction with residential use subject to SMC 19.50.032.

(Ord. 01-2019 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 08-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 07-2018 § 3, 2018; Ord. 05-2018 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 11-2017 § 1, 2017; Ord. 03-2014 § 2(A), 2014; Ord. 02-2014 § 2(B), 2014; Ord. 03-2012 § 1(B), 2012; Ord. 02-2012 § 2(A), 2012).

 


Table 2-3

Mixed Uses and Permit Requirements  

	Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Mixed Use Zoning Districts (1)	Permit Required by District (2)	P	Use permitted

	UP	Use permit required

	L	License required

	–	Use not allowed

	 	 	 	WTUP	Wine tasting use permit

	Land Use	 	MX	Specific Use Regulations

	 

	MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES (3)

	Artisans/Craft Product Manufacturing	 	UP	 	 	 

	Food and Beverage Manufacturing	 	UP	 	 	 

	Furniture/Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops	 	UP	 	 	 

	Change in Existing Nonconforming Uses	 	UP	SMC 19.82.020 

	Recycling Facilities – Small Collection Facilities	 	–	 	 	 

	Research and Development (R&D)	 	UP	 	 	 

	Warehousing, Wholesaling and Distribution	 	–	 	 	 

	RECREATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES (3)

	Clubs, Lodges, and Private Meeting Halls	 	UP	 	 	 

	Community Centers	 	UP	 	 	 

	Health/Fitness Facilities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Indoor Amusement/Entertainment Facilities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Libraries and Museums	 	UP	 	 	 

	Outdoor Commercial Recreation	 	–	 	 	 

	Religious Facilities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Schools – Specialized Education and Training	 	UP	 	 	 

	Studios for Art, Dance, Music, Photography, Etc.	 	UP	 	 	 

	Theaters and Auditoriums	 	UP	 	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL USES (4)

	Emergency Shelters	 	UP	SMC 19.50.033

	Live/Work Facilities	 	UP	SMC 19.50.050

	Multifamily Dwelling (Four or Fewer Units)	 	P	 	 	 

	Multifamily Dwelling (Five or More Units)	 	UP	 	 	 

	Personal Indoor Cannabis Cultivation (7)	 	P	SMC 19.50.032(A)

	Personal Outdoor Cannabis Cultivation (7)	 	P	SMC 19.50.032(B) (Prohibited if multifamily dwelling or mobile home)

	Residential Care Homes, Seven or More Clients	 	UP	 	 	 

	Single-Family Dwellings	 	P (5)	 	 	 

	Supportive Housing, Four or Fewer Units	 	P	 	 	 

	Supportive Housing, Five or More Units	 	UP	 	 	 

	Transitional Housing, Four or Fewer Units	 	P	 	 	 

	Transitional Housing, Five or More Units	 	UP	 	 	 

	RETAIL TRADE (3)

	Accessory Retail Uses	 	UP	 	 	 

	Art, Antique, Collectible and Gift Sales	 	UP	 	 	 

	Artisan Shops	 	UP	 	 	 

	Auto and Vehicle Sales/Rental	 	–	 	 	 

	Building Material Stores	 	–	 	 	 

	Commercial Cannabis Activities (Except Delivery Services as Indicated Below)	 	–	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Cannabis Delivery Services (Destination Only)	 	P	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Drive-In and Drive-Through Sales	 	UP	 	 	 

	Farmers Market	 	UP	 	 	 

	Fueling Station	 	UP	 	 	 

	Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores	 	UP	 	 	 

	General Retail	 	UP	 	 	 

	Grocery Store	 	UP	 	 	 

	Music Venue	 	L	Chapter 5.34 SMC

	Outdoor Retail Sales and Activities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Plant Nurseries and Garden Supply Stores	 	UP	 	 	 

	Restaurant	 	UP	 	 	 

	Second Hand Stores	 	UP	 	 	 

	Shopping Center	 	UP	 	 	 

	Special Event Venue (6)	 	UP	 	 	 

	Wine Tasting Facilities/Wine Bars	 	WTUP	SMC 19.50.120

	Tap Rooms	 	UP	SMC 19.50.130

	SERVICES (3)

	Auto Parts Sales	 	UP	 	 	 

	Banks and Financial Services	 	UP	 	 	 

	Bed and Breakfast Inns (B&Bs)	 	UP	 	 	 

	Business Support Services	 	UP	 	 	 

	Child Day Care Facilities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Equipment Rental	 	UP	 	 	 

	Governmental and Public Facilities	 	UP	 	 	 

	Hotel or Motel	 	UP	 	 	 

	Medical Services – Clinics, Offices, Laboratories	 	UP	 	 	 

	Medical Services – Hospitals	 	–	 	 	 

	Mortuaries and Funeral Homes	 	UP	 	 	 

	Offices, Professional and Administrative	 	UP	 	 	 

	Personal Services	 	UP	 	 	 

	Storage – Outdoor	 	–	SMC 19.40.100(D)

	Storage – Personal Storage Facility (Mini-Storage)	 	–	 	 	 

	Telecommunications Facilities, Commercial	See Chapter 5.30 SMC, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

	Vacation Rental	 	–	SMC 19.50.110

	Vehicle Services, Repair and Maintenance	 	UP	 	 	 

	Vehicle Services, Service Stations	 	–	SMC 19.50.100

	Repair Services for Consumer Products	 	UP	 	 	 

	SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT

	Formula Business, Small	 	UP	SMC 19.50.035

	Formula Business, Large	 	UP	SMC 19.50.035

	Formula Restaurant, Large	 	UP	SMC 19.50.035

	SPECIAL PURPOSE USES

	Public Utility Facilities	 	–	 	 	 

	Public Utility Equipment	 	P	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.    See SMC 19.10.050(C) regarding uses not listed. See Division VIII for definitions of the listed land uses.

2.    New development in the mixed use zone shall include a residential component unless waived by the planning commission through use permit review (see SMC 19.10.020(C)).

3.    Uses within these categories are allowed only if the planning commission finds that the use will not result in the encroachment of incompatible commercial uses within an established residential area.

4.    New residential developments subject to the city’s growth management ordinance.

5.    Limited to a single residence on an existing lot of record; otherwise, use permit approval is required.

6.    On sites of one acre in size or larger.

7.    Personal cultivation of cannabis (indoor and outdoor) and cannabis delivery services only allowable in conjunction with residential use subject to SMC 19.50.032.

(Ord. 01-2019 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 08-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 07-2018 § 3, 2018; Ord. 05-2018 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 11-2017 § 2, 2017; Ord. 01-2017 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 03-2014 § 2(B), 2014; Ord. 02-2014 § 2(C), 2014; Ord. 03-2012 § 1(C), 2012; Ord. 02-2012 § 2(B), 2012).

 


Table 2-4

Special Purpose Uses and Permit Requirements  

	Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Special Purpose Zoning Districts	Permit Required by District	P	Use permitted

	UP	Use permit required

	L	License required

	–	Use not allowed

	Land Use (1)	A	Pk	P	W	Specific Use Regulations

	 

	AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN SPACE USES

	Crop Production and Horticulture	P	–	–	P	 	 

	Livestock Raising	P	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.020

	Prescribed Grazing	–	UP	–	–	 	 

	Produce Stands for On-Site Production	P	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.070

	Trails, Hiking and Bicycling	P	P	P	–	 	 

	MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES

	Agricultural or Food Processing	–	–	–	UP	 	 

	Wineries	–	–	–	UP	 	 

	Winery Accessory Uses	–	–	–	UP	SMC 19.50.020

	RECREATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

	Community Centers	–	–	UP	–	 	 

	Community Garden	–	UP	UP	–	 	 

	Equestrian Facilities	UP	UP	–	–	SMC 19.50.020

	Libraries and Museums	–	UP	UP	–	 	 

	Parks and Playgrounds	–	P	P	–	 	 

	Recreational Facilities	–	UP	P	–	 	 

	Schools, Public and Private	–	–	P	–	 	 

	Theaters and Auditoriums	–	UP	P	–	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL USES (2)

	Agricultural Employee Housing	P	–	–	–	 	 

	Cannabis Delivery Services (Destination Only)	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Caretaker and Employee Housing	UP	UP	UP	UP	 	 

	Commercial Cannabis Activities (Except Delivery Services as Indicated Above)	–	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.032(C)

	Emergency Shelters, 15 or Fewer Beds	–	–	P	–	SMC 19.50.035

	Emergency Shelters, 16 or More Beds	–	–	UP	–	 

	Personal Indoor Cannabis Cultivation (3)	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(A)

	Personal Outdoor Cannabis Cultivation (3)	P	P	P	P	SMC 19.50.032(B) (Prohibited if multifamily dwelling or mobile home)

	Residential Accessory Structures and Uses	P	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.035

	Single-Family Dwellings	P	–	–	–	SMC 19.50.035

	Supportive Housing (4)	–	–	UP	–	 	 

	Transitional Housing (4)	–	–	UP	–	 	 

	Vacation Rental	–	UP	–	–	SMC	19.50.110

	SERVICES

	Offices – Administrative	–	UP	UP	–	 	 

	Cemeteries	–	–	P	–	 	 

	Child Day Care Facilities	–	–	P	–	 	 

	Corporation Yard	–	–	P	–	 	 

	Farmers Market	P	P	P	–	 	 

	Governmental and Public Facilities	–	UP	UP	–	 	 

	Kennel	–	–	UP	–	 	 

	Medical Services – Hospitals	–	–	UP	–	 	 

	Telecommunications Facilities, Commercial	See Chapter 5.30 SMC, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

	SPECIAL PURPOSE USES

	Public Utility Facilities	–	–	UP	–	 	 

	Public Utility Equipment	P	P	P	P	 	 

	Notes:

1.    See SMC 19.10.050(C) regarding uses not listed. See Division VIII for definitions of the listed land uses.

2.    New residential developments subject to the city’s growth management ordinance (Chapter 19.94 SMC).

3.    Personal cultivation of cannabis (indoor and outdoor) and cannabis delivery services only allowable in conjunction with residential use subject to SMC 19.50.032.

4.    Supportive and transitional housing shall be subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

(Ord. 01-2019 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 08-2018 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 07-2018 § 3, 2018; Ord. 05-2018 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 03-2015 § 1, 2015; Ord. 02-2014 § 2(D), 2014).1

Code reviser’s note: The development code document adopted by Ordinance 2003-02 contains a color, foldout map zoning map of the city of Sonoma that is not included in this title. Copies are on file in the office of the city clerk. 


Chapter 19.12       STREETSCAPE

Sections:

19.12.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.12.020  Streetscape standards and guidelines.


19.12.010  Purpose of chapter.

Streetscapes are the areas between buildings in Sonoma that are occupied by the public street right-of-way and related street, sidewalk, and landscaping improvements, and any setback and yard areas on private property. Sonoma’s streetscapes are among the most important urban design features of Sonoma, because their appearance, character and the impressions they evoke, create the public image of the city. That image is significant to how residents and visitors think and feel about the city.

This chapter provides standards and guidelines for the planning and design of the publicly owned portions of the streetscape, as well as shared private facilities such as private streets and alleys. Standards and guidelines for the privately owned portions of the streetscape (setbacks/yards, landscaping and buildings) are addressed in Division III, Project Design. The standards and guidelines of this chapter establish appropriate requirements for the width and uses of public and private street rights-of-way (for traffic, parking, pedestrians, bicycles, and landscaping). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.12.020  Streetscape standards and guidelines.

The following standards and guidelines apply to the design and construction of public rights-of-way and right-of-way improvements in conjunction with proposed subdivisions, individual lot development where proposed projects are required to provide right-of-way dedications or improvements and public right-of-way improvements designed and constructed by the city. 


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.14       BLOCK STRUCTURE

Sections:

19.14.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.14.020  Block design standards and guidelines.

19.14.030  Neighborhood commercial development.

19.14.040  Lot sizes.


19.14.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides city standards for the layout of proposed blocks within new subdivisions, including minimum lot size requirements. The guidelines and standards set forth in this chapter are intended to:

A.  Promote a connected community and ensure public safety by continuing the historic grid system;

B.  Ensure that new subdivisions emulate historic development patterns in terms of block sizes;

C.  Preserve significant natural features;

D.  Provide adequate parkland and other open space;

E.  Lessen traffic congestion through the creation of alternative routes and reduce traffic speeds in residential settings.

Technical standards for subdivision improvements and infrastructure are found in Division VI, Subdivisions. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.14.020  Block design standards and guidelines.

Blocks within proposed subdivisions shall be designed in compliance with the following standards, except where different requirements are established for a particular planning area within the city by Division III, Project Design.

A.  Street Layout. Streets within new subdivisions shall align with and connect to those of adjacent subdivisions, avoiding the tendency for the proposed subdivision to become an enclave apart from the rest of the community. Public streets should be planned to be continuous through adjacent residential developments, where permitted by terrain and other natural features, to weave the community together and simplify traffic circulation patterns. Requirements for street widths and other street cross-section features are established by Chapter 19.12 SMC, Streetscape, and by Division III, Project Design, for the planning area applicable to the site.

B.  Cul-de-Sac Streets. The use of cul-de-sac streets is strongly discouraged, except where the location or configuration of the parcel to be subdivided will not permit a through street to be used, or a significant natural or cultural feature can be more effectively preserved through the use of a cul-de-sac. Where a cul-de-sac street is approved, the review authority shall require pedestrian connections from the cul-de-sac bulb to the next adjacent through street wherever feasible. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 500 feet.

C.  Block Length. The block dimension between intersecting public streets should normally not exceed 300 feet, or be less than 200 feet.

D.  Edge Blocks. Subdivisions proposed on sites with significant natural features (for example, creeks) shall be designed to provide a single-loaded "frontage road" adjacent to the natural feature, rather than "backing-up" development to the feature. Proposed subdivisions that are located adjacent to the city’s corporate boundary should also be designed to provide the single-loaded frontage road at the edge. See Figure 2-2, below.


[IMAGE]


E.  Alleys. The use of alleys is encouraged in new subdivisions, in order to provide access to second units and parking and loading facilities and to improve the pedestrian orientation of primary streets by reducing or eliminating curb cuts. Suggested locations for the inclusion of alleys in future subdivisions and other developments may be established by Division III, within particular planning areas.

F.  Gated Neighborhoods. Gated residential developments isolate parts of the community from others, and are strongly discouraged.

G.  Natural Features. Creeks, existing healthy mature trees, and other obvious natural features existing on a site proposed for subdivision, should be preserved and incorporated into the project and its landscaping elements to the greatest extent feasible. Additional requirements are established by SMC 19.40.050, Hillside development, SMC 19.40.060, Landscape standards, and Chapter 12.08 SMC, Tree Ordinance.

H.  Parks and Neighborhood Open Space. Residential subdivisions shall provide dedicated parkland or park in-lieu fees as provided in SMC 19.69.030, Parkland dedications and fees.

1.  Guidelines for Park Development. The planning commission shall make use of the following guidelines in its review of any development within which dedicated parkland is proposed:

a.  Such facilities should be centrally located within the development and should be located at street frontages rather than behind lot lines (although alternative locations may be considered in order to take advantage of significant natural features).


[IMAGE]


b.  Where feasible, significant natural features should be incorporated into parks.

c.  Residential subdivisions should be designed to integrate and connect with proposed park and other open space elements (for example, creek corridors) and with existing and proposed trails and pedestrian ways in the site vicinity. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.14.030  Neighborhood commercial development.

This section establishes standards and guidelines for the size, location, design and other characteristics of neighborhood commercial development that may be allowed in the R-S (Residential – Sonoma) zone.

A.  Development Standards. The following standards shall be applied to any neighborhood commercial center proposed in the RS zone:

1.  Neighborhood commercial centers shall be allowed only in conjunction with new developments of 30 units or more.

2.  The land area devoted to a neighborhood commercial center shall be confined to a single, defined area, that shall not exceed five percent of the total land area of the development.

3.  Uses within neighborhood commercial centers shall be limited to those set forth in Table 2-1, Residential Uses and Permit Requirements, for the R-S zone.

B.  Guidelines. The planning commission shall make use of the following guidelines in its review of any neighborhood commercial center proposed in the RS zone:

1.  Neighborhood commercial centers should be centrally located and should be easily accessible within the development to pedestrians and bicyclists.

2.  Neighborhood commercial centers should incorporate public uses, such as parks.

3.  Higher density residential development should be located within or adjacent to any neighborhood commercial center. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.14.040  Lot sizes.

Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide parcels that comply with the minimum area and dimensional requirements of this section, as set forth in Table 2-5, General Lot Size Requirements, unless otherwise specified in the lot size requirements for individual planning areas provided in Division III, Project Design. Variances to the minimum lot size standards set forth in this section shall be governed by SMC 19.61.050, Exceptions to subdivision standards. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).

Table 2-5 General Lot Size Requirements1

	Zoning District	Minimum  Lot Area	Minimum  Lot Width	Minimum  Lot Depth

	R-HS	10 acres	100 feet	100 feet

	R-R	0.5 acres	75 feet	100 feet

	R-S	5,000 square feet	N.A.2	 

	R-L	8,500 square feet	65 feet

75 feet corner lots	90 feet

	R-M	5,000 square feet	55 feet

70 feet corner lots	90 feet

	R-H	4,500 square feet	50 feet

70 feet corner lots	90 feet

	R-O	4,500 square feet	50 feet

70 feet corner lots	90 feet

	MX	Commercial:  10,000 square feet

Residential: 5,000 square feet	40 feet 	N.A.

	C	 	40 feet	 

	C-G	 	60 feet	 

	W	10 acres	100 feet	100 feet

	A	20 acres	100 feet	100 feet

	P	Minimum lot area determined by the planning commission through the subdivision review process.	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Lot size requirements do not apply to condominiums and may be modified through the planned development permit process (SMC 19.54.070). 

2.	Variations in lot size and width are required in new development.The minimum lot size and width shall be determined by the planning commission in the course of development review of individual projects.	 	 	 


Chapter 19.16 PLANNING AREA STANDARDS

Sections:

19.16.010    Purpose of division.

19.16.020    Planning areas established.

19.16.030    Organization and intent of planning area chapters.

19.16.040    Applicability of area standards and guidelines.


19.16.010 Purpose of division.

This division establishes 13 planning areas within the city, based on the time periods and types of development and land uses that characterize each area. This division also establishes site planning and design standards for each area to ensure that proposed projects are designed to enhance and maintain the most desirable development and environmental characteristics of each unique area of the city. The planning areas are described in terms of three subtypes – areas, districts, and corridors – depending upon their function, their geography, and the range of land uses within them. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.16.020 Planning areas established.

The provisions of this division are applicable to specific sites within the city based on the area where the site is located. The following planning areas are hereby established (see Table 3-1). The overall structure of the planning areas is depicted on Figure 1 and the location and boundaries of each area are shown on Figure 3-21.

 

Table 3-1 Planning Areas 

	Planning Area	See

	Northeast Area	Chapter 19.18 SMC

	Central-East Area	Chapter 19.20 SMC

	Southeast Area	Chapter 19.22 SMC

	Northwest Area	Chapter 19.24 SMC

	Central-West Area	Chapter 19.26 SMC

	Southwest Area	Chapter 19.28 SMC

	Gateway District	Chapter 19.30 SMC

	Broadway Corridor	Chapter 19.32 SMC

	Downtown District	Chapter 19.34 SMC

	West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway Corridor	Chapter 19.36 SMC

	Open Space Districts	Chapter 19.38 SMC


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.16.030 Organization and intent of planning area chapters.

Each planning area is the subject of a separate chapter containing standards, guidelines, and background information specific to that area, divided between three sections.

A. Overview and Objectives. The first section (“Existing Conditions, Desired Future, Potential Changes”) contains a general overview of the planning area, a statement of broad planning objectives, and a description of likely public improvements and other potential changes, as follows:

1. Existing Conditions. The discussion of existing conditions which opens each chapter is intended to briefly set forth the unique characteristics of each planning area in terms of natural and built features. A primary purpose of this section is to provide a context for the regulations and guidelines that follow.

2. Desired Future. This subsection contains a discussion of the general planning objectives for the area as derived from relevant General Plan policies and the particular conditions of the planning area. It is to be used by decision-making bodies, including the city council, the design review and historic preservation commission, and the planning commission, as a reference to the larger intent of specific development regulations and as guidelines in the review of discretionary development applications within each planning area.

3. Potential Changes. In this subsection, specific public improvements relevant to each planning area are described, including street extensions, new bicycle and pedestrian paths, drainage improvements, and street tree plantings. Also described are approved or anticipated private development projects of significance to the planning area. Projects and improvements are drawn from General Plan policies and implementation measures, the city’s five-year capital improvement program, other project objectives identified by the city council, approved and anticipated development proposals, and projects identified by other agencies (e.g., the Sonoma Valley Unified School District). The purposes of this section are to:

a. Provide decision-makers and the general public with a common frame of reference as to potential public improvements and other changes relevant to development conditions;

b. Provide a basis for requiring new development to participate in the provision of public improvements when such participation is warranted due to the impacts of development;

c. Ensure that known and prospective public improvements are considered in the review of development applications.

B. Development Standards and Guidelines. The second section (“Project Planning and Design Standards”) sets forth specific development standards and guidelines applicable to new development. The specific provisions of this section are as follows: 

1. Zoning Map. A zoning map is provided for each planning area depicting the zoning districts within it, as well as the zoning designations which would apply to areas outside of the city limits but within the sphere of influence.

2. Site Planning. The physical standards, requirements, and guidelines applicable to new development are set forth in this subsection, including limitations on density and regulations pertaining to building setbacks, coverage, open space and parking design. Environmental features and screening and buffering requirements are also addressed. 

3. Building Design. In this subsection, standards and guidelines regarding building heights, types, and profiles are provided.

4. Design Map and Guidelines. Concluding the chapter for each planning area is a design map and accompanying design guidelines. The map and guidelines are intended to highlight key planning issues facing each planning area. 

C. Overview of Conditions. The concluding section is a map in which the major physical features of each planning area are identified, including streets, building envelopes, creeks, and contour lines. The balance of land uses and the number of units within each planning area are summarized as well. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.16.040 Applicability of area standards and guidelines.

New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements of this division for the applicable planning area, in addition to the applicable development standards in Division IV, General Site Planning and Development Standards. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).1

Code reviser’s note: The development code document adopted by Ordinance 2003-02 contains color foldout maps of all of the planning areas, maps that are not included in this title. Copies are on file in the office of the city clerk. 


Chapter 19.18       NORTHEAST PLANNING AREA
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.18.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.18.020  Project planning and design.


19.18.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A.  Existing Conditions. The Northeast planning area lies immediately to the north and east of the Plaza and downtown, and extends to the northeast city boundary. The planning area, which encompasses 230 acres, includes many historical structures and diverse land uses. Scenic vistas of the surrounding hillsides along four of the major north-south streets and a portion of the city’s bike path are also important attributes of this area. Existing development is characterized by wide variety in architectural styles, site planning techniques, and street patterns, reflecting different periods in the city’s history. Important natural features include Schocken Hill, which extends into the planning area from the north, and Nathanson Creek, which runs through the southeast edge of the area. Visually, this area is marked by the contrast of rural and urban elements.

Existing land uses include:

1.  A scattering of commercial uses, including a restaurant, a small office building, the Vella Cheese company and a light industrial facility;

2.  Medium density residences, including a few small lot subdivisions and multifamily dwellings;

3.  Depot Park and a complex of county-owned recreational facilities including the Veterans’ Building and Arnold Field;

4.  Sebastiani Winery and a small amount of vineyard land;

5.  Rural hillside residential areas;

6.  Low density single-family residences;

7.  Agricultural land; and

8.  Undeveloped open space areas zoned for other land uses. 

The bicycle/walking path which runs east and west through the center of the planning area is an important recreational and social element of the Northeast planning area.

B.  Desired Future. The general objective for this area, as expressed in SMC 19.18.020, Project planning and design, is to preserve the quality and context of land uses and buildings. Remodeling or additions to existing structures and infill development including intensification in mixed use areas, will require careful attention to surrounding building form, site design, and land uses to preserve the quality of development in the Northeast planning area. The emphasis of mixed use development should be residential, with some small-scale office, bed and breakfast, or other compatible commercial land uses allowed subject to use permit review.

C.  Potential Changes. Specific improvements contemplated in this area include improvements to the Maysonnave property and Depot Park, the creation of a pedestrian corridor linking the Plaza, Depot Park and the Sonoma Overlook Trail, and landscaping improvements to public parking lots. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.18.020  Project planning and design.

A.  Site Planning Standards.

1.  Residential Density. The following residential density and minimum lot size requirements apply to proposed subdivisions and multifamily developments within the Northeast planning area.

Table 3-2 Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-HS  (Residential – Hillside)	1 maximum;  or, 1 per 10 acres	10 acres

	R-R  (Residential – Rural)	2 per acre maximum	20,000 sq. ft. 

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;  5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum;  11 per acre maximum	5,500 sq. ft.

	MX  (Mixed Use)	20 per acre maximum	7,000 sq. ft. 

	W  (Wine Production)	None2	5 acres 

	A  (Agriculture)	1 maximum	10 acres 

	Notes:

1.	Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.

2.	Residences are not allowed in the W zone, except for caretaker residences authorized through use permit approval.	 	 

2.  Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-3 and 3-4.

 

Table 3-3 Northeast Area: Infill and Additions 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 W1	A	R-HS	R-R	R-L	R-M	MX

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Front/Street-side2	30 ft.	 	 	30 ft.	New construction: 20 ft. or the same as the closest structure to the street on either side, whichever is more. 

Additions: 20 ft.	New construction: 15 ft. or the same as the closest structure to the street on either side, whichever is less.

Additions: 15 ft.	N.A.

	Side:  One-story	30 ft.	 	 	20 ft. min., 50 ft. total	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. total.	7 ft. minimum,  18 ft. total.	 

	Side:  Two-story	30 ft.	 	 	20 ft. min., 50 ft. total	7 ft.minimum,  18 ft. total.	7 ft. minimum,  18 ft. total.	 

	Rear	30 ft.	 	 	30 ft.	25 ft.	20 ft.	 

	Garage:  Front	30 ft.	 	 	30 ft.	20 ft. from primary structure	 	 

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 	 	 	 	 

	F.A.R. 	N.A.	0.05	0.10	0.20	0.35	0.50	0.60

	Coverage	N.A.	10%	15% 	25% 	40%	60%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Commercial	No minimum requirement.	 	 	 	 	N.A.	 7% – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	No minimum requirement.	 	 	 	 	300 sq. ft. per unit	 

	Residential: Private	No minimum requirement.	 	 	 	 	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions. 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Primary Structure	35 ft.	 	30 ft. 	 	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Setbacks in the W district may be reduced where the review authority first finds that the reduced setback would not be detrimental to surrounding land uses.

2.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

 

Table 3-4 Northeast Area: Subdivisions of 5+ Lots

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 

	 	R-M	MX

	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 

	Front/Street-side1	15 ft., one-story

20 ft., two-story	A variety of setbacks, consistent with neighborhood conditions, shall normally be required at the discretion of the planning commission.

	Side:  One-story	5 ft. minimum,  15 ft. total.	5 ft. minimum,  15 ft. total.

	Side:  Two-story	10 ft. minimum on two-story side	8 ft. minimum on two-story side

	Rear	One-story: 20 ft.; two-story: 25 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.; two-story: 20 ft.

	Garage:  Front	20 ft. from primary structure	20 ft. from primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 

	F.A.R. 	0.45	0.60

	Coverage	50%	60%

	Open Space	Minimum open space required for residential development component only. See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.	 

	Commercial	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	300 sq. ft. per unit	300 sq. ft. per unit

	Residential: Private	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).	 	 

3.  Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for multifamily and mixed use developments shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Nonresidential and multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

4.  Natural Features. Environmental amenities including creeks, streams and other drainage courses, mature trees, and rock outcrops shall be preserved and incorporated into the proposed site plan. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See SMC 19.40.050, Hillside development, and SMC 19.40.060, Landscape standards, and the tree preservation ordinance for specific hillside development and tree preservation requirements and guidelines.
[IMAGE]


5.  Screening and Buffering. Multifamily and mixed use development shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B.  Building Design.

1.  Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of two stories or 30 feet; provided, that structures in the A and the W zoning districts may be allowed up to 35 feet in height. Second stories shall be set back an additional 10 feet from the front setback, and five feet on the sides and rear setbacks. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040, for height measurement and exceptions.

2.  Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

3.  Building Types – Guidelines for Commercial Structures. Proposed commercial and mixed use structures should be compatible in scale, massing height to residential development in the vicinity. Building architecture and design details should maintain a low-key, residential flavor.

C.  Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the Northeast Planning Area will be maintained at their existing width and alignment. (Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.20       CENTRAL-EAST PLANNING AREA
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.20.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.20.020  Project planning and design.


19.20.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A.  Existing Conditions. The Central-East planning area is located at the eastern edge of the city, between East Napa Street and East MacArthur Street, and includes some of the oldest residential areas in the community, with mature landscaping and street trees. The streets primarily follow a grid pattern with variable widths, supporting slower traffic. Some streets have sidewalks and/or parkway landscaping strips and many homes have tall, mature hedges along the front property line, which create well defined street edges. Setbacks tend to be large, but vary widely. 

The area includes a variety of architectural styles, representative of individual home subdivision and construction. Nathanson Creek meanders from the northern boundary of the planning area along its west edge, where it crosses East MacArthur Street. The east edge of the planning area is adjacent to open fields outside of the city, and the planning area also has views of the hillsides to the north.

Existing land uses include:

1.  Low density single-family homes;

2.  Four neighborhood parks;

3.  The Sonoma Community Center;

4.  Undeveloped, Sonoma residential property in the sphere of influence; and

5.  A cemetery.

B.  Desired Future. The general objective for this area, as expressed in SMC 19.20.020, Project planning and design, is to preserve the existing quality and fabric of residential neighborhoods in the Central-East planning area. Two key issues that could affect efforts to maintain the character of the area include a significant number of parcels that could be subdivided as infill lots, and the site planning and building design techniques employed in their development. Development of the potential infill parcels will mainly need to focus on visual compatibility with the adjacent patterns of site design, building scale, and architectural context.

C.  Potential Changes. The future development of the parcels east of Armstrong Estates will lead to the extension of Charles Van Damme Way and William Cunningham Avenue, and perhaps to the connection of Appleton Way with East Napa Street. This area, portions of which are currently outside of city limits, has an R-S designation, which calls for somewhat higher densities and a greater variety in lot sizes than what is found in the development to the west (Armstrong Estates), which features lots having a minimum area of 20,000 square feet. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.20.020  Project planning and design.

A.  Site Planning.

1.  Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot size requirements apply to proposed subdivisions and multifamily projects within the Central-East planning area.

Table 3-5 Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;  5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-S (Residential – Sonoma)	3 per acre minimum;  8 per acre maximum	5,000 sq. ft.

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum;  11 per acre maximum	5,500 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.	Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.	 	 

2.  Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-6 and 3-7, following. 

3.  Driveways and Parking. Driveways and parking areas for multifamily projects shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Nonresidential and multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

4.  Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities including Nathanson Creek, related riparian areas, and mature trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site.

 

Table 3-6 Central-East Area: Infill and Additions 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M

	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	New structures on vacant parcels: 25 ft. or the same as the average of structures to the street on either side, whichever is greater.2

Additions: 20 ft.

Nonconforming replacement structures: The same location as the original structure.	 	20 ft.

	Side:  One-story	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined

	Side:  Two-story	3 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,4 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,4 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	8 ft. minimum on two-story side

	Rear	20 ft.	 	15 ft.

	Garage:  Front	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.50

	Coverage	40%	40%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 

	Residential: Common	N.A.	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit

	Residential: Private	N.A.	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 

	Primary Structure	35 ft. on parcels of 20,000 sq. ft. or greater, otherwise 30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Where averaging adjacent structures results in a setback of greater than 30 feet, a 30-foot setback shall be allowed.

3.	A nonconforming replacement structure shall not exceed 10 percent of the height or area of the original structure, unless a use permit is obtained.

4.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 

 

Table 3-7 Central-East Area: New Subdivisions of 5+ Lots

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M

	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	A variety of setbacks, compatible with neighborhood conditions, shall normally be required at the discretion of the planning commission. An average setback of 25 ft. shall be maintained.	 	20 ft.

	Side:  One-story	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. combined	As approved by the planning commission, except that in no case shall a setback of less than 3 ft. be allowed.	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined

	Side:  Two-story	3 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	8 ft. minimum on two-story side

	Rear	20 ft.	 	15 ft.

	Garage:  Front	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.50

	Coverage	40%	40%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 

	Residential: Common	N.A.	500 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit

	Residential: Private	N.A.	 	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 

	Primary Structure	35 ft. on parcels of 20,000 sq. ft. or greater; otherwise 30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 

5.  Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B.  Building Design.

1.  Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. Structures may exceed the height standard by increasing side and rear setbacks by two feet for each additional five feet in height. Second stories must be set back an additional 10 feet from the front setback, and five feet on the sides and rear setbacks. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2.  Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

C.  Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the Central-East planning area will be maintained at their existing width and alignment. (Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.22       SOUTHEAST PLANNING AREA
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.22.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.22.020  Project planning and design.


19.22.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A.  Existing Conditions. The Southeast area is roughly bounded on three sides by major collector streets, with Nathanson Creek forming the western boundary. The smaller lot sizes and street improvements associated with the single-family subdivisions within the city contrast with the rural lands of the unincorporated sphere of influence, with little transition between the two. The three large single-family subdivisions within city limits are not characterized by any particular street or block pattern, except that all feature curb, gutter, and sidewalk, and none provide, at present, a connection to or continuation of the traditional grid pattern found to the north.

Existing land uses include:

1.  Low density single-family homes;

2.  A large block of vacant or lightly developed Sonoma residential and low density residential properties in the sphere of influence;

3.  A creekside neighborhood park;

4.  The Sonoma Valley High School and its associated playing fields on the east;

5.  A middle school;

6.  An elementary school; and

7.  A cemetery.

B.  Desired Future. The general objectives for this area, as expressed in SMC 19.22.020, Project planning and design, are as set forth below. The area along Fifth Street East, between Denmark Street and Napa Road, represents the largest block of undeveloped residential land within the sphere of influence. Its development should be based on elements found in traditional Sonoma neighborhoods, including grid streets, a mix of lot sizes, and variation in the size and style of homes. The development of this area should result in a distinct edge to the city, rather than a "feathering" effect, and should connect to adjoining subdivisions.

C.  Potential Changes. The development of the Sonoma residential area will allow for additional grid street connections to Fifth Street East, Denmark Street, and, potentially, Napa Road. The extension of curb, gutter and sidewalk, and the undergrounding of drainage will be needed along the east side of Fifth Street East and the north side of Napa Road. In addition, the intersection of Fifth Street East/Napa Road will ultimately need to be signalized.

The high school expansion and the recently completed middle school on the property south of the high school have implications for the residential development adjacent to the east. The placement of buildings, playing fields, access and parking should support those neighborhoods, not diminish them. To provide convenient access to playing fields and other facilities on the east side of the creek, an access road (public or private) should be extended to connect Denmark Street with Newcomb Street. Opportunities for creek restoration should be pursued along the bicycle/pedestrian path recently developed on the east side of Nathanson Creek. Connections to this path should be made to the residential areas on the east. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.22.020  Project planning and design.

A.  Site Planning Standards.

1.  Residential Density. The following residential density and minimum lot size requirements apply to proposed subdivisions and multifamily projects within the Southeast planning area:

Table 3-8 Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;  5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-S (Residential – Sonoma)	3 per acre minimum;  8 per acre maximum	5,000 sq. ft.

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum;  11 per acre maximum	5,500 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.	Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.	 	 

2.  Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-9 and 3-10, following.

3.  Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for multifamily projects shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4.  Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities, including Nathanson Creek, related riparian areas, and mature oak trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site.

5.  Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B.  Building Design.

1.  Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet, side and rear setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2.  Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

C.  Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the Southeast planning area will be maintained at their existing width and alignment. (Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).

 

Table 3-9 Southeast Area: Infill and Additions 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M

	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	New structures on vacant parcels: 20 ft. or the same as the average of structures to the street on either side, whichever is greater.2

Additions: 20 ft.

Nonconforming replacement structures: The same location as the original structure.3	 	15 ft.

	Side:  One-story	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined

	Side:  Two-story	3 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,4 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,4 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	8 ft. minimum on two-story side

	Rear	20 ft.	 	15 ft.

	Garage:  Front	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.50

	Coverage	40%	40%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 

	Residential: Common	N.A.	500 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private.	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private.

	Residential: Private	N.A.	 	 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Where averaging adjacent structures results in a setback of greater than 30 feet, a 30-foot setback shall be allowed.

3.	A nonconforming replacement structure shall not exceed 10 percent of the height or area of the original structure, unless a use permit is obtained.

4.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 

 

Table 3-10 Southeast Area: New Subdivisions of 5+ Lots

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M

	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	A variety of setbacks, compatible with neighborhood conditions, shall normally be required at the discretion of the planning commission. An average setback of 20 feet shall be maintained.	 	15 ft.

	Side:  One-story	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. combined	As approved by the planning commission, except that in no case shall a setback of less than 3 ft. be allowed.	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined

	Side:  Two-story	3 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	8 ft. minimum on two-story side

	Rear	20 ft.	 	15 ft.

	Garage:  Front	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.50

	Coverage	40%	40%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 

	Residential: Common	N.A.	500 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	N.A.	 	 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.24       NORTHWEST PLANNING AREA
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.24.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.24.020  Project planning and design.


19.24.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A.  Existing Conditions. The Northwest planning area is a predominantly residential district bounded by the West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway commercial corridor on the west and south and the Vallejo Home State Park on the east. Verano Avenue forms the northern boundary. A class 1 bike/walking path crosses the planning area, providing local access to Olsen Park, as well as a route to Maxwell Regional Park on the west and the Plaza on the east. In general, residential development within the area is of three types: (1) older tracts of single-family residences on long, narrow blocks arranged in a grid pattern (east of Fifth Street); (2) newer tracts of single-family residences arranged on curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs (west of Fifth Street); and (3) multifamily development, in the form of condominiums and P.U.D.s, along West Spain Street.

Existing land uses include:

1.  Low density single-family homes;

2.  Condominiums and planned developments;

3.  A neighborhood park;

4.  A restaurant and a cooking school;

5.  A parking area and a small office building associated with the Sonoma Valley shopping center; and

6.  Scattered vacant parcels, some of them as large as 14 acres.

B.  Desired Future. As expressed in SMC 19.24.020, the general objectives for the Northwest planning area are as follows: Within the single-family areas, additions and reconstruction will increase the architectural variety of the area, a trend which should be encouraged while preserving the generally small scale of the older tracts and avoiding the over-building of lots. The largest opportunity for new residential development is represented by the Montini property, a 14-acre parcel located at the northwest corner of the planning area, adjacent to the Vallejo Home State Park. Its development should contribute to the character of the area by extending the grid pattern of the older residential blocks to the south, while providing a greater variety of lot sizes and unit types as called for by its Sonoma Residential zoning designation.

New multifamily development along West Spain Street should emulate the good examples in the area by providing generous street-side setbacks, maintaining low building profiles, and locating parking within the interior or the back of the lot. 

C.  Potential Changes. Views from Fifth Street West of the northern hills lost through the development of the Montini property will be regained by the extension of Fourth Street West and Verano Avenue. While Fourth Street West will also be extended from West Spain Street to connect with Rosalie Drive, no connection will be made across the bike path in order to preserve the safety of the path and to prevent Fourth Street from being used as a shortcut to Sonoma Highway. Pedestrian access to and from Sonoma Market will be improved by closing gaps in the sidewalk system, especially at the intersection of Fifth Street West and West Spain Street. This intersection may ultimately be signalized. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.24.020  Project planning and design.

A.  Site Planning Standards.

1.  Residential Density. The following density and minimum lot size requirements apply to proposed subdivisions and multifamily projects within the Northwest planning area:

Table 3-11 Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;  5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-S (Residential – Sonoma)	3 per acre minimum;  8 per acre maximum	5,500 sq. ft.

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum;  11 per acre maximum	5,000 sq. ft.

	MX (Mixed Use)	20 per acre maximum 	7,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.	Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.	 	 

2.  Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-12 and 3-13.

3.  Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for multifamily projects shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets (West Spain Street, Fifth Street West, and Verano Avenue) shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4.  Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities, including mature oak trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site.

5.  Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B.  Building Design.

1.  Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet, side and rear setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2.  Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

C.  Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the Northwest planning area will be maintained at their existing width and alignment. 

 

Table 3-12 Northwest Area: Infill and Additions 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M	MX

	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	15 ft.

	Side:  One-story	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 20 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 

	Rear	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	 

	Garage:  Front	5 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	N.A.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.50	0.70

	Coverage	40%	40%	60%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.	 	 	 

	Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	7 – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	N.A.	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private.

	Residential: Private	N.A.	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 	 

 

Table 3-13 Northwest Area: Subdivisions of 5+ Lots

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M	MX

	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	15 ft.

	Side:  One-story	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 20 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 

	Rear	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	 

	Garage:  Front	5 ft. from the front of primary structure	20 ft. from the front of primary structure	20 ft. from the front of primary structure	N.A.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.50	0.70

	Coverage	40%	40%	60%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.	 	 	 

	Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	7 – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	N.A.	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit,	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	N.A.	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 	 

(Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.26       CENTRAL-WEST PLANNING AREA
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.26.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.26.020  Project planning and design.


19.26.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A.  Existing Conditions. The Central-West planning area is large, at 297 acres, and contains a variety of housing types, including low density single-family, mobile home parks, duplexes and fourplexes, as well as large-scale multifamily developments. Sonoma Creek, on the west, represents the area’s most distinct boundary. The West Napa/Sonoma Highway commercial corridor lies to the north, the Downtown district and Broadway to the east, and rural development within the Southwest planning area to the south. The development of this area is recent in terms of the city’s overall history, with the oldest tracts dating back to the 1950s. Within single-family areas, front setbacks tend to be quite consistent (20 feet, usually), less so in the multifamily sections. Most of the streets are developed with monolithic sidewalks rather than planter strips. The major streets within the Central-West area form a grid, continued by some local streets and ignored by others.

Existing land uses include:

1.  Low density single-family homes;

2.  Two mobile home parks;

3.  Multifamily development, including duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes, condominiums, and apartments;

4.  Two congregate care facilities;

5.  A neighborhood park (Hertenstein Park);

6.  Sassarini Elementary School;

7.  A hospital; and

8.  A small shopping center.

B.  Desired Future. The general objective for this area, as expressed in SMC 19.26.020, is to ensure that new infill developments respect their immediate context. Single-family areas should remain single-family with regular setbacks and development in multifamily areas, while having greater flexibility in site design and massing, should clearly respond to conditions on adjacent parcels. Otherwise, the mini-neighborhoods within the planning area risk losing their distinctiveness. In the development or redevelopment of properties on the edge of the planning area, particularly adjacent to the West Napa Street corridor, uses should be laid out to minimize potential conflicts with adjacent commercial development, while maximizing appropriate connections. In order to preserve the city’s largest stock of affordable senior housing, the regular maintenance of the mobile home parks’ grounds and of the individual coaches should be encouraged.

C.  Potential Changes. The need for street improvements within the area is limited mainly to traffic calming and pedestrian safety improvements, such as safety improvements to the bike path crossing on West MacArthur Street. Hayes Street, between Bettencourt Street and West MacArthur Street, will ultimately be improved to a full width as adjoining properties develop. In the long term, intersection improvements may be needed at Fifth Street West/Andrieux Street and Fifth Street West/West MacArthur Street. Although a significant environmental feature, Sonoma Creek is largely inaccessible within the planning area, but a bike/pedestrian connection has been developed along it between Oregon Street and Napa Road. The Fryer Creek bike/walking path should be extended, if possible, to connect with Second Street West. Throughout the planning area, gaps in the sidewalks and in street tree plantings need to be filled. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.26.020  Project planning and design.

A.  Site Planning Standards.

1.  Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot sizes apply to new subdivisions within different zoning districts in the Central-West planning area.

Table 3-14 Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;  5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-S (Residential – Sonoma)	3 per acre minimum;  8 per acre maximum	5,000 sq. ft.

	R-P (Residential – Mobile Home Park)	7 per acre maximum	10 acres

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum;  11 per acre maximum	4,500 sq. ft.

	R-H (Residential – High Density)	15 per acre maximum	3,500 sq. ft.

	C (Commercial)	20 per acre maximum 	10,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.	Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.	 	 

 

Table 3-15 Central-West Area: Infill and Additions 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	R-P	R-L	R-S	R-M	R-H	C

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 	 	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	20 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	15 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.

	Side:  One-story	10 ft.	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	 	5 ft. minimum, 12 ft. combined	 	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-story	20 ft.	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	 

	Rear	20 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	One-story: 12 ft.

Two-story: 15 ft.	 

	Garage:  Front	N.A.	5 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	N.A.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 	 	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.30	0.35	0.35	0.45	0.70	0.80

	Coverage	35%	40%	40%	50%	60%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 	 	 	 

	Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	7 – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit	300 sq. ft. per unit	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 	 	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	 	 	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 	 	 	 

 

Table 3-16 Central-West Area: Subdivisions of 5+ Lots

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 	 

	 	R-L	R-S	R-M	R-H

	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	A variety of setbacks, compatible with neighborhood conditions, shall normally be required at the discretion of the planning commission. An average setback of 25 feet shall be maintained.	 	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	15 ft.

	Side:  One-story	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	As approved by the planning commission, except that in no case shall a setback of less than 3 ft. be allowed.	5 ft. minimum, 12 ft. combined	 

	Side:  Two-story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	 

	Rear	20 ft.	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	15 ft.

	Garage:  Front	5 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	Parking areas (including carports and garages) should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings.	 

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.35	0.45	0.70

	Coverage	40%	40%	50%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 	 

	Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.

	Residential: Common	N.A.	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit	300 sq. ft. per unit

	Residential: Private	N.A.	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at building wall, not ridge.	 	 	 	 

2.  Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-15 and 3-16, preceding.

3.  Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for multifamily projects shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets (West Spain Street, Fifth Street West, and Verano Avenue) shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4.  Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities, including Sonoma Creek, Fryer Creek, the west fork of Fryer Creek, related riparian areas, and mature oak trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site.

5.  Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources (SMC 19.40.030). See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060). A masonry wall may be required of any new development whose rear yard abuts a commercially zoned property.

B.  Building Design.

1.  Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet, side and rear setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2.  Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

C.  Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the Central-West planning area will be maintained at their existing width and alignment. (Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.28       SOUTHWEST PLANNING AREA
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.28.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.28.020  Project planning and design.


19.28.010  Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A.  Existing Conditions. The Southwest planning area, which is entirely residential, is marked by sharp contrasts between rural and urban development. Malet Street and Harrington Drive are rural enclaves, developed mainly with older residences. New residential development includes a single-family tract and a series of higher density tracts featuring detached units on small lots. The Southwest area is bounded by rural and agricultural lands outside of the City’s sphere of influence on the south and west, with the Broadway corridor and the gateway at Four Corners to the east, and urban residential development to the north. The Fryer Creek channel bisects the area. No east-west streets traverse the planning area (with the exception of Leveroni Road), due to the presence of the creek, but there is a bicycle/pedestrian connection at the southern end of the channel. This crossing connects bike/pedestrian pathways which run along either side of the channel, providing access to the two neighborhood parks within the planning area.

Existing land uses include:

1.  Older, rural density single-family homes;

2.  Single-family tract development;

3.  Several planned developments;

4.  Two neighborhood parks and a wetland preserve; and

5.  Scattered vacant parcels, some of them relatively large. 

B.  Desired Future. The general objectives for this area are to preserve the Harrington and Malet Street areas as rural enclaves and to regulate additions and modifications to existing planned developments. Over time, the unincorporated areas of Malet Street and Harrington Drive will be annexed to the city so that the residents of those areas may have the benefit of reliable water and sewer service. However, these areas are intended to be preserved as pockets of rural development. New development within these areas and future public improvements should be consistent with that goal. Existing and planned single-family developments within the planning area will inevitably contrast with adjacent rural areas. While the general character of development within these areas will be that of urban density single-family residential, transitional design elements should be used, especially at street connections between urban and rural areas. The planned developments within the Southwest area were designed with little room for change. Additions and renovations will be greatly restricted due to the small lot sizes and narrow setbacks associated with these developments.

C.  Intended Changes. Harrington Drive and Malet Street west of First Street West will require some level of upgrading, but street sections should reflect and reinforce the rural qualities of those areas. Elsewhere in the planning area, gaps in the sidewalk system need to be closed and, in the long term, sidewalks (with planter strips) will probably be extended along Fifth Street West and Leveroni Road. Except for a connection between Newcomb Street and Malet Street and possible improvements to the intersection of Fifth Street West and Leveroni Road, no major street improvements are planned. For health and safety reasons, water and sewer lines will have to be extended along Malet Street and, in the long term, along Fifth Street West and Leveroni Road. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.28.020  Project planning and design.

A.  Site Planning Standards.

1.  Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot sizes apply to new subdivisions within the different zoning districts of the Southwest planning area.

Table 3-17 Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-R (Residential – Rural)	2 per acre maximum	20,000 sq. ft.

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;  5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-S (Residential – Sonoma)	3 per acre minimum; 8 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum; 11 per acre maximum	6,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.	Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.	 	 

2.  Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Table 3-18, following.

 

Table 3-18 Southwest Area: Infill, Additions and Replacement Structures

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 	 	 	 

	 	R-R	R-L	R-S	R-M

	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.	 	 	 

	Front/Street-side1	One-story: 20 ft.

Two-story:2 30 ft.	One-story: 20 ft.

Two-story:2 30 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.

	Side:  One-story	15 ft.	15 ft.	5 ft. minimum, 12 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 12 ft. combined

	Side:  Two-story	15 ft.	15 ft.	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.

	Rear	30 ft.	30 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.

	Garage:  Front	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure	5 ft. from the front of the primary structure	20 ft. from the front of the primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.	 	 	 

	F.A.R. 	0.20	0.35	0.35	0.45

	Coverage	25%	40%	40%	50%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.	 	 	 

	Residential: Common	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.

	Residential: Private	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.	 	 	 

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	 	 	 

	Notes:

1.	Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.	Measured at wall, not ridge.	 	 	 	 

3.  Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for multifamily projects shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets (Fifth Street West, Leveroni Road) shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4.  Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities, including Fryer Creek and associated riparian areas, wetlands, and mature oak trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site. 

5.  Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B.  Building Design.

1.  Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet, side and rear setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2.  Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

C.  Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the Southwest planning area will be maintained at their existing width and alignment with the following exceptions:

1.  Malet Street. West of First Street West, Malet Street should be maintained in a rural configuration; however, for safety reasons, it will need to be widened in some areas to provide a consistent two-lane section.

2.  Harrington Drive. Harrington Drive should be maintained as a rural street, but widening in some areas may be needed to achieve a safe two-lane section. (Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.30 GATEWAY DISTRICT
[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.30.010    Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.30.020    Project planning and design standards.


19.30.010 Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A. Existing Conditions. Although the Gateway commercial district encompasses only 59 acres, its future development is crucial to the identity of Sonoma. It forms the southern entrance to the city and marks the division between the rural and agricultural character of the unincorporated area and the urban features of the city. The district is bounded by existing and planned multifamily development to the west and north, rural residential, agricultural, and vacant parcels to the south, and Nathanson Creek to the east. Broadway and Napa/Leveroni Road divide the district into quarters.

Existing land uses include:

1. Single-family homes on large lots;

2. A hardware and garden supply center; 

3. A hotel;

4. A local market, and small car repair shop, a furniture store, and a mixed use building;

5. A PG&E substation;

6. A vineyard;

7. Traintown (a large, landscaped recreation facility); and

8. Vacant parcels, totaling more than 15 acres.

B. Desired Future. The Gateway district should provide an attractive and distinctive entrance to Sonoma. In terms of uses, the Gateway district should provide a mix of resident- and visitor-serving uses, along with a substantial residential component. The district should complement, not compete with, the Plaza, and should provide shopping and service opportunities for existing and future residential development in southern Sonoma. In terms of site planning, architecture, and landscaping, new development and redevelopment should draw from the best examples of Sonoma. Existing local serving uses within the district should be retained and encouraged to upgrade in keeping with the overall goals for the area.

The development of the Gateway district will contrast with the rural and agricultural lands of the unincorporated territory to the south, east and west. Design sensitivity will be needed to make this contrast pleasing rather than jarring. Larger setbacks and lower building heights are appropriate at the edge properties of the district, with smaller setbacks and higher buildings at the core. It is expected that the hotel at the northwest quadrant of the district will anchor other visitor-serving uses and encourage the improvement of other properties in the area. 

Pedestrians must be better served – by extending sidewalks with planter strips along major roads, by reducing driveway cuts, and by requiring pedestrian pathways and connections in new development. A street tree planting program should be developed and implemented in conjunction with frontage improvements. 

C. Potential Changes. In terms of road improvements, the southernmost segment of Broadway within the Gateway district will ultimately be widened to three lanes. Napa and Leveroni Road may not need to be widened, but shoulder improvements will be necessary in some areas, as well as turn-pockets. The intersection of Broadway and Napa/Leveroni Road will need to be improved with landscaping, sidewalks, and crosswalks. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.30.020 Project planning and design standards.

A. Site Planning Standards.

1. Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot sizes apply to new subdivisions within the Gateway district.

 

 

 

Table 3-19 

Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements 

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	C-G (Commercial – Gateway)	20 per acre maximum	10,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.    Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.

2. Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-20 and 3-21, following.

3. Driveways and Parking. Parking areas should be located at the rear or along the side of properties and should be discouraged in front of buildings. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets (Broadway, Napa Road, Leveroni Road) shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

 

Table 3-20 

Gateway District: Additions and Renovations 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	Edge Properties (C-G)	Core Properties (C-G)

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	20 ft. or consistent with existing structure	None required

	Side	None required, except 1) when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply; 2) when abutting the sphere of influence, in which case a 20 ft. setback is required.	None required

	Rear	None required, except when abutting a residential zone or the sphere of influence, in which case a 20 ft. setback is required.	None required

	Parking  Areas	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure. Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. For the expansion or renovation of existing parking areas subject to planning approval, the review authority may require additional landscaping and/or the consolidation of driveway cuts.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.80

	Coverage	40%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	7% – 11% of site

	Residential	300 sq. ft. per unit (any combination of shared or private)

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	35 ft.

	Notes:

1.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

 

Table 3-21 

Gateway District: New Development 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	Edge Properties (C-G)	Core Properties (C-G)

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	Broadway: 30 feet

Napa/Leveroni: 20 feet

Interior drives: None required.	None required

	Side	None required, except 1) when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply; 2) when abutting the sphere of influence, in which case a 20 ft. setback is required.	None required

	Rear	None required, except when abutting a residential zone or the sphere of influence, in which case a 20 ft. setback is required.	None required

	Parking  Areas	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure. Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. For the expansion or renovation of existing parking areas subject to planning approval, the review authority may require additional landscaping and/or the consolidation of driveway cuts.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.80

	Coverage	40%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	7% – 11% of site

	Residential	300 sq. ft. per unit (any combination of shared or private)

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	35 ft.

	Notes:

1.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

4. Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities, including Nathanson Creek, related riparian areas, and mature oak trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site.

5. Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B. Building Design.

1. Height and Profile. Proposed structures in the core area shall not exceed a maximum height of 35 feet. Outside of the core area the maximum building height shall be 30 feet. See SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2. Building Types – Guidelines for Commercial, Mixed Use and Multifamily Residential Structures. New construction and alterations to existing structures should be designed to establish the Four Corners area as a distinctive gateway to Sonoma. In reviewing proposals for new development and redevelopment, the review authority (the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable) shall make use of the following guidelines:

a. Site and building design should enhance the streetscape. Primary building entrances, especially for commercial uses, should be oriented toward the street and accessible from the sidewalk.

b. Allow existing uses to remain and, subject to use permit review, to expand or intensify, in conformance with the provisions of this development code (see Chapter 19.82 SMC, Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Parcels).

c. Encourage pedestrian connections between developments and to adjoining residential areas.

d. Site design and architectural features that contribute to pedestrian comfort and interest, such as awnings, recessed entrances, arcades, courtyards, paseos, alleys, and patios, are encouraged.

e. The massing of larger buildings (5,000 square feet or greater) should be broken down to an appropriate scale through the use of storefronts and breaks in the facade.

f. Architectural styles and details traditional to Sonoma should be used. The use of durable, high quality materials is encouraged. Industrial and strip building types and materials (e.g., concrete tilt-up structures) are not appropriate to the Gateway district.

g. Encourage variety in building design features (e.g., height, articulation, shape, and mass) in order to enhance visual diversity, preserve scenic vistas, and avoid strip-style development.

h. Building types, architectural details and signs having a generic or corporate appearance are strongly discouraged. Chain stores and franchises are not prohibited in the Gateway district, but such uses must respect and contribute to the importance of the area as the front door to Sonoma.

i. Development along the sphere of influence should provide a clear and suitable transition to adjacent rural areas in terms of site design, architecture and landscaping. Buildings should take advantage of outward views.

j. In the core area, promote high-intensity uses and place buildings close to the street (zero to 15 feet). Encourage the use of two-story buildings. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).



[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.32 BROADWAY CORRIDOR


[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.32.010    Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.32.020    Project planning and design standards.


19.32.010 Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A. Existing Conditions. Connecting the southern gateway to the downtown, the Broadway corridor possesses considerable historic, visual, and functional significance. Historically, Broadway completes the Camino Real or “Royal Road” of Spanish/Mexican mission settlements. Visually, Broadway provides a grand entrance to downtown Sonoma with its axial view of the Plaza, City Hall, and the northern hills, its 110-foot right-of-way, and its procession of street trees. Functionally, Broadway is a segment of State Route 12 and is a major traffic arterial. The Broadway corridor is flanked by residential areas, with Nathanson Creek forming its eastern edge and First Street West its western boundary. Parcels along Broadway tend to be long and narrow (to widths of 50 feet) and some have double frontages.

North of MacArthur Street, Broadway possesses a clear visual organization defined by historic structures with landscaped front yards and generally regular setbacks, street trees, and a consistent street width. South Broadway, in contrast, features a patchwork of older (but not historic) commercial buildings, new commercial and multifamily residential development, historic single-family homes and remnant agricultural buildings. These uses are interspersed with vacant parcels. However, the dominant use on South Broadway, in terms of area, appearance, and intensity, is the high school. Street improvements along South Broadway are inconsistent.

Existing land uses include:

1. Retail, office and mixed use, often in adaptively reused historic buildings;

2. Single-family residences;

3. Duplexes, apartments, and small multifamily development;

4. A hotel;

5. The Sonoma Valley High School and the Adele Harrison Middle School;

6. A nursing home; and

7. Scattered vacant parcels.

B. Desired Future. Historic structures on Broadway will be preserved, restored and re-used, while new development will respect and contribute to the character of the area. Mixed use development will be directed so as to retain the predominantly residential character of First Street West while enlivening Broadway with small-scale retail, office, and residential uses. With respect to the high school and the middle school, careful placement of playing fields, parking and school uses will be required in order to assure compatibility with neighboring residential areas.

C. Potential Changes. South of MacArthur Street, Broadway will be improved to a consistent configuration. Gaps in the sidewalk system and street tree plantings will be closed. Intersection improvements may ultimately be needed at Broadway/Andrieux Street. With the expansion of the high school, its main entrance has been aligned with Newcomb Street and a traffic signal has been installed at that intersection. The gains in pedestrian safety associated with this improvement will only be fully realized if the high school frontage is redesigned to prevent pedestrians from crossing at the Malet Street intersection. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.32.020 Project planning and design standards.

A. Site Planning Standards.

1. Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot sizes apply to new subdivisions within the different zoning districts of the Broadway corridor:

Table 3-22 

Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements 

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	C (Commercial)	20 per acre maximum	8,000 sq. ft.

	MX (Mixed Use)	20 per acre maximum	8,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.    Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.

2. Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-23 and 3-24, following.

 

Table 3-23 

Broadway Corridor: Additions and Replacement Structures 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	C	MX

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	Replacement structures: The same location as the original structure.2

Additions to existing structures: 15 ft.	Replacement structures: The same location as the original structure.2

Additions to existing structures: 20 ft.

	Side:  One-Story	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined

	Side:  Two-Story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,3 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.

	Rear	15 ft., except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Parking  Areas	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure. Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. 

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.60	1.0

	Coverage	60%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site

	Residential	300 sq. ft. per unit (any combination of shared or private)	300 sq. ft. per unit (any combination of shared or private)

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.    A front porch may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.    A replacement structure shall not exceed 10 percent of the height or area of the original structure unless a use permit is obtained.

3.    Measured at wall, not ridge.

 

Table 3-24 

Broadway Corridor: New Development 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	C	MX

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	15 ft. or within the range of adjacent structures on either side.

	Side:

One-Story	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined

	Side:

Two-Story	2 ft. for every five ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.

	Rear	15 ft., except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Parking  Areas	Garages shall be set back 20 ft. from the main structure. Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. 

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.60	1.0

	Coverage	60%	60%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site

	Residential	300 sq. ft. per unit (any combination of shared or private)	300 sq. ft. per unit (any combination of shared or private)

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.    A front porch may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.    Measured at wall, not ridge.

3. Driveways and Parking. Parking areas should be located at the rear or along the side of properties and should be discouraged in front of buildings. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along Broadway shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4. Natural Features. Natural environmental amenities including creeks, streams and other drainage courses; and mature trees shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See creek development (SMC 19.40.020) and landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines.

5. Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B. Building Design.

1. Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet located within the MX zone, side setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2. Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

3. Building Types – Guidelines for Commercial and Mixed Use Structures. New commercial and mixed use buildings and alterations to existing structures should contribute to the established Broadway streetscape. In reviewing proposals for commercial and mixed development and redevelopment, the review authority (the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable) shall make use of the following guidelines:

a. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the building faces the public street.

b. Buildings should reinforce the scale, massing, proportions and detailing established by other significant historic buildings in the vicinity (if any). 

c. The massing of larger commercial and mixed use buildings (5,000 square feet or greater) should be broken down to an appropriate scale through the use of storefronts and breaks in the facade.

d. Architectural styles and details that reflect the Sonoma vernacular should be used. Along Broadway, Victorian and other residential architectural styles are more typical than purely commercial building types. The use of durable, high quality materials is encouraged.

e. Site design and architectural features that contribute to pedestrian comfort and interest, such as awnings, recessed entrances, and alleys, are encouraged.

f. In renovations involving historic buildings, authentic architectural details should be preserved and any new detailing and materials should be compatible with those of the existing structure. Pre-existing alterations that diminish a building’s historic qualities should be removed when the opportunity arises. (See Chapter 19.42 SMC, Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone.)

g. Building types, architectural details and signs having a generic or corporate appearance are strongly discouraged. Chain stores and franchises are not prohibited along Broadway, but such uses must respect and contribute to the historic qualities of the area in terms of building design and signs. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.34 DOWNTOWN DISTRICT


[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.34.010    Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.34.020    Project planning and design standards.


19.34.010 Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A. Existing Conditions. The Downtown district is the heart of Sonoma. The district centers on the Plaza and the historic downtown, collectively designated as a National Historic Landmark. The Sonoma Plaza is an eight-acre park, framed by historic buildings, with City Hall at its center. The downtown encompasses a lively concentration of small businesses, including restaurants, bookstores, specialty retail, and offices. A cluster of historically significant buildings on the north side of the district, including the mission and the barracks, are managed as a state park. Outside of the original downtown area, the western portion of the district contains a mix of single-family, multifamily, retail, and office development, including a modern shopping center. Multifamily development lies at the northwest and southeast edges of the district.

Existing land uses include:

1. The Sonoma Plaza and City Hall;

2. Retail uses, offices and apartments in historic buildings;

3. Restaurants, cafes, bakeries, and delicatessens; 

4. Hotels;

5. A complex of historic buildings within a state park;

6. Modern retail and office development;

7. A shopping center;

8. Condominiums, apartments, and PUDs; and

9. Older single-family development.

B. Desired Future. The primary objectives for the Downtown district are to preserve and enhance its historic character and to retain and promote its economic vitality as a commercial, cultural, and civic center attractive to residents and visitors. New construction and new uses should build upon the established character of the downtown. High quality architecture, pedestrian-friendly design, and uses which draw locals as well as tourists are reasonable expectations for Sonoma’s most distinctive district. While commercial uses will remain preeminent, the downtown’s housing stock should be preserved and extended. Multifamily and live-work development in the town center provide customers for downtown businesses and reduce automobile dependence. Higher density residential development at the edges of the district confers similar benefits and establishes a transition to lower density residential areas.

Many locals prefer to walk to the Plaza rather than drive, a choice which should be made as convenient and enjoyable as possible. Pedestrian amenities and connections should be extended throughout the district. The continued development of readily accessible off-street parking is also needed, as by choice or necessity, many visitors, local shoppers, and those who live or work in the downtown area will drive. In developing new parking or renovating existing parking, the creation of driveway connections between parking areas and pedestrian connections to commercial destinations should be emphasized.

C. Potential Changes. Opportunities to create additional off-street parking should be pursued and interior connections between existing off-street parking lots should be created. A pedestrian path linking the Plaza with Depot Park and with the Sonoma Overlook Trail is planned in conjunction with improvements to the Casa Grande parking lot and the Maysonnave property. Additional plantings are needed to fill gaps in the layout of street trees. In terms of traffic improvements, West Napa Street between First Street West and Second Street West may need to be reconfigured as a three-lane street section. The re-use or other disposition of the former fire station property on Broadway and Patten Street will need to be considered. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.34.020 Project planning and design standards.

A. Site Planning Standards.

1. Residential Density. The following residential densities apply to the zoning districts within the Downtown district:

Table 3-25 

Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements 

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre, minimum

5 per acre, maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum

11 per acre maximum	5,000 sq. ft.

	R-O (Residential – Housing Opportunity)	25 per acre maximum	4,500 sq. ft.

	MX (Mixed Use)	20 per acre maximum	7,000 sq. ft.

	C (Commercial)	20 per acre maximum	7,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.    Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.

 

Table 3-26 

Downtown District: Additions and Replacement Structures  

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	R-L	R-M	R-O	MX	C

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	In line with existing structure or 20 ft.	In line with existing structure or 15 ft.	None required	In line with existing structure or 15 ft.	None required

	Side:  One-Story	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	8 ft.	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-Story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	8 ft.

	Rear	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	12 ft.	None required

	Garage: Front	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure (residential development). Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. For the expansion or renovation of existing parking areas subject to planning approval, the review authority may require additional landscaping and/or the consolidation of driveway cuts.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.50	0.70	1.20	2.0

	Coverage	40%	60%	65%	70%	100%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	25% of site	10% of site

	Residential: Common	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit 	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	250 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	200 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.	35 ft.

	Notes:

1.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.    Measured at building wall, not ridge.

 

Table 3-27 

Downtown District: New Development  

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	R-L	R-M	R-O	MX	C

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	20 ft.	10 ft.	None required	10 ft.	None required

	Side:  One-Story	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	5 ft. minimum, 15 ft. combined	8 ft.	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-Story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.	8 ft.

	Rear	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 20 ft.	12 ft.	None required

	Garage: Front	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure (residential development). Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. For the expansion or renovation of existing parking areas subject to planning approval, the review authority may require additional landscaping and/or the consolidation of driveway cuts.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages, and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.35	0.50	0.70	1.20	2.0

	Coverage	40%	60%	65%	70%	100%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	25% of site	10% of site

	Residential: Common	N.A.	300 sq. ft. per unit 	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	400 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	N.A.	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.	35 ft.

	Notes:

1.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.    Measured at building wall, not ridge.

2. Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-26 and 3-27, preceding.

3. Driveways and Parking. Parking areas should be located at the rear or along the side of properties and should be discouraged in front of buildings. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Throughout the district, driveway cuts shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4. Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities such as creeks, streams and other drainage courses, and mature trees, should be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See creek setback (SMC 19.40.020) and landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines.

5. Screening and Buffering. Multifamily developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B. Building Design.

1. Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 35 feet in the Commercial zoning district and 30 feet in the Mixed Use and R-O zoning districts, except that a 36-foot height may be allowed at the discretion of the planning commission for new developments that include a third floor residential component. Within the R-L, R-M, and P zoning districts, the maximum height shall be 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet in the R-M and R-O districts, side and rear setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2. Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

3. Building Types – Guidelines for Commercial and Mixed Use Structures. New commercial and mixed use buildings and alterations to existing structures should reinforce the authentic historic character of the Downtown district. In reviewing proposals for commercial and mixed use development and redevelopment, the review authority (the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable) shall make use of the following guidelines:

a. Buildings should reinforce the scale, massing, proportions and detailing established by other significant historic buildings in the vicinity (if any).

b. The massing of larger commercial and mixed use buildings (5,000 square feet or greater) should be broken down to an appropriate scale through the use of storefronts and breaks in the facade.

c. Architectural styles and details that reflect the Sonoma vernacular should be used. In the Downtown district, examples include stone, stucco, pressed metal, transoms, base tile, and glass block. The use of durable, high quality materials is encouraged.

d. Site design and architectural features that contribute to pedestrian comfort and interest, such as awnings, recessed entrances, paseos, alleys, and patios, are encouraged.

e. In renovations involving historic buildings, authentic details should be preserved and any new detailing and materials should be compatible with those of the existing structure. Pre-existing alterations that diminish a building’s historic qualities should be removed when the opportunity arises. (See Chapter 19.42 SMC, Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone.)

f. Building types, architectural details and signs having a generic or corporate appearance are strongly discouraged. Chain stores and franchises are not prohibited in the Downtown district, but such uses must respect and contribute to the historic qualities of the area in terms of building design and signs. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.36 WEST NAPA STREET/SONOMA HIGHWAY CORRIDOR


[IMAGE]


Sections:

19.36.010    Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.36.020    Project planning and design standards.


19.36.010 Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A. Existing Conditions. Located in west and northwest Sonoma, the West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway corridor is a commercial strip comprised of segments of State Highway 12. Beginning at West Napa Street/Third Street West, it extends westward along West Napa Street to Riverside Drive, then northward along the Sonoma Highway to Harley Street. Although it contains a wide variety of uses and building types, many of the blocks within the corridor present a pleasing appearance and exhibit a high degree of visual organization. The corridor is also punctuated by shopping centers with expansive parking lots, some only lightly landscaped, which break the rhythm established by smaller-scale development. Still other segments are more notable for their natural features and present a distinctly rural appearance (Sonoma Creek is a significant, if underutilized, natural amenity). Throughout the corridor, there are axial views of the hills surrounding Sonoma. West Napa Street and the Sonoma Highway are the city’s primary collectors and the corridor contains the most heavily travelled streets in Sonoma. 

Existing land uses include:

1. Shopping centers of various sizes;

2. Smaller-scale modern commercial development, including banks and professional offices;

3. Small office and service uses in converted residences;

4. Three car dealerships and various other auto-related uses;

5. Restaurants, fast-food and otherwise;

6. Small multifamily developments and scattered single-family residences;

7. A mobile home park;

8. The Sonoma Valley Library; and

9. The St. Francis de Solano Church.

B. Desired Future. While fulfilling its role as a traffic artery, the West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway corridor should be upgraded visually and made kinder to pedestrians. Towards these ends, a program for filling gaps in the sidewalk and street tree system should be developed and implemented. When frontage improvements are required of new development and redevelopment, planter strips should be used rather than monolithic sidewalk. New development and redevelopment should incorporate any desirable site features, especially trees and existing buildings having a street presence. Driveway cuts should be minimized, especially through the use of shared access, and new parking should be located in the back of properties. Because much of the corridor backs onto residential development, site plan relationships must be carefully evaluated. Ideally, new commercial uses should be designed to relate to the extent feasible with adjacent residential development; at a minimum, adequate screening and buffering are required.

C. Intended Changes. The improvement of West Napa/Seventh Street West is necessary for safe pedestrian access to the library. Safety improvements are also needed at Sonoma Highway, where the bike path ends, in order to address unsafe pedestrian crossings in that area. It is projected that additional intersection improvements will be needed at West Napa Street/Fifth Street West and the county has expressed the intention of widening the Riverside Bridge and making adjustments to the West Napa/Sonoma Highway/Riverside intersection. Any improvements to that location should be viewed as an opportunity to beautify the intersection through additional landscaping. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



19.36.020 Project planning and design standards.

A. Site Planning Standards.

1. Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot sizes apply to new subdivisions within different zoning districts in the West Napa/Sonoma Corridor:

Table 3-28 

Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements 

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	R-M (Residential – Medium Density)	7 per acre minimum

11 per acre maximum	5,000 sq. ft.

	R-P (Residential – Mobile Home Park)	7 per acre maximum	10 acres

	MX (Mixed Use)	20 per acre maximum	8,000 sq. ft.

	C (Commercial)	20 per acre maximum	10,000 sq. ft.

	C-G (Commercial – Gateway)	20 per acre maximum	10,000 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.    Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.

 

Table 3-29 

Napa/Sonoma Corridor: Additions and Replacement Structures  

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	R-P	R-M	MX	C	C-G

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	20 ft.	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 25 ft.

	Side:  One-Story	10 ft.	5 ft. minimum, 12 ft. combined	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-Story	20 ft.	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures

	Rear	10 ft.	15 ft., except when abutting the R-L zone, in which case a minimum 20 ft. setback is required.	None required

	Garage: Front	N.A.	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure (residential development). Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. For the expansion or renovation of existing parking areas subject to planning approval, the review authority may require additional landscaping and/or the consolidation of driveway cuts.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.20	0.45	0.70	0.80	0.80

	Coverage	30%	50%	60%	70%	40%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	N.A.	N.A.	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	300 sq. ft. per unit 	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	75 – 225 sq. ft. per unit 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.    Measured at building wall, not ridge.

 

Table 3-30 

Napa/Sonoma Corridor: New Development 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	R-M	MX	C	C-G

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	One-story: 15 ft.

Two-story: 25 ft.

	Side:  One-Story	5 ft. minimum, 12 ft. combined	None required, except when abutting a residential zone, in which case the corresponding setback in the residential zone shall apply.

	Side:  Two-Story	2 ft. for every 5 ft. (or fraction thereof) of height above 15 ft.,2 in addition to the normal requirement for one-story structures.

	Rear	15 ft., except when abutting the R-L zone, in which case a minimum 20 ft. setback is required.	None required

	Garage: Front	Garages shall be set back 20 feet from the main structure (residential development). Parking areas should normally be located along the sides and to the rear of a property and should be minimized or avoided in front of buildings. For the expansion or renovation of existing parking areas subject to planning approval, the review authority may require additional landscaping and/or the consolidation of driveway cuts.

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.45	0.70	0.80	0.80

	Coverage	50%	60%	70%	40%

	Open Space	See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	 Commercial	N.A.	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site	7% – 11% of site

	Residential: Common	25%	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination of shared or private

	Residential: Private	400 sq. ft. per unit 

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

2.    Measured at building wall, not ridge.

2. Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Tables 3-29 and 3-30, preceding.

3. Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for multifamily projects shall not be located in a front setback, but shall be provided at the rear or along the side of the site. Multifamily parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and land uses. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets (West Spain Street, Fifth Street West, and Verano Avenue) shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4. Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities such as creeks, streams and other drainage courses, mature trees, and other natural features shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See creek setback (SMC 19.40.020) and landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines.

5. Screening and Buffering. Multifamily and commercial developments shall require screening and buffering of parking and driveway areas, and noise and light sources. See Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and landscape standards and guidelines (SMC 19.40.060).

B. Building Design.

1. Height and Profile. Proposed structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. See SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2. Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

3. Building Types – Guidelines for Commercial and Mixed Use Structures. New commercial and mixed use buildings and alterations to existing structures should enhance the character of the West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway corridor and preserve significant historic elements. In reviewing proposals for commercial and mixed development and redevelopment, the review authority (the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable) shall make use of the following guidelines:

a. Buildings should reinforce the scale, massing, proportions and detailing established by other significant historic buildings in the vicinity (if any).

b. The massing of larger commercial and mixed use buildings (5,000 square feet or greater) should be broken down to an appropriate scale through the use of storefronts and breaks in the facade.

c. Architectural styles and details that reflect the Sonoma vernacular should be used.

d. Site design and architectural features that contribute to pedestrian comfort and interest, such as awnings, recessed entrances, paseos, alleys, and patios, are encouraged.

e. Potential impacts on adjacent residential uses shall be considered and addressed through the site planning of new commercial and mixed use development.

f. In renovations involving historic buildings, authentic details should be preserved and any new detailing and materials should be compatible with those of the existing structure. Pre-existing alterations that diminish a building’s historic qualities should be removed when the opportunity arises. (See Chapter 19.42 SMC, Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone.)

g. Building types, architectural details and signs having a generic or corporate appearance are strongly discouraged. Chain stores and franchises are not prohibited in the West Napa Street/Sonoma Highway corridor, but such uses must enhance appearance of the area in terms of building design, landscaping, and signs. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2004 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.38 OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS

Sections:

19.38.010    Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

19.38.020    Project planning and design.


19.38.010 Existing conditions, desired future, potential changes.

A. Existing Conditions. The three open space districts are characterized by large areas of land in public ownership devoted to open space and recreational uses. The Maxwell district has an area of approximately 89 acres, all of which is owned by Sonoma County and dedicated to use as a regional park. The Maxwell Farms Regional Park encompasses a range of recreational uses, including playing fields, a Boys and Girls Club, and natural hiking areas.

The Vallejo district is dominated by the 57-acre Vallejo Home State Park. The historic buildings within this park are set off by expansive vistas. North of the park are several large, vacant parcels, currently used for grazing but having a zoning of Hillside Residential. Other uses within the district include a complex of city buildings (the police station and the city council chambers) and playing fields, a church, and a small amount of residential development.

The third open space district is comprised of the Mountain Cemetery. This city-owned property, which has an area of approximately 60 acres, has been developed with a historic public cemetery on the lower portion, with the remainder devoted to oak woodlands. The property is a key part of the hillside backdrop north of the city.

B. Desired Future. The general objective for the three districts is to preserve and enhance their value as public open space and recreational resources. A secondary objective for these districts is to maintain significant areas within the city with nonhardscape groundcovers to minimize increased quantities of urban runoff and downstream flooding. 

C. Intended Changes. Maxwell Farms Regional Park will continue to be managed by the county department of parks and recreation. The city will maintain its partnership with the county to ensure that future improvements address valley recreational needs while preserving the unique environmental features of the park. Similarly, the city will continue to work with the State Parks Department to ensure that historic resources and open space values associated with the Vallejo Home State Park are preserved. If the privately owned hillside properties behind the park cannot be acquired as open space, the city will need to carefully monitor their development through its hillside regulations in order to minimize visual impacts on the backdrop. 

Within the Cemetery district, the Old Mountain Cemetery will continue to be operated as a public cemetery and has recently been expanded to include a veterans’ component. The portion of the property that had been used as a landfill will be restored to a natural condition. Within the property, off of Norrbom Road, the development of a water tank has recently been completed. The tank site has been carefully selected to minimize visual impacts. It is intended that the upper portion of the property, which encompasses approximately 60 acres, will be preserved in its natural condition as an oak woodland, with public access provided through a hiking trail. Portions of this area which have been damaged by illegal four-wheel drive activity will be restored over time. (Ord. 05-2015 § 3, 2015; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]



19.38.020 Project planning and design.

A. Site Planning Standards.

1. Residential Density. The following residential densities and minimum lot sizes apply to new subdivisions within the different zoning districts of the open space planning areas:

 

 

 

 

Table 3-31 

Lot Size and Residential Density Requirements 

	Zoning District	Number of Dwellings Per Parcel1	Minimum Lot Size

	Pk (Park)	N.A.2	N.A.

	P (Public Facilities)	N.A.2	N.A.

	R-HS (Residential – Hillside)	1 per 10 acres, maximum3	10 acres

	R-L (Residential – Low Density)	2 per acre minimum;

5 per acre maximum	7,500 sq. ft.

	Notes:

1.    Densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 19.44 SMC.

2.    Caretaker’s residence may be allowed by use permit.

3.    Subject to use permit review, a single-family residence may be allowed on an existing legal lot of record, regardless of its size.

2. Setbacks, Site Coverage, and Open Space. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in Table 3-32, following. 

3. Driveways and Parking. Parking areas for public uses shall be appropriately landscaped and screened. See Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards. Driveways along collector streets shall be minimized when possible, by combining driveways, using alleys, or designing development so that access is provided from local streets.

4. Natural Features. Significant environmental amenities, including Sonoma Creek and associated riparian areas, wetlands, hillsides, and mature oak trees, shall be preserved by being incorporated into site plan design and layout. Appropriate enhancement or protective measures shall be included in plans where determined necessary by the planning commission. See landscaping standards and design guidelines (SMC 19.40.060), and the tree preservation ordinance for specific tree preservation requirements and guidelines. Environmental features of lesser significance should be incorporated into project site plans when appropriate if justified by the quality of the feature and its relation to the site.

B. Building Design.

1. Height and Profile. Proposed residential structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet. For structures in excess of 15 feet, side and rear setbacks shall be increased by two feet for each additional five feet in height. See the following design guidelines, and SMC 19.40.040 for height measurement and exceptions.

2. Building Types – Guidelines for Residential Structures. Proposed dwellings should be placed on their sites so that the most narrow dimension of the structure is parallel to the most narrow dimension of the parcel, and so that the primary entrance to the dwelling faces the public street, or is accessible from a porch or other entry element which faces the street.

C. Street and Block Layout. It is intended that streets within the open space districts will be maintained at their existing width and alignment. 

 

Table 3-32 

Open Space Districts: Infill and Additions 

	 Development Feature	Requirements by Zoning District

Setbacks, Site Coverage, Open Space and Height 

	R-HS	R-L

	 

	Setbacks	Minimum setbacks required for primary structures. See SMC 19.40.110 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, exceptions, and design guidelines for setbacks.

	Front/Street-side1	30 ft.	20 ft.

	Side:  One-Story	30 ft.	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. total

	Side:  Two-Story	30 ft.	7 ft. minimum, 18 ft. total

	Rear	30 ft.	20 ft.

	Garage: Front	30 ft.	20 ft. from primary structure

	F.A.R./ Coverage	Floor Area Ratio: Maximum building area as a ratio of site area, excluding porches, cellars, attics, detached garages (up to 400 square feet), and underground parking. Coverage: Maximum site coverage as percentage of site area, excluding porches and detached garages.

	F.A.R. 	0.10	0.35

	Coverage	10%	40%

	Open Space	Minimum open space required for residential component only. See SMC 19.40.070 and 19.40.080 for design requirements.

	Residential: Private	No minimum requirement.

	Height	Ridge height measured from finished grade. See SMC 19.40.040 for applicability and exceptions.

	Primary Structure	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Notes:

1.    In the Pk and P zoning districts, development standards are determined on a case-by-case basis through use permit review.

2.    Front porches may extend up to 10 feet into front setback (or street-side setback for wrap-around porches).

(Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.40 GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS

Sections:

19.40.010    Purpose and applicability.

19.40.020    Creekside development.

19.40.030    Exterior lighting.

19.40.040    Height measurement and height limit exceptions.

19.40.050    Hillside development.

19.40.060    Landscape standards.

19.40.070    Open space for multifamily residential projects.

19.40.080    Open space for commercial and mixed use projects.

19.40.090    Performance standards.

19.40.100    Screening and buffering.

19.40.110    Setback regulations and exceptions.

19.40.120    Undergrounding of utilities.

19.40.130    Protection of scenic vistas.


19.40.010 Purpose and applicability.

A. Purpose. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure that new or modified uses and development produce an environment of stable and desirable character which is harmonious with existing and future development, and protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, consistent with the General Plan.

B. Applicability.

1. All Zoning Districts. The standards of this chapter apply to all zoning districts (e.g., residential, commercial, manufacturing, etc.), and therefore, are combined in this chapter.

2. Considered in Combination. These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Division II, Community Design, and for each subarea in Division III, Project Design.

3. In Case of Conflict. Where there may be a conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards.

4. Compliance. All new or modified structures and uses shall comply with the standards of this chapter as determined applicable by the city planner, except as specified in Chapter 19.82 SMC, Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Parcels. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.020 Creekside development.

A. Purpose. Creek corridor habitats support plants and animals; recharge aquifers; and filter some pollutants. Creek corridors are valuable as open space areas, and are of recreational and scenic interest. For these reasons, it is the intent of the city to provide adequate buffer areas between creek corridors and adjacent development in order to protect this valuable community resource as a natural, scenic, and recreational amenity. 

B. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any property adjoining or including any of the following waterways:

1. Sonoma Creek;

2. Nathanson Creek; and

3. Fryer Creek.

C. Streambed Analysis. At the time of permit application, applicants with parcels adjoining any of the above specified waterways may be required to prepare a site-specific streambed analysis prepared by a hydrologist, civil engineer, or other qualified professional to determine the precise boundary/top of bank of the waterway. If required, a streambed analysis should normally include:

1. Detailed mapping of at least 1:100 scale;

2. Identification of the direction and flow of material run-off from the site, or immediately adjacent to the site;

3. The need for mitigation measures (e.g., rip-rap, energy dissipation structures or flow stabilizing devices) to keep flow velocities close to pre-development levels; and

4. Other information that the city planner determines is necessary to properly analyze and mitigate potential impacts of the proposed development on the waterway.

The requirement for a streambed analysis may be waived by the city planner or the planning commission, as applicable, if it is determined that the project, because of its size, location, or design will not have a significant impact on the waterway, or that sufficient information already exists and that further analysis is not necessary.

D. Creekside Development Standards. The following standards shall be implemented by the applicable review authority in the review of any planning permit involving development or other activity within the creek setback, as set forth below.

1. A minimum 30-foot wide setback from the top of bank shall be required for all zoning districts, except along Sonoma Creek, where a 50-foot setback shall be required. Additional setback area may be necessary to protect sensitive environmental resources (e.g., vernal pools). Setbacks adjacent to creekside paths or open spaces shall be measured from the outside boundary of the path or open space. 

2. No structure, parking access, parking space(s), paved areas, or swimming pool shall be constructed within a creek or creekside setback area, unless a use permit is obtained in compliance with SMC 19.54.040, Use permits.

3. No grading or filling, planting of exotic/nonnative or nonriparian plant species, or removal of native vegetation shall occur within a creek or creekside setback area.

4. Where drainage improvements are required within the setback area, they shall be placed in the least visible locations and naturalized through the use of river rock, earthtone concrete, and landscaping with native plant materials. 

5. Within creek setback areas, the use of permeable surfaces (e.g., wood decks, sand-joined bricks, and stone walkways) shall be incorporated into a project’s design, where feasible, in order to minimize off-site flows and to facilitate the absorption of water into the ground.

6. Land use changes within the setback area that cause an increase in impervious surfaces or sedimentation may result in channel erosion. This may require measures to stabilize the creek’s bank.

a. Creek rehabilitation is the preferred method of stabilization. The objective is to maintain the natural character of the creek and riparian area. The process may include enlarging the channel at points of obstruction, clearing obstructions at points of constriction, limitation of use in areas of excessive erosion, and restoration of riparian vegetation.

b. Concrete channels and other mechanical measures of stabilization shall not be used unless no other alternative exists.

c. If a creek bank stabilization other than rehabilitation or vegetative method is required, hand-placed stone or rock rip-rap are the preferred methods.

E. Modifications to Creekside Development Standards. The planning commission may modify the creekside development standards outlined in subsection (D) of this section in compliance with SMC 19.54.040, Use permits.

F. Creekside Development Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be considered by the applicable review authority in the review of any discretionary planning permit involving development or other activity within the creek setback, as set forth below.

1. Setbacks may be required for all ministerial projects (e.g., building permits, etc.). Dedications, where consistent with the Circulation Element of the city’s General Plan and the Bicycle Plan, may be required by the planning commission for all land use activities requiring a discretionary permit (e.g., use permits, planned development permits, etc.), if warranted by the nature and intensity of the proposed use.

2. Public access and visibility to creeks, and the separation of residences and other uses from creeks should be provided through the use of single-loaded frontage roads in combination with multi-use trails.

3. Development should be oriented to creeks for access and visibility whenever possible. Developments that backup to creeks are discouraged.

4. The provision of multi-purpose creekside trails and public open space is strongly encouraged outside of the riparian habitat area. Open space areas should include planting for riparian enhancement with native shrubs and trees, paths and trails, lighting, benches, play and exercise equipment, and trash receptacles.

5. Creekside trails should link to other trail and open space systems that are existing or planned in the surrounding area as shown in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

G. Findings and Decision. The following findings shall be made, in addition to those identified in SMC 19.54.040(E), Findings, Decision, to approve a conditional use permit for the modification of creekside development standards:

1. The creek bank in the vicinity of the modification has been demonstrated as being historically stable; and

2. Riparian resources will not be significantly diminished by the modification. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.030 Exterior lighting.

The following standards and guidelines shall be administered by the planning commission and the design review and historic preservation commission through the review of discretionary planning permits. These provisions shall not apply to ministerial permits, except for the standards set forth in subsection (E) of this section.

A. Exterior Fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with the character of the surrounding structure(s) and shall be energy efficient. Fixtures shall be appropriate in height, intensity, and scale to the use they are serving. Generally, pole-mounted fixtures shall be low in height (up to 20 feet) and be equipped with light shields to reduce or eliminate light spillage beyond the project’s boundaries.

B. Intensity. The level of parking lot light projected onto any ground or wall surface shall not be less than two footcandles nor more than five footcandles at the base of the light fixture. Pedestrian courts, plazas, and walkways shall have a light level at the ground surface of one footcandle. The electrical or lighting plan shall demonstrate the dispersal of light on the ground surface and compliance with the requirements of this section. Building-mounted decorative lights shall not exceed five footcandles measured five feet from the light source.

C. Security Lighting. Security lighting shall be provided in all nonresidential zoning districts at building entrances/exits. Security lighting shall provide a minimum of two footcandles and a maximum of three footcandles at the ground level of the entrance.

D. Shielding. Where the light source is visible from outside the project boundary, shielding shall be required to reduce glare so that neither the light source nor its image from a reflective surface shall be directly visible from any point five feet or more beyond the property line. This requirement shall not apply to single-family residential uses, traffic safety lighting, or public street lighting.

E. Height. Light standards should not normally exceed 15 feet in height, especially within and adjacent to residential developments. The review authority may allow taller standards in large parking lots that are not adjacent to residential uses or in other special settings.

F. Recreational Court Lighting. The following standards shall apply to the lighting of outdoor recreational courts:

1. Type. Fixtures shall be of a type that is rectangular on a horizontal plane. The outside of the fixture, arm, and supporting pole shall be coated with a dark, low reflectance material;

2. Location. Light fixtures shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the nearest property line;

3. Height. The maximum height of the light fixtures shall be 18 feet measured from the court surface;

4. Number. Not more than one light fixture for each 900 square feet of court surface is allowed, with a maximum of eight poles and fixtures for each recreational court; 

5. Supports. Light fixtures shall be supported by an arm extending at least four feet from a support pole;

6. Design. Light fixtures shall be designed, constructed, mounted, and maintained so that, with appropriate shielding, the light source is completely cut off when viewed from any point five feet or more beyond the property lines of the subject parcel. The incident light level at a property line shall not exceed one footcandle measured from finished grade to a height of 12 feet. The incident light level upon any habitable structure on an adjoining property shall not exceed 0.05 footcandle;

7. Hours of Operation. Recreational court lighting shall not be operated between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays;

8. Coating of Surface. In the event that an illuminated court surface is visible from another parcel, the court surface shall be treated with a low reflectance, dark-colored coating; and

9. Waiver of Provisions. Provisions of this subsection may be waived or modified by the planning commission through the approval of an exception in compliance with SMC 19.54.050. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.040 Height measurement and height limit exceptions.

All structures shall meet the following standards relating to height, except for fences and walls, which shall comply with Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls.

A. Maximum Height. The height of structures shall not exceed the standards established by Division III, Project Design. The maximum height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the finished grade of the site to an imaginary plane located the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the grade. See Figure 4-1. Structures in hillside areas shall comply with the height regulations identified in SMC 19.40.050, Hillside development.
[IMAGE]


B. Exceptions to Height Limits. Exceptions to the height limits for structures shall apply in the following manner:

1. Third-Floor Residential Units. Within the Commercial, Gateway Commercial, and Mixed Use zoning districts, a maximum height of 36 feet may be allowed in order to accommodate third-floor multifamily residential development. The allowance of this additional height shall be subject to use permit review, in compliance with SMC 19.54.050.

2. Elevator Penthouses and Other Roof-Mounted Structures. Roof-mounted structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment shall be allowed, up to a maximum of five feet above the allowed structure height. The total square footage of all structures above the allowed height shall not exceed 25 percent of the total roof area of the main structure.

3. Chimneys, Spires, Antennas, Etc. Chimneys, flag poles, antennas and similar structures shall be allowed, up to a maximum of eight feet above the allowed structure height. 

4. Additional Height. Additional height or roof area may be allowed subject to the approval of an exception in compliance with SMC 19.54.050. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.050 Hillside development.

A. Purpose. This section establishes regulations and guidelines to preserve and protect views to and from the hillside areas within the city, to preserve significant topographical features and habitats, and to maintain the identity, character, and environmental quality of the city.

B. Applicability.

1. Hillside Areas and Hillside Zoning District. The standards and guidelines contained in this section apply to all uses and structures within areas that have a slope of 10 percent or greater, or areas with slopes that exceed 15 percent over 25 percent or more of the site and to all development within the Hillside zoning district.

2. Basis for Slope Determinations. For the purpose of this section, slope shall be computed on the natural slope of the land before grading, as determined from a topographic map having a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and a contour interval of not more than five feet.

3. Conditional Use Permit Required. New development within a hillside area shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040.

C. Additional Application Requirements. In addition to the standard application submittal requirements, the city council may, by resolution, establish additional informational requirements for applications involving hillside development.

D. Development Standards.

1. Structure Height. The height of structures in a hillside area shall not exceed the maximum established by the applicable zoning district. Measurement of structure height shall be as provided in SMC 19.40.040, Height measurement and height limit exceptions.

2. Grading and Drainage.

a. Grading shall be designed to:

i. Conserve natural topographic features and appearances by minimizing the amount of cut and fill and by means of land form grading to blend graded slopes and benches with the natural topography; and

ii. Retain major natural topographic features (i.e., canyons, knolls, ridgelines, and prominent landmarks).

b. All graded areas shall be protected from wind and water erosion. Interim erosion control plans shall be required, certified by the project engineer, and reviewed and approved by the city engineer.

c. Slopes created by grading shall not exceed a ratio of 3:1, without a soils report and stabilization study indicating a greater permissible slope and shall not exceed 30 feet in height between terraces or benches.

3. Street Layout. To the extent feasible based on property conditions, streets shall follow the natural contours of the terrain in order to minimize the need for grading. Cul-de-sacs and loop roads are encouraged where necessary to fit the natural topography subject to the approval of the city engineer and fire department.

E. Design Guidelines. Within the hillside area and the Hillside zoning district, the following design guidelines should be implemented whenever applicable:

1. Terrain Alteration. The project should be designed to fit the terrain rather than altering the terrain to fit the project. Development patterns that form visually protruding or steeply cut slopes for roads or lots shall be avoided.

2. Lot Pad Grading. Lot pad grading should be limited to the boundaries of the structure’s foundation, vehicle parking space and a yard area as shown on the approved grading plan. Pads should not exceed 5,000 square feet in total area. 

3. Site and Structure Design. Site design should utilize varying structure heights and setbacks, split-level foundations, and retaining walls to terrace structures with the direction of the slope.

4. Lot Line Locations. Lot lines should be placed at the top of slope areas to help ensure that the slope will not be neglected by the uphill owner.

5. Design and Location of Structures.

a. The form, mass, and profile of the individual buildings and architectural features should be designed to blend with the natural terrain and preserve the character and profile of the natural slope. Techniques that should be considered include:

i. Split pads, stepped footings, and grade separations to permit structure to step up the natural slope;

ii. Detaching parts of a dwelling (e.g., garage); and

iii. Avoiding the use of gable ends on downhill elevations. The slope of the roof should be oriented in the same direction as the natural slope.

b. Excavate underground or utilize below grade rooms to reduce the visual bulk of a structure.

c. Use roofs on lower levels as open space decks for upper levels.

d. Exterior structural supports and undersides of floors and decks not enclosed by walls may be permitted provided fire safety and aesthetic considerations have been adequately addressed.

e. Building materials and color schemes should blend with the natural landscape of earth tones and natural vegetative growth.

6. Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that result in large uniform planes shall be avoided. Retaining walls shall be divided into elements and terraces with landscaping to screen them from view. Generally, no retaining wall should be higher than five feet. When a series of retaining walls is required, each individual retaining wall should be separated from adjacent walls by a minimum of five feet.

7. Slope Restoration. Transitional slopes shall be replanted with self-sufficient trees, shrubs, and ground cover that are compatible with existing surrounding vegetation in order to enhance the blending of manufactured and natural slopes.

8. Reduced Public Street Widths. On-street parking lanes may be omitted from public streets when the result is a substantial decrease in cutting and/or filling. Where no on-street parking is provided, off-street parking areas shall be provided to yield a ratio of two additional spaces per dwelling unit. Streets may be reduced to 24 feet in width with no on-street parking, or 32 feet in width with on-street parking on one side.

9. Preservation of Ridgelines. Ridgelines shall be preserved. Structures shall not be located closer to a ridgeline than 100 feet measured horizontally on a topographic map or 50 feet measured vertically on a cross section, whichever is more restrictive. In no case shall the roofline or any other portion of a structure extend above the line of sight between a ridgeline and any public right-of-way, whether the ridgeline is above or below the right-of-way.

E. Evaluation of Applications. The planning commission shall evaluate a conditional use permit application for hillside development based on the following objectives, in addition to the findings for conditional use permits required through SMC 19.54.040:

1. The preservation of natural topographic features and appearances by maintaining the natural topography to the greatest extent possible;

2. The protection of natural topographic features and appearances through limitations on successive padding and terracing of building sites and the preservation of significant ridgelines, steep slopes, natural rock outcroppings, drainage courses, prominent trees and woodlands, vernal pools, and other areas of special natural beauty;

3. The utilization of varying setbacks, building heights, foundation designs, and compatible building forms, materials, and colors that help blend buildings into the terrain;

4. The utilization of clustered sites and buildings on more gently sloping terrain to reduce grading alterations on steeper slopes;

5. The utilization of building designs, locations, and arrangements that protect views to and from the hillside area;

6. The preservation and introduction of plant materials so as to protect slopes from soil erosion and slippage and minimize the visual effects of grading and construction of hillside areas; and

7. The utilization of street designs and improvements that minimize grading alterations and harmonize with the natural contours of the hillsides. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.060 Landscape standards.

A. Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the city by providing standards related to the quality and functional aspects of landscaping and to increase the compatibility between abutting land uses and public rights-of-way by providing landscape screening and buffers.

B. Applicability. All projects that require planning permit or subdivision approval by the city shall provide and maintain landscaping in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, as applicable to the specific features of the project.

C. Areas Required to Be Landscaped. Landscaping shall be provided in the following locations:

1. Setbacks. All setback and open space areas required by this development code shall be landscaped, except where a required setback is occupied by a sidewalk or driveway, or where a required setback is screened from public view and it is determined by the review authority that landscaping is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

2. Unused Areas. All areas of a project site not intended for a specific use (including pad sites in shopping centers held for future development) or designated as natural open space shall be landscaped unless it is determined by the review authority that landscaping is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

3. Parking Areas. Parking areas shall be landscaped in compliance with Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

D. Landscape Standards and Guidelines. Landscaping shall be designed and installed as follows:

1. General Design Standards. The following features shall be incorporated into the design of landscaped areas:

a. Landscaping shall be designed for water efficiency, in conformance with the requirements of the low-water use landscaping ordinance.

b. Landscaping shall be planned as an integral part of the overall project design and not simply located in left over space after parking areas and structures have been planned.

c. Landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system.

d. Pedestrian access to sidewalks and structures shall be considered in the design of all landscaped areas.

e. Landscape planting shall be provided within adjacent public street rights-of-way, in compliance with Chapter 19.62 SMC, Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements.

Landscaping may include lawn, ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other live plant materials. Landscaping may also include small amounts of accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements (e.g., ponds, fountains, sculpture, and paved or decorated surfaces) excluding driveways, parking, and storage areas.

2. Plant Materials. Plant materials shall be selected and installed to comply with the following requirements:

a. A mix of plant materials and sizes shall be provided consistent with the city’s low-water use landscaping ordinance. Variety is encouraged in order to provide visual interest as well as reduce the chance of landscape failure due to disease infestation. Trees shall not be smaller than 15-gallon container stock and shrubs shall not be smaller than five-gallon container stock;

b. Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not interfere with utilities and traffic safety sight areas;

c. Trees and shrubs shall be planted and maintained in a manner that protects the basic rights of adjacent property owners. Street tree varieties shall be consistent with the city’s adopted street tree list;

d. Trees planted near public sidewalks or curbs shall be of a species and installed in a manner that prevents physical damage to sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other public improvements;

e. Tree varieties planted within street rights-of-way shall be consistent with the city’s street tree list and shall comply with street tree planting standards;

f. Ground cover should normally be live plant material (exceptions include rocks placed around trees to prevent overwatering). Limited quantities (10 percent maximum) of gravel, bark, or similar materials may be used in combination with a living ground cover;

g. Turf areas should be designed to minimize water runoff onto hardscape.

E. Landscape Plan Requirements.

1. Preliminary Landscape Plan. A preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted in conjunction with or following the approval of an application for a land use entitlement (e.g., conditional use permit, tentative map, planned unit development), for new development, and the significant expansion or redevelopment of an existing use subject to review by the design review and historic preservation commission.

2. Content. Preliminary landscape plans and final landscape plans shall contain information as specified in the instructions for preparing landscape plans, provided by the department.

3. Review and Approval. After initial application review in compliance with SMC 19.52.060, Initial application review, the design review and historic preservation commission shall review each preliminary landscape plan to verify its compliance with the provisions of this section. The design review and historic preservation commission may approve the submittal in compliance with this section, or may disapprove or require changes to a submittal that is not in compliance.

4. Final Landscape Plan. Following approval of the land use entitlement, a final landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a building permit. Final plans shall be approved by the city planner prior to the start of on-site construction or soil disturbance and prior to the issuance of a building permit. Projects requiring commission approval due to their size or use shall require plans be prepared by a licensed landscape architect or licensed contractor. Evidence shall also be provided that a licensed landscape contractor will be responsible for plant and irrigation installation.

F. Maintenance Required. Landscape areas shall be maintained in a healthful and sound condition at all times. Irrigation systems and their components shall be maintained in a fully functional manner. Regular maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; and weeding in all landscaped areas. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.070 Open space for multifamily residential projects.

This section provides requirements, guidelines, and incentives for the provision of private and common open spaces and related amenities for newly developed or redeveloped multifamily residential uses throughout the city. The intent of this section is to ensure that multifamily residential developments in the city are provided with high-quality private and common open space integral to the design of the development.

A. Open Space Required. All multifamily residential projects except duplexes shall provide permanently maintained outdoor open space for each dwelling unit (private open space) and for all residents (common open space). Unless different standards are applied through specific planning area regulations as set forth in Division III, Project Design, usable outdoor open space, not including required front or street-side yards, shall be provided as set forth in Table 4-1, below:

Table 4-1 

Minimum Open Space Requirements for Multifamily Development 

	Type	Area Required

	Common outdoor space:	300 square feet per dwelling unit

	Private outdoor space:	 

	Studio and one-bedroom units	75 square feet per dwelling unit

	Two-bedroom units	150 square feet per dwelling unit

	Three-bedroom units and larger	225 square feet per dwelling unit

Project proponents are encouraged to provide open space areas that exceed the minimum amount required. The city may offer incentives in compliance with subsection (E) of this section.

B. Configuration of Open Space. To ensure that required open space is well-designed, usable, and accessible, the review authority shall employ the following standards and guidelines in evaluating proposed open space:

1. Required open space shall be located on-site.

2. Open space should be provided as continuous, usable site elements that reinforce or enhance other aspects of the site plan, such as pedestrian networks, view corridors, and environmental features.

3. Common open space areas should be oriented to pedestrian circulation and should incorporate seating, enhanced paving materials, lighting, shade trees and/or trellises, and landscaping. Fountains, works of art, and similar features are also encouraged.

4. Open space areas shall be easily accessible. Common open space areas should be readily accessible from the majority of units in the development. Private open space should be immediately accessible from a kitchen, dining room, family room or master bedroom within the unit it serves.

5. All open space areas shall be of sufficient size to be usable by residents:

a. Private open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of seven feet and a configuration that would accommodate a rectangle of at least 100 square feet;

b. Common open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of 15 feet.

6. The orientation of private and common open space should take advantage of natural sunlight and should be sheltered from the noise and traffic of adjacent street or incompatible uses.

C. Allowed Uses. Required common open space shall be available for passive and active outdoor recreational uses for the enjoyment of all residents of the multifamily development. These spaces shall not include driveways, public or private streets, utility easements where the ground surface cannot be appropriately used for open space, parking spaces, or other areas primarily intended for other functions.

D. Maintenance. Required common open space shall be controlled and permanently maintained by the owner of the property or by project homeowners through a homeowners association or maintenance agreement.

E. Open Space Incentives. Development incentives to encourage pedestrian-oriented open spaces that exceed the above requirements may be granted at the discretion of the planning commission. The types of incentives that may be available to eligible projects include:

1. Reduced parking requirements (for pedestrian-oriented open space and amenities of an especially high quality); 

2. Increased lot coverage;

3. Reduced front and street-side setbacks. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.080 Open space for commercial and mixed use projects.

This section provides requirements and guidelines for the provision of open spaces and related amenities for newly developed or redeveloped commercial uses, including mixed use and live-work development, throughout the city. The intent is to make commercial and mixed use environments more livable, pedestrian-oriented, and humane through the provision of public and private open spaces, including plazas, courtyards, and outdoor dining and seating areas. 

A. Open Space Required. All commercial and mixed use projects shall provide permanently maintained outdoor open space, except as provided for in subsection (F) of this section, Exemptions. Unless different standards are applied through planning area regulations found in Division III, Project Design, usable outdoor open space shall be provided as set forth in Table 4-2, below:

 

Table 4-2 

Minimum Open Space Requirements for Commercial and Mixed Use Development 

	Type	Area Required

	 

	Commercial

	Change in use, with no increase in building area	N.A.

	New development, on site <10,000 sq. ft.	7%

	New development, on site 10,000 to 20,000 sq. ft.	9%

	New development, on site >20,000 sq. ft.	11%

	Mixed Use

	New development	300 sq. ft. per unit, any combination public and private

	Live-Work1

	New development	250 sq. ft. per unit, any combination public and private

	Notes:

1.    See SMC 19.50.050 for specific regulations pertaining to live/work development.

Project proponents are encouraged to provide open space areas that exceed the minimum amount required. The city may offer incentives in compliance with subsection (E) of this section.

B. Configuration of Open Space. To ensure that required open space is well-designed, usable, and accessible, the review authority shall employ the following standards and guidelines in evaluating proposed open space:

1. Required open space shall be located on-site.

2. Open space should be provided as continuous, usable site elements that reinforce or enhance other aspects of the site plan, such as pedestrian networks, view corridors, and environmental features.

3. Common open space areas should be oriented to pedestrian circulation and should incorporate seating, enhanced paving materials, lighting, shade trees and/or trellises, and landscaping. Fountains, works of art, and similar features are also encouraged.

4. Private open space for residential and live-work units should be immediately accessible from a kitchen, dining room, family room or master bedroom within the unit it serves.

5. Open space areas intended for residents shall be of sufficient size to be usable by residents:

a. Private open space areas should have a minimum dimension of seven feet and a configuration that would accommodate a rectangle of at least 100 square feet;

b. Common open space areas should have a minimum dimension of 15 feet.

6. The orientation of private and common open space should take advantage of natural sunlight and should be sheltered from incompatible uses.

C. Allowed Uses. Required open space shall not include driveways, public or private streets, utility easements where the ground surface cannot be appropriately used for open space, parking spaces, or other areas primarily intended for other functions, except for stormwater detention and infiltration functions where the ground surface can be appropriately used for open space during dry weather.

D. Maintenance. Required common open space shall be controlled and permanently maintained by the owner of the property or by multiple project owners through a condominium association or maintenance agreement.

E. Open Space Incentives. Development incentive bonuses to encourage pedestrian-oriented open spaces, open spaces which preserve areas in a pristine natural condition, intensive green roofs that reduce stormwater runoff while providing accessible open space for pedestrians, and open spaces that reduce stormwater runoff through detention or infiltration that exceed the above requirements may be granted at the discretion of the planning commission. The types of bonus incentives that may be available to eligible projects include: 

1. Reduced parking requirements (for pedestrian-oriented open space and amenities of an especially high quality); 

2. Increased lot coverage;

3. Reduced setbacks.

F. Exemptions. The provision of required open space may be reduced or waived by the review authority (planning commission or design review and historic preservation commission) under the following circumstances:

1. Minor commercial development or additions involving less than 500 square feet of new building area;

2. Infill or replacement development in the Downtown district. (Ord. 05-2015 § 4, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.090 Performance standards.

All land use activities shall comply with the following provisions regarding the prohibition of adverse impacts:

A. Adverse Impacts Prohibited. Any use or activity that results in an adverse impact to the character and environment of a surrounding area by producing repeated and consistently intolerable levels of air pollution, electrical or electronic disturbance, hazardous materials, glare, noise, odor, vibration, waste products, or similar disturbances, shall be prohibited.

B. Determination of a Public Nuisance. Upon    discovery of the activity, the city shall investigate and utilize, where necessary, whatever instruments or consulting specialists that may be required to determine whether or not a public nuisance exists.

C. Abatement of a Public Nuisance. An identified public nuisance shall be abated in compliance with Chapter 14.30 SMC. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.100 Screening and buffering.

This section provides standards for the screening and buffering of adjoining land uses, equipment and outdoor storage areas, and trash storage areas.

A. Screening Between Different Land Uses. Fences and walls shall be provided and maintained between different zoning districts in the following manner:

1. Wall Height. An opaque screen consisting of plant material and a solid masonry wall or wooden fence, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be installed along parcel boundaries whenever a commercial or industrial development adjoins a residential zoning district and whenever a multifamily zoning district adjoins a single-family residential zoning district. The maximum height of the walls shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls.

2. Wall Treatment. The walls or fences shall be architecturally treated on both sides, subject to the approval of the city planner or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable.

3. Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian access may be provided between the commercial properties and adjoining common open area(s) within residential developments.

4. Waiver by Planning Commission. The planning commission may waive or modify the requirements for screening walls or fences if one or more of the following findings can be made:

a. The development plan adequately provides for the integration of different land uses (e.g., shared parking areas) in such a way that conflicts between the different uses will be avoided;

b. An existing wall or fence is in place that meets or would be modified to conform to the intent of this section;

c. A lesser level of screening is appropriate due to the nature of the adjoining uses.

B. Mechanical Equipment.

1. Screened from Public View. Roof- or ground-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, ventilation ducts and exhaust, water heaters, etc.), loading docks, service yards, storage and waste areas, and utility services shall be screened from public view from adjoining public rights-of-way, and adjoining area(s) zoned for residential or open space uses, including views from above the subject project.

2. Architectural Compatibility. The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, architectural style, and shall include appropriately installed and maintained landscaping subject to SMC 19.40.060, Landscape standards, and the approval of the city planner or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable.

C. Solar Equipment. The placement of solar heating or electrical generation equipment shall be regulated as follows: 

1. Roof-Mounted Equipment. Roof-mounted solar collector panels shall be flat, matching the roof pitch, and placed as close as possible to the surface of the roof. All plumbing, piping, and other connections shall be suitably covered with metal flashing painted to match the color of the roof.

2. Ground-Mounted Equipment. Ground-mounted solar collector panels and related equipment shall be placed no closer than five feet to any property line and shall be screened from public view. The height of ground-mounted structures, including collector panels, shall not exceed seven feet.

3. Appurtenant Equipment. Appurtenant equipment and fixtures shall be screened from public view.

4. Use Permit Requirements. The placement of solar equipment shall be subject to design review as set forth in SMC 19.54.080 under the following circumstances:

a. Roof-mounted solar panels proposed for any structure located in the Historic Overlay district.

b. Roof-mounted solar panels with an area of greater than 200 square feet.

c. The proposed placement of solar equipment that does not comply with the provisions set forth in subsections (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section.

D. Outdoor Storage and Work Yards. Uses with outdoor storage of materials or operations shall comply with the following:

1. Solid Sight-Obscuring Wall and Gate(s). Outside uses shall have a solid sight-obscuring masonry wall or wooden fence not less than six feet, or more than eight feet in height, of a type and design approved by the review authority. The wall shall include sight-obscuring gates. The wall and gate(s) shall be maintained to continuously conform to the satisfaction of the city planner; and

2. All Operations Within Walled Area. Site operations in conjunction with the outdoor uses, including the loading and unloading of materials and equipment, shall be conducted entirely within a walled area.

E. Outdoor Building Supply Area(s). Outdoor building supply areas shall be screened with walls, fencing, meshing, landscaping, or similar material to minimize visibility of the storage area(s), subject to the approval of the review authority.

F. Trash Enclosures. Any outdoor storage of garbage cans, dumpsters, recycling bins or other similar containers shall be enclosed by a solid wooden fence, masonry wall, or other similar enclosure. The enclosure shall be located on the site so as to minimize potential noise, odor, and visual impacts on adjacent properties and prevent the transport of trash, spilled materials or leaks outside of the designated trash area either by wind or stormwater runon. (Ord. 05-2015 § 5, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.110 Setback regulations and exceptions.

This section establishes standards to ensure the provision of open areas around structures for: access to and around structures; access to natural light, ventilation, and direct sunlight; separation of incompatible land uses; space for landscaping, privacy, and recreation; and visibility and traffic safety.

A. Setback Requirements.

1. Compliance. All structures shall comply with the setback requirements established by Division III, Project Design, and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this development code and by the city’s adopted Uniform Building Code.

2. Extending Over Property Lines Prohibited. Portions of a structure, including eaves or roof overhangs, shall not extend beyond a property line or into an access easement or public right-of-way.

3. Unobstructed. Each required setback area shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as provided in this section.

B. Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows:

1. Front Setback. The required front setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line to the nearest point of the wall of the structure, except as follows:

a. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the structure to the nearest point of the property line adjoining the public right-of-way determined by the city planner to constitute the front yard. (Whenever a future right-of-way line is officially established, required setbacks shall be measured from the established line(s));

b. For flag lots, the measurement shall normally be taken from a parallel line established where the access strip meets the buildable area of the parcel closest to the public right-of-way to the nearest point of the wall of the structure.

2. Side Setbacks. The side setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest point of the wall of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear yards.

3. Street-Side Setback. The side setback, on the street side of a corner parcel, shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line adjoining the public right-of-way to the nearest point of the wall of the structure.

4. Rear Setback. The rear setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line of the parcel to the nearest point of the wall of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line, which extends between the side yards, except:

a. The rear setback on the street side of a double frontage lot shall be measured from the nearest point of the rear property line adjoining the public right-of-way. If an access easement or public right-of-way line extends into or through a rear setback, the measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the easement or right-of-way line; and

b. Where the side property lines converge to a point, a line five feet long within the parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front property line, shall be deemed to be the rear property line for the purpose of determining the depth of the required rear setback. 
[IMAGE]


C. Allowed Projections into Setbacks. The following architectural features may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side, and rear setbacks, only as follows:

1. Balconies, Porches, and Stairways. The following setback standards shall apply to balconies, porches, and stairways:

a. Balconies and similar open, uncovered features shall not project into any required setback unless the feature is three feet or less in height above finished grade, in which case it may extend into required setbacks in compliance with subsection (C)(1)(c) of this section;

b. Covered, unenclosed porches, located at the same level as the entrance floor of the structure, may extend into required setbacks in compliance with subsection (C)(1)(c) of this section;

c. Uncovered outside stairways and landings, that are not attached to a deck, are not enclosed, and do not extend above a ground floor entrance, may extend into required setbacks as follows:

i. Up to 10 feet into a required front or street-side setback, but not closer than 10 feet to a front or street-side property line;

ii. Up to three feet into a required side setback, but not closer than three feet to a side property line;

iii. Up to three feet into a required rear setback, but not closer than 10 feet to a rear property line;

d. These requirements shall not apply to uncovered landings, patios, or walkways constructed not more than six inches above finished grade.

2. Canopies, Chimneys/Fireplaces, Cornices, Eaves, and Roof Overhangs. Cantilevered architectural features on the main structure, including bay windows, canopies, chimneys/fire places up to eight feet in width, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, roof overhangs, and solar devices may extend up to three feet into a required setback, but not closer than three feet to a side or rear property line.
[IMAGE]


3. Setback Requirements for Specific Structures and Equipment.

a. Decks, driveways, patio slabs, and walkways shall be allowed in required setbacks, provided they do not exceed a height of six inches above finished grade. This provision shall not exclude the use of steps providing access between areas of different elevation on the same property.

b. An inner court providing access to a dwelling group (constructed and located face-to-face) shall provide a minimum width of 15 feet between rows for single-story structures with an additional five feet of width for each additional floor above the first floor.

c. Ground-mounted equipment (e.g., air conditioners, fans, filters, heaters, swimming pool pumps, etc.) shall be allowed in required side or rear setbacks, provided:

i. The equipment, including housing, is not closer than three feet to any side or rear property line; and

ii. The equipment does not exceed a height of four feet measured from the finished grade at the base of the unit.

d. Guard railings or fences for safety protection around depressed ramps may be located in required setbacks provided:

i. An open-work railing or fence is used; and

ii. The height of the railing or fence complies with the requirements of the city’s adopted Uniform Building Code.

e. Wooden and/or masonry planter boxes shall be allowed in all required setbacks when maintaining a maximum height of 42 inches.

f. Patios.

i. Attached covered patios having no enclosures, screening, or walls on at least three sides shall not project more than 10 feet into a required rear setback.

ii. Detached covered patios shall meet the requirements for residential accessory structures identified in SMC 19.50.080, Residential accessory uses and structures.

g. Retaining Walls.

i. Retaining walls up to 42 inches in height are exempt from setback requirements.

ii. Retaining walls up to six feet in height may be located within a required setback provided the exposed side of the wall faces into the subject parcel. If the exposed side of the retaining wall faces out of the subject parcel, the maximum height within the setback shall be four feet.

h. Swimming pools and spas are allowed in side and rear setbacks provided they are not closer than five feet to a side or rear property line.

D. Projections into the Public Right-of-Way. In commercial and mixed use zoning districts, projections into the public right-of-way may be allowed as provided for below.

1. Signs, Awnings and Canopies. Subject to the approval of the design review and historic preservation commission in accordance with SMC 19.54.080, Site design and architectural review, signs, awnings, and similar nonpermanent structures may project into the public right-of-way. The minimum clearance of such structures shall be seven feet and the minimum distance from an adjoining curb or street edge shall be three feet. Supporting posts or columns shall not be permitted under this provision.

2. Balconies and Building Projections. Subject to the approval of the planning commission in accordance with SMC 19.54.040, Use permits, balconies and other permanent building features may project into a public right-of-way. The minimum clearance of such structures shall be eight feet and the minimum distance from an adjoining curb or street edge shall be three feet. Supporting posts or columns shall not be permitted under this provision.

3. Posts, Columns, and Supports. Subject to the approval of the city council through the review of an encroachment permit, posts, columns and other permanent building features may be permitted within the public right-of-way. Such features shall not impede pedestrian access and shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any adjoining public street.

E. Use and Maintenance of Setback Areas. Setback areas and yards (defined as areas on a property not developed with a structure), including driveways and parking areas, shall be used and maintained in accordance with the following standards and requirements:

1. Structures. Yards and required setback areas shall not be occupied by structures other than:

a. Fences, as allowed under Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls.

b. Accessory structures located within setback areas in compliance with SMC 19.50.080, Residential accessory uses and structures.

c. Projections into setbacks as provided for under subsection (C) of this section.

d. Structures for which a variance or an exception have been obtained, in accordance with the applicable provisions of Division V.

e. Legal nonconforming structures.

2. Use. The use of yards and required setback areas shall be limited to the following:

a. Permitted uses under the applicable zoning district as set forth in Division II;

b. Conditionally permitted uses under the applicable zoning district as set forth in Division II for which a conditional use permit has been obtained;

c. Home occupations operated in conformance with SMC 19.50.040;

d. Legal nonconforming uses.

3. Storage. Front or street-side yards and setbacks shall not be used for the storage of garbage, rubbish, debris, parts, building materials (except in the course of permitted construction), or inoperable motor vehicles, except for screened storage facilities, such as building materials yards, allowed through a use permit in the Commercial and Mixed Use zones.

4. Maintenance. Setbacks and yards shall be maintained so as to be free from garbage and debris and accumulations of refuse and yard waste. No yard or setback area shall be maintained in a manner that supports or attracts concentrations of vermin or feral animals. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.120 Undergrounding of utilities.

All on-site cable television, electric, and telephone facilities, fire alarm conduits, lighting wiring, and other wiring conduits and similar facilities shall be placed underground at the time of development. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.40.130 Protection of scenic vistas.

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide standards for the protection of important scenic vistas throughout the city as identified in the General Plan, Community Development Element (Town Design).

B. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any new development for which a discretionary planning or subdivision permit is required that has the potential to affect any of the scenic vistas identified in the General Plan (see the “Town Design Elements” map in the Community Development Element). 

C. Scenic Vista Defined. For the purpose of this section, a “scenic vista” means a public view, benefitting the community at large, of significant features, including hillside terrain, ridgelines, canyons, geologic features, and community amenities (e.g., parks, landmarks, permanent open space).

D. Standards for View Corridors. New structures shall be constructed and located in a manner that preserves scenic vistas by maintaining view corridors, whenever possible. Examples of corridors include:

1. Unbuilt space between buildings;

2. View opportunities created from undeveloped lots;

3. Airspace created from public parks and open spaces; and

4. Open spaces created from the deliberate spacing of buildings on the same lot or adjacent lots.

5. Development in hillside areas, especially near ridgelines, shall comply with the standards in SMC 19.40.050, Hillside development. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.42 HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND INFILL IN THE HISTORIC ZONE

Sections: 

19.42.010    Purpose.

19.42.020    Designation of a local historic resource or district.

19.42.030    Adaptive reuse.

19.42.040    Guidelines for preservation and adaptive reuse.

19.42.050    Guidelines for infill development.


19.42.010 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to safeguard the historic character of Sonoma by recognizing and preserving significant historic and cultural resources by providing incentives for the preservation and rehabilitation of historically and culturally significant resources, and by ensuring that new development in the historic overlay zone is architecturally compatible.

A. Officially Designated Historic Structures. This chapter establishes incentives, minimum standards, and guidelines for the preservation and adaptive reuse of officially designated historic structures to the greatest extent feasible, as well as a process for listing districts, sites, structures and other resources possessing local historic significance.

B. Potentially Historic Structures. This chapter establishes guidelines for the preservation of historic structures within the city, using the League for Historic Preservation’s inventory of historic structures as a guide for determining whether these provisions should be applied.

C. Infill Development. This chapter establishes guidelines to be used in review of infill development within the historic overlay zone for which a discretionary permit is required. (Ord. 06-2013 § 2(A) (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.42.020 Designation of a local historic resource or district.

A. Purpose. In order to recognize and promote the preservation of sites, structures, and areas that are important to the history of Sonoma, this section provides for the nomination and designation of locally significant historic resources and districts.

B. Designation Process – Local Historic Resources. Local historic resources shall be designated by the design review and historic preservation commission in the following manner:

1. Initiation of Designation. Designation of an historical resource may be initiated by the design review and historic preservation commission or by the owner of the property that is proposed for designation. Applications for designation originating from outside the commission must be accompanied by such historical and architectural information as is required by the commission to make an informed recommendation concerning the application, together with the fee set by the city council.

2. Review, Notice and Hearing. The design review and historic preservation commission shall conduct a public hearing on a nomination for local historic resource designation. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings), including mailed notice to the owners of any property proposed for such designation.

3. Findings, Decision. Following a public hearing, the design review and historic preservation commission may approve or disapprove a nomination for designation as a local historic resource. The commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The design review and historic preservation commission may approve such designation only if it finds that the resource meets at least one of the following criteria:

a. It is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to Sonoma’s history and cultural heritage; or

b. It is associated with the lives of persons important in Sonoma’s past; or

c. It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of construction, or represents the work of an important creative individual, or possesses high artistic values; or

d. It has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Sonoma’s prehistory or history.

C. Designation Process – Local Historic Districts. Local historic districts shall be designated by the city council upon the recommendation of the design review and historic preservation commission in the following manner:

1. Initiation of Designation. The designation of a local historic district may be initiated by the city council or the design review and historic preservation commission.

2. Requirements for Designation. The designation of a local historic district is subject to finding by the review authority that all of the following requirements are met:

a. The proposed district is a geographically definable area.

b. The proposed district possesses either a significant concentration or continuity of buildings unified by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development.

c. Considered as a whole, a sufficient concentration of buildings within the proposed district demonstrates integrity of design, setting, materials, workmanship and association.

d. The collective historic value of the buildings and structures in the proposed district is greater than the historic value of each individual building or structure.

e. The designation of the area as a historic district is reasonable, appropriate and necessary to protect, promote and further the goals and purposes of this chapter and is not inconsistent with other goals and policies of the city.

3. Design Review and Historic Preservation Commission Hearing and Recommendation. The design review and historic preservation commission shall conduct a public hearing on a nomination for local historic resource district. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings), including mailed notice to the owners of any property proposed for such designation. Following the public hearing, the commission shall recommend approval in whole or in part or disapproval of the application for designation in writing to the city council, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The design review and historic preservation commission may approve a recommendation for a local historic district only if it makes the findings set forth in subsection (B) of this section.

4. City Council Hearing and Decision. The city council shall conduct a public hearing on a nomination for local historic district. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings), including mailed notice to the owners of any property proposed for such designation. Following the public hearing, the city council shall by resolution approve the recommendations in whole or in part, or shall by motion disapprove them in their entirety. The city council may approve a designation as a local historic district only if it makes the findings set forth in subsection (B) of this section. If the city council approves a local historic district, notice of the decision shall be sent to property owners within the district.

D. Amendment or Rescission. The design review and historic preservation commission and the city council may amend or rescind any designation of an historical resource or historic district in the same manner and procedure as are followed for designation.

E. Previously Designated Historic Resources. The sites and structures previously designated by the city council as having local historic significance through the adoption of Resolution 18-2006 are hereby designated as local historic resources as defined in this chapter.

F. Register. The design review and historic preservation commission shall maintain a register of designated local historic resources and districts. (Ord. 06-2013 §§ 2(A) (Exh. B), 3, 2013).


19.42.030 Adaptive reuse.

The adaptive reuse of historic structures within the historic overlay district, involving uses not otherwise allowed through the base zone, may be allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, in compliance with SMC 19.54.040 and as set forth below.

A. Eligible Structures. The following types of structures are eligible for adaptive reuse:

1. Officially Designated Structures. Those structures of officially designated historical significance as indicated by (a) listing with the State Office of Historic Preservation, or (b) listing as a locally significant historic resource, regardless of whether they are located within the historic overlay zone.

2. Structures with Potential Historical Value. In addition to officially designated structures, there are other structures that may have historical value because of their age (usually more than 50 years old), and their contribution to the overall historic character of the community due to their unique architectural scale and style, use of design details, form, materials, or proportion, as may be documented through listing on the Sonoma League for Historic Preservation’s inventory of historic structures. Such structures shall only be eligible for adaptive reuse if located within the historic overlay zone and shall not be eligible for consideration as a vacation rental.

B. Allowable Use. The following uses may be considered in an application for the adaptive reuse of a historic structure:

1. Residential Uses and Densities.

a. Allowable Residential Uses. Single- and multifamily dwellings and residential condominiums.

b. Allowable Residential Densities. The allowable residential density within the historic overlay district may exceed the normally allowable density under the subject general plan designation and zoning district, subject to the approval of the planning commission.

2. Nonresidential Uses.

a. Bed and breakfast inns;

b. Hotels;

c. Limited retail;

d. Mixed use (residential over commercial) developments;

e. Professional and service-oriented offices;

f. Restaurants (with or without outdoor dining facilities); and

g. Vacation rentals (limited to structures listed or eligible for listing on the State Register of Historic Places); and

h. Wine tasting facilities.

C. Retention of Residential Character, Scale, and Style. Adaptive reuse projects shall retain a residential character, scale, and style (e.g., off-street parking areas would be prohibited in the front and street side setbacks, new construction would have a residential appearance, signs would be limited, etc.). The guidelines set forth in SMC 19.42.040 shall be considered by the planning commission in applications for adaptive reuse.

D. Compliance with Parking Standards. The above-listed uses shall be provided with suitable parking, in compliance with Chapter 19.48 SMC (Parking and Loading Standards).

E. Findings and Decision. The planning commission shall approve, with or without conditions, the adaptive reuse of an historic structure only if all of the following findings can be made, in addition to those identified in SMC 19.54.040 (Use permits). The alteration or adaptive reuse would:

1. Enhance, perpetuate, preserve, protect, and restore those historic districts, neighborhoods, sites, structures, and zoning districts which contribute to the aesthetic and cultural benefit of the city;

2. Stabilize and improve the economic value of historic districts, neighborhoods, sites, structures, and zoning districts;

3. Preserve diverse architectural design reflecting phases of the city’s history, and encourage design styles and construction methods and materials that are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood(s);

4. Promote and encourage continued private ownership and utilization of structures now so owned and used; and

5. Substantially comply with the applicable Secretary of the Interior Standards and Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Properties as well as the applicable requirements and guidelines of this chapter.

The following additional finding is required for applications for adaptive reuse as a vacation rental:

6. Restore and rehabilitate a historic structure and/or property, excluding second units, which is listed or eligible for listing on the State Register of Historic Places, that has fallen into such a level of disrepair that the economic benefits of adaptive reuse are necessary to stem further deterioration, correct deficient conditions, or avoid demolition as implemented in the conditions of project approval. (Ord. 03-2016 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 06-2013 § 2(A) (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 06-2009 §§ 1 – 3, 2009; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003. Formerly 19.42.020).


19.42.040 Guidelines for preservation and adaptive reuse.

A. Purpose. The purpose of these guidelines is to implement general plan policies related to the preservation and adaptive reuse of officially designated historic structures throughout the city and of structures having potential historical value within the city’s historic overlay zone.

B. Applicability. These guidelines are to be utilized during the development/design review process as criteria against which to review new construction within the historic overlay district requiring discretionary approval and adaptive reuse projects.

C. Preservation and Rehabilitation of Existing Structures. In general, preservation and rehabilitation efforts should aim toward protecting the essential architectural features of a structure that help to identify its individual style and thereby further its contribution to the historic character of the surrounding neighborhood.

1. General Rehabilitation Principles.

a. Historic structures should be recognized for their own time and style. Rehabilitation should not try to create a preconceived concept of history, but should reuse existing or appropriate features.

b. Rehabilitation of historic structures should try to retain and restore original elements first. If damage or deterioration is too severe, the element should be recreated using original materials to match the color, design, texture, and any other important design features.

c. When replacement is necessary and original material cannot be obtained, substitution material should incorporate the color, design, and texture that conveys the visual appearance of the original material.

2. Doors.

a. Older structures almost always had solid wood doors that fit the particular style of the structure. The front door of the structure was the most ornate with secondary doors usually more utilitarian in appearance. The shape, size, and style of doors are an important feature of all historical architectural styles and the original design/type should be maintained.

b. Original doors should be repaired in place whenever possible. When replacement is necessary, the replacement door should match the original design and materials as close as possible.

c. If the original door is missing, appropriate design and materials should be selected by studying the doors of similar structures in the surrounding neighborhood or consulting books on architectural styles. Many older style panel doors are still available from material suppliers and may match the original doors very closely.

3. Exterior Materials.

a. The original exterior building materials should be retained whenever possible. It is not desirable to use mismatched materials of different finishes, shapes, sizes, or textures.

b. Structures with original wood siding should not be stuccoed in an attempt to modernize their appearance. Likewise, plastic shingles should not be used to replace wood siding or shingles.

c. Replacing wood siding with aluminum siding of the same shape and size as the original siding can be an alternative, but care shall be taken to use siding of the appropriate size.

d. Brick surfaces should not be sandblasted in an attempt to remove old paint. Sandblasting would damage the natural fired surface of the brick, and cause it to lose its water repellent qualities. Also, mechanical grinders should not be used to remove mortar as this can damage the brick surrounding the joint.

4. Ornamentation and Trim.

a. Most often it is the authentic decoration and trim on a structure that lends character and identifies the structure with its particular architectural style. Original ornamentation should be preserved whenever feasible.

b. If the material needs to be removed to be repaired or copied, determine how the piece is attached and carefully plan the work to be sensitive to the material. Any prying action should be slow and careful, with a minimal amount of force.

c. If the ornamentation or trim is comprised of several layers of materials, it is helpful to sketch the components as they come apart to ensure proper reassembly. If the pieces are beyond repair, a skilled finish carpenter should duplicate the original work.

5. Porches and Stairs.

a. During rehabilitation efforts, the design integrity of the front porch should not be compromised. Front porches should not be enclosed with walls or windows.

b. If enclosing the porch is the only viable means of adding needed space, care should be taken to use decoration(s), doors, siding materials, trim details, and windows that match the facade of the structure surrounding the porch.

6. Roofs.

a. Roofs are important both functionally and aesthetically. Great care should be taken to ensure that roofs are watertight and that roofing materials are compatible with the original style of the structure. Oftentimes roofs only need repairs, but when replacement is necessary roofing materials should be selected that are appropriate to the structure’s architectural style.

b. It should be recognized that fire safety requirements may preclude reroofing a structure in its original material. The determination of what material to use for the replacement of wood shingles or shakes in historic structures should be based on compatibility with the colors and materials used elsewhere on the structure.

7. Windows.

a. Most older/historic structures had wood framed windows that were either casement, double hung, or fixed. The shape, size, and style of windows are an important feature of most architectural styles and the original type window should be maintained.

b. When window replacement is necessary, it is preferred that the new window be an exact match of the original. 

c. An alternative to special milling may be the use of an “off-the-shelf” standard window that closely matches the original.

d. Aluminum or plastic frame windows should not be used as replacements on any part of an historically valuable structure without justification. The use of such materials is highly visible and the contrast of materials and styles can permanently affect the architectural integrity of the structure. The use of traditional materials is preferred.

D. Additions to Existing Structures. Additions to historically valuable structures may be necessary to ensure their continued use. Modifications (e.g., additions, new entrances and exits, parking facilities, handicap facilities, and seismic strengthening) should be made with care so as not to compromise a structure’s historically valuable features, finishes, or materials.

1. Site Plan Considerations. Additions should be carefully placed to minimize changes in the appearance of the structure from the public right-of-way. Whenever possible, additions should be placed to the side or rear of the structure and should not obstruct the appearance of the structure from the public right-of-way.

2. Architectural Compatibility.

a. Additions to historically valuable structures should incorporate the distinctive architectural features of the original structures including:

i. Door and window shape, size, and type;

ii. Exterior materials;

iii. Finished floor height;

iv. Roof material, pitch, and style; and

v. Trim and decoration.

b. Refer to the rehabilitation guidelines, subsection (C) of this section, Preservation and Rehabilitation of Existing Structures, for discussion of appropriate exterior doors, porches, wall materials, windows, etc.

3. Roof Pitch and Style.

a. The roof of a structure, especially its pitch and style, is an important architectural element that should be taken into consideration when planning an addition.

b. Whenever possible, the pitch and style on the addition should match the original.

c. Roof materials should also match as close as possible.

4. Second-Story Additions.

a. Because adding an additional story to an existing structure will always change the structure’s proportions, such additions should be carefully designed to follow similar two-story examples of the particular style that may be found in the surrounding neighborhood.

b. Integrating the new second-story addition into the original design of the structure may be easier if the addition is set back from the front facade so that it is less noticeable from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 06-2013 § 2(A) (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003. Formerly 19.42.030).


19.42.050 Guidelines for infill development.

A. Purpose. These guidelines are intended to encourage new infill development in the historic overlay district to be compatible in scale and treatment with the existing, older development and to maintain the overall historic character and integrity of the community. At the same time, these guidelines are intended to promote the visual variety that is characteristic of Sonoma, to allow for contemporary architectural designs, and to provide reasonable flexibility in accommodating the tastes, preferences and creativity of applicants proposing new development, especially individual single-family homes. As stated in the 2020 General Plan:

Sonoma should continue to be characterized by variety in terms of land uses, building types, and housing, and this diversity should be consistent with preserving the town’s small-scale and historic character.

B. Guidelines for Compatibility. The single most important issue of new infill development is one of compatibility, especially when considering larger structures. When new structures are developed adjacent to older single-family residences, there are concerns that the bulk and height of the infill structures may have a negative impact on the adjoining smaller-scale structures. The following considerations are intended to address this concern:

1. Site Plan Considerations.

a. New development should continue the functional, on-site relationships of the surrounding neighborhood. For example, common patterns that should be continued are entries facing the public right-of-way, front porches, and garages/parking areas located at the rear of the parcel.

b. Front setbacks for new infill development should follow either of the following criteria:

i. Equal to the average front setback of all residences on both sides of the street within 100 feet of the property lines of the new project; or

ii. Equal to the average front setback of the two immediately adjoining structures on each side of the new project.

c. In cases where averaging between two adjoining existing structures is chosen, the new structure may be averaged in a stepping pattern. This method can work especially well where it is desirable to provide a large front porch along a portion of the front facade.

2. Architectural Considerations.

a. New infill structures should support the distinctive architectural characteristics of development in the surrounding neighborhood, including building mass, scale, proportion, decoration/detail, door and window spacing/rhythm, exterior materials, finished-floor height, porches, and roof pitch and style.

b. Because new infill structures are likely to be taller than one story, their bulk and height can impose on smaller-scale adjoining structures. The height of new structures should be considered within the context of their surroundings. Structures with greater height should consider providing greater setbacks at the second-story level, to reduce impacts (e.g., blocking or screening of air and light, privacy, etc.) on adjoining single-story structures.

c. The incorporation of balconies and porches is encouraged for both practical and aesthetic reasons. These elements should be integrated to break up large front facades and add human scale to the structures.

d. The proper use of building materials can enhance desired neighborhood qualities (e.g., compatibility, continuity, harmony, etc.). The design of infill structures should incorporate an appropriate mixture of the predominant materials in the surrounding neighborhood whenever possible. Common materials are brick, horizontal siding, shingles, stone, stucco, and wood.

e. Color schemes for infill structures should consider the color schemes of existing structures in the surrounding neighborhood in order to maintain compatibility and harmony. Avoid sharp contrasts with existing building colors.

3. Single-Family Residences.

a. The design of an individual single-family residence is typically of great significance to the homeowner. Changes required through the design review process should be the minimum necessary to achieve compatibility with the overall character of the historic overlay district. 

b. Historic architectural styles (e.g., craftsman, Victorian, bungalow, etc.) are not mandated. However, contemporary architectural treatments proposed for new residences should complement and not detract from the qualities of the historic overlay district and the neighborhood setting of the proposed development.

c. To the extent that a proposed residence is not readily visible from a public street, other public vantage point, or a significant historic resource, greater design flexibility should be allowed.

4. Sustainable Construction Techniques.

a. Building forms that reduce energy use may be radically different than traditional architectural types. Careful and sensitive design is required in order to produce a contrast that is pleasing rather than jarring. The use of appropriate colors and textures on exterior materials is one method of linking a contemporary building design to a traditional neighborhood context.

b. Roof gardens, solar panels, and other sustainable construction features should be fully integrated into the design of new construction, rather than applied at the conclusion of the design process.

5. Accessory Structures.

a. New accessory structures (e.g., garages, second units, sheds, etc.) that are visible from the public right-of-way should incorporate the distinctive architectural features (e.g., color, materials, roof pitch and style, etc.) of the main structure. 

b. Design features should be applied with less detail on the accessory structure so that it does not compete with the main structure and is clearly subordinate to it. (Ord. 06-2013 § 2(A) (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 07-2007 § 1 (Exh. B), 2007; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003. Formerly 19.42.040).


Chapter 19.44 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND DENSITY BONUSES

Sections: 

19.44.010    Purpose.

19.44.020    Inclusionary units.

19.44.025    Eligibility for bonus and incentives.

19.44.030    Types of bonuses and incentives allowed.

19.44.040    Continued availability.

19.44.050    Location of inclusionary and bonus units.

19.44.060    Processing of density bonus/incentive requests.


19.44.010 Purpose.

This chapter delineates city requirements pertaining to inclusionary affordable units. In addition, as required by state law (Government Code Section 65915), this chapter offers incentives to developers for providing housing that is affordable to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in SMC 19.44.025, Eligibility for bonus and incentives. The incentives include the ability to construct more residential dwelling units than normally allowed by the applicable General Plan designation and zoning district, and other incentives and concessions provided by this chapter. In offering these incentives and concessions, this chapter is intended to implement the requirements of state law (Government Code Sections 65302, 65913, and 65915 et seq.). (Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.44.020 Inclusionary units.

In order to ensure an appropriate variety of unit types and residential living opportunities in new development, inclusionary affordable units shall be provided as follows:

A. Sonoma Residential District. In the Sonoma Residential zoning district:

1. A development containing five or more parcels or units shall provide that at least 20 percent of the total parcels or units are affordable to households in the low and moderate income categories; and

2. At least one-half of the affordable parcels or units of any residential development containing 10 or more parcels or units shall be affordable to households in the low income category.

B. In Other Residential Zoning Districts. A development containing five or more residential parcels or units shall provide that at least 20 percent of the total parcels or units are affordable to households in the low and moderate income categories.

C. Affordable. “Affordable” shall be defined as “affordable housing unit” consistent with the most recently adopted affordability policies of the city of Sonoma. (Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.44.025 Eligibility for bonus and incentives.

A developer of a housing development in the city may be permitted a density bonus and incentives in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918 (State Density Bonus Law), subject to the processing requirements set forth in SMC 19.44.060. (Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.44.030 Types of bonuses and incentives allowed.

A qualifying residential development project shall be entitled to the following density bonus and other incentives. If a density bonus and/or other incentives cannot be accommodated on a parcel due to strict compliance with the provisions of this development code, the planning commission is authorized to waive or modify development standards as necessary to accommodate all bonus units and other incentives to which the development is entitled.

A. Density Bonus.

1. Minimum Percentage Required. The density bonus allowed by this chapter shall consist of a percentage increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed by the General Plan designation and zoning district applicable to the parcel as of the date of filing for the development project application. The percentage increase shall be calculated in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(f). Inclusionary units required pursuant to SMC 19.44.020 shall be included when calculating a density bonus.

2. Only One. A single development project shall not be granted more than one density bonus in compliance with this chapter.

B. Incentives. A qualifying residential development project shall be entitled to incentives and/or concessions as provided for by state law (Government Code Section 65915(k)):

1. Reduction in Standards. A modification (reduction or increase) of the site development standards of this development code (e.g., parking design requirements, setbacks, site coverage, zero lot line and/or reduced parcel sizes, etc.) that would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions;

2. Mixed Use Zoning. Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the residential development project if nonresidential land uses would reduce the cost of the project, and the nonresidential land uses would be compatible with the project and surrounding development;

3. Other Incentives. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions; and

4. Alternative Parking Ratios. Use of the parking ratios that result in a parking reduction in excess of that provided in the parking standards set forth in Government Code Section 65915(c). (Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.44.040 Continued availability.

The land use permit application for the residential development project shall include the procedures proposed by the developer to maintain the continued affordability of the inclusionary and density bonus units in the following manner:

A. Development Projects with City Funding – 55 Years. Projects receiving a direct financial contribution or other financial incentives from the city, or a density bonus and at least one other concession or incentive, shall maintain the availability of the lower income density bonus units for a minimum of 55 years, as required by state law (Government Code Sections 65915(c) and 65916);

B. Private Development Projects – Inclusionary and Density Bonus Only – 55 Years. Privately financed projects that receive a density bonus as the only incentive from the city shall maintain the availability of lower income density bonus units for 55 years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program; and

C. Affordability Agreement. Affordability shall be guaranteed through an “affordability agreement” executed between the developer and the city in a standard form approved by the city council and the city attorney. The agreement shall be recorded on the subject property with the county recorder’s office before the issuance of building permits and shall become effective before final inspection of the first unit. The subject agreement shall be legally binding and enforceable on the property owner(s) and any subsequent property owner(s) for the duration of the agreement. The agreement shall include the following items:

1. Number and Duration. The number of, and duration of the affordability for, the affordable units;

2. Monitoring Affordability. The method in which the developer and the city are to monitor the affordability of the subject affordable units and the eligibility of the tenants or owners of those units over the period of the agreement;

3. Marketing of Units. The method in which vacancies would be marketed and filled;

4. Location and Type. A description of the location and unit type (bedrooms, floor area, etc.) of the affordable units within the project; and

5. Standards for Incomes and Rents/Sales Prices. Standards for maximum qualifying household incomes and standards for maximum rents or sales prices consistent with the most recently adopted affordability policies of the city of Sonoma and Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 03-2016 § 5, 2016; Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.44.050 Location of inclusionary and bonus units.

As required by state law (Government Code Section 65915(g)), the location of density bonus units within the qualifying project may be at the discretion of the developer. Normally, inclusionary affordable units should be reasonably dispersed throughout the development and should be compatible with the design or use of the market-rate units in terms of appearance, materials, and finish quality. The clustering of affordable units may be permitted by the planning commission, when consistent with the design and site planning characteristics of a particular development. (Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.44.060 Processing of density bonus/incentive requests.

A. Eligibility. To be eligible for consideration of a density bonus and related incentives, an application for a state density bonus shall be submitted with the first application for approval of a housing development and shall be processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided:

1. A site plan showing the total number and location of all proposed housing units and the number and location of proposed housing units which qualify the housing development for density bonus housing units.

2. The manner in which the applicant shall satisfy the affordability requirements for the housing units which qualify the housing development for density bonus units.

3. A description of any requested incentives and concessions, waivers or modification of development standards, or modified parking standards. For all incentives and concessions, except mixed use development, the application shall include evidence that the requested incentives and concessions result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. For waivers or modifications of development standards, the application shall include evidence that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible and that the development standard from which a waiver or modification is requested will have the effect of precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to this article and with the concessions and incentives permitted by this article.

B. Approval of Incentives. Reductions in development standards for developments featuring density bonus units may be approved by the planning commission. The provision of any other incentives shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The council or commission shall approve the above incentives or concessions, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, unless it makes written findings in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65915(d)). (Ord. 02-2014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.46 FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS 

Sections:

19.46.010    Purpose.

19.46.020    Applicability.

19.46.030    General height limitations.

19.46.040    Height limitations for retaining walls.

19.46.050    Measurement of fence or wall height.

19.46.060    Special wall and fencing requirements.

19.46.070    Special wall and fencing guidelines.

19.46.080    Restrictions on fence materials.

19.46.090    Authority to waive or modify requirements.


19.46.010 Purpose.

This chapter establishes requirements for fences, hedges, and walls to ensure that these features do not block views and sunlight, provide adequate buffering between different land uses, provide screening of outdoor uses and equipment, and are designed and appropriately maintained to provide aesthetic enhancement of the city. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.020 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter apply to all fences, hedges, and walls unless otherwise stated. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.030 General height limitations.

A. Maximum Heights. Fences, hedges, and walls (except retaining walls) may be constructed to the heights shown in Table 4-3. See also SMC 19.46.040, Height limitations for retaining walls.

B. Modifications to Fence Height Standards. The planning commission may modify the fence height standards referenced in subsection (A) of this section, subject to the approval of a use permit (SMC 19.54.040) and in compliance with the provisions of this section.

C. Findings and Decision. The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, that the following findings are met in addition to those required for all conditional use permits (SMC 19.54.040(E)):

1. That the fence will be compatible with the design, appearance, and physical characteristics of the site and other existing structures in the surrounding neighborhood;

2. That the height, orientation, and location of the fence is in proper relation to the physical characteristics of the site and surrounding properties;

3. That the fence will be a planned architectural feature and would not dominate the site or overwhelm surrounding properties, structures, or passersby; and

4. That the fence will be of sound construction and located so as not to cause a safety hazard.

Table 4-3 

Maximum Height of Fences, Hedges and Walls 

	Location	Maximum Height

	 

	Rear and interior setbacks	7 feet1

	Front and street-side setbacks2	3.5 feet

	At intersections of streets, alleys, and driveways within traffic safety sight areas	30 inches if solid; otherwise the maximum height normally allowed, if the fence material is 75% open (e.g., lattice).

	Notes:

1.    An additional one foot of height is allowed (to a maximum of eight feet tall), but all fencing material above seven feet in height shall be open grill or latticework, or a similar open design allowing light and air to pass through at least 40 percent of the fencing material.

2.    Unless additional height is granted through a conditional use permit (SMC 19.54.040)

(Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.040 Height limitations for retaining walls.

A. Maximum Height – Six Feet. Retaining walls shall not exceed a height of six feet measured from the finished grade at the base of the wall. The city planner may approve additional height up to one foot in consideration of varying topographical features.

B. Fence or Wall Topping.

1. Wall for a Cut in Grade. Where a retaining wall protects a cut below the finished grade and is located on a front, side, or rear property line, the retaining wall may be topped by a fence or wall of the same height that would otherwise be allowed if no retaining wall existed.

2. Wall for a Fill of Grade. Where a retaining wall contains a fill, the height of the retaining wall shall be considered as contributing to (counting towards) the allowable height of a fence or wall.

3. Safety Protection. Regardless of the height of the retaining wall, an open-work, non-view-obscuring fence may be erected at the top of the retaining wall for safety protection to a maximum height of 42 inches.

C. Located within Setback.

1. Setback. Where a wall or fence is located in a required setback area adjacent to a retaining wall containing a fill, in compliance with SMC 19.40.110, Setback regulations and exceptions, the wall or fence shall be set back from the retaining wall a distance of one foot for each one foot in height.

2. Landscaping. The area between the wall or fence and the retaining wall shall be landscaped and continuously maintained in good condition. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.050 Measurement of fence or wall height.

A. Determination of Height. Where there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of less than two feet, the height of a fence or wall constructed along the property line shall be determined by using the finished grade at the base of the fence or wall on the highest parcel.

B. Determination by Building Official. When there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of two feet or more, the height of a fence or wall shall be determined by the building official.

C. Averaging.

1. Variations. To allow for variation in topography, the height of a fence or wall may vary up to six inches.

2. Average Finished Grade. The variation shall be dependent on the average finished grade which shall be determined by adding to the lowest grade adjacent to the fence or wall, one-half of the difference in elevation of the grade on each side of the fence.

3. Maximum Height. The average height of a fence or wall shall not exceed the maximum height allowed. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.060 Special wall and fencing requirements.

A. Swimming Pools, Spas, and Similar Features. Swimming pools, spas, and other similar features shall be fenced in compliance with requirements of the city’s adopted Uniform Building Code.

B. Outdoor Equipment, Storage, and Work Areas. Screening of outdoor uses and equipment and activities shall be provided in compliance with SMC 19.40.100, Screening and buffering, and SMC 19.50.060, Outdoor dining, display, and sales standards.

C. Temporary Fencing. Temporary fencing used during site preparation and construction shall be subject to the approval of the city planner. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.070 Special wall and fencing guidelines.

A. Fence and Wall Design. In new development for which architectural review is required (see SMC 19.54.080), the design review and historic preservation commission shall make reference to the following guidelines:

1. Uniformity Required. Fence or wall designs should be consistent throughout a multifamily or nonresidential development, or single-family subdivision, although multiple designs may be employed in large projects.

2. Mix of Materials Required. The design should include a mix of materials and finishes that are compatible with the overall design of the project.

3. Articulation Required. Perimeter fences and walls adjoining public rights-of-way should be articulated. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.080 Restrictions on fence materials.

A. Security Fences. Barbed wire, electrified, or razor wire fences, and other similar types of security fences are prohibited in all residential zoning districts and on commercial properties adjoining a residential zoning district. The use of such fence materials on commercial properties that do not adjoin a residential zoning district shall be subject to use permit review, in compliance with SMC 19.54.040.

B. Chain-Link. Except for temporary fencing associated with construction, the use of chain-link fencing shall not be allowed on a residentially zoned or developed property within a required setback adjoining public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.46.090 Authority to waive or modify requirements.

The planning commission may waive or modify the requirements of SMC 19.46.080, Restrictions on fence materials, in compliance with the provisions of SMC 19.54.040, Use permits, for nonresidential projects where evidence is presented that a higher degree of security is required and that the security may only be achieved through the use of barbed wire or similar security-type fencing materials. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.48 PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS

Sections:

19.48.010    Purpose.

19.48.020    Applicability.

19.48.030    General parking regulations.

19.48.040    Number of parking spaces required.

19.48.050    Adjustments to parking requirements.

19.48.060    Disabled/handicapped parking requirements.

19.48.070    Development standards for parking facilities.

19.48.080    Development guidelines for parking facilities.

19.48.090    Landscaping of parking facilities.

19.48.100    Driveways.

19.48.110    Bicycle parking requirements.

19.48.120    Loading space requirements.


19.48.010 Purpose.

This chapter provides off-street parking and loading standards to: 

A. Provide for the general welfare and convenience of persons within the city by ensuring adequate off-street parking and loading facilities to meet the needs generated by specific uses; 

B. Increase public safety by reducing congestion on public streets;

C. Ensure access and maneuverability for emergency vehicles; and

D. Provide adequate loading facilities to reduce the use of public streets for loading purposes. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.020 Applicability.

Every use, including a change or expansion of a use or structure, shall have off-street parking and loading facilities in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A use shall not be commenced and structures shall not be occupied until improvements required by this chapter are satisfactorily completed. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.030 General parking regulations.

A. Parking and Loading Spaces to Be Permanent. Required parking and loading spaces shall be permanently available, marked, and maintained for parking or loading purposes and shall be located on the site they are intended to serve unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. Parking facilities approved to be located off site shall be located within 300 feet of the use they are intended to serve. Where stormwater runoff management, detention, or infiltration is a requirement, parking facilities approved to be located off site shall be included in all associated runoff calculations. 

B. Parking and Loading to Be Unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants, or persons having control of operation of a premises for which parking or loading spaces are required by this chapter shall not prevent, prohibit, or restrict authorized persons from using those spaces, except that temporary restrictions may be allowed subject to the approval of the city planner.

C. Existing Parking. Existing parking or loading spaces shall not be reduced to an amount below that which is required by this chapter. The city planner may approve the temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in conjunction with a seasonal or intermittent use for a period of not more than 30 days. Longer periods may be allowed with the approval of a temporary use permit (SMC 19.54.030).

D. Maintenance. Parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles, turnaround areas, and landscaped areas shall be kept free of dust, graffiti, and litter; and striping, paving, walls, light standards, and all other facilities shall be permanently maintained. 

E. Use of Commercial Parking. Parking developed under this chapter for commercial uses shall be available for use by the general public during business hours without charge and without reservation by individual tenant space, unless otherwise authorized by the planning commission. (Ord. 05-2015 § 6, 2015; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.040 Number of parking spaces required.

Each land use shall provide at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces found to be required by this chapter, except where a greater number of spaces is required through approval of a discretionary permit or a parking reduction is granted in compliance with SMC 19.48.050, Adjustments to parking requirements. 

A. Parking Requirements by Land Use. The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided for each use shall be in compliance with Table 4-4 and the following requirements. Additional spaces may be required for company-owned vehicles or through entitlement approval.

B. New Developments. All new developments, except an expansion of an existing structure (see subsection (D) of this section), shall provide parking and loading spaces as required by Table 4-4 or as may be modified by SMC 19.48.050(B), Adjustments to Parking Requirements – Shared Use of Parking Facilities).

C. Change to Similar Use. When the use of a structure changes to a use that requires the same number of parking spaces as the immediately previous use, the number of required parking spaces for the new use shall remain the same, regardless of the number of spaces actually provided by the previous use; provided, that the previous use was legally established and no spaces were subsequently eliminated.

D. Expansion of Structure or Change in Use. When a structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, or when a change in use requires more parking than the previous use, additional parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with this chapter. The number of parking spaces required for an addition to a structure shall be based on the parking requirement associated with the entire structure.

Table 4-4 

Parking Requirements by Land Use  

	Land Use Type:

Manufacturing, Processing, and Warehousing	Vehicle Spaces Required

	General manufacturing, industrial and processing uses	One space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 20,000 sq. ft.; and one space for each 1,000 sq. ft. thereafter. The gross floor area may include incidental office space comprising less than 20% of the total gross floor area. Parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

	Recycling facilities	Determined by use permit.

	Research and development, laboratories	One space for each 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle.

	Warehouses and storage facilities	One space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. The gross floor area may include incidental office space comprising less than 20% of the total gross floor area. Parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

	Land Use Type:

Recreation, Education, Public Assembly	Vehicle Spaces Required

	Child day care centers (nursery schools)	One space for each 10 children, plus permanent drop-off area as approved by the city planner.

	Large family day care homes	One space for each employee, in addition to the required residential spaces.

	Churches, other places of worship, and mortuaries, meeting halls, and performance theaters	One space for each four seats or one space for each 75 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater.

	Indoor arcades, amusement centers	One space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Health/fitness clubs	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Libraries, museums, art galleries, and similar nonassembly cultural uses	Determined by commission based on location, nature, and frequency of use.

	Outdoor recreation, playgrounds, playing fields, and parks	Determined by commission based on location, nature, and frequency of use.

	Schools (private) elementary/junior high	Two spaces for each classroom.

	High school	Two spaces for each classroom, plus one space for every seven students.

	Trade and business schools	Two spaces for each classroom, plus one space for every two students.

	Studios for dance and art	One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Land Use Type:

Residential Uses	Vehicle Spaces Required

	Group quarters (including boarding houses, rooming houses, and dormitories)	One space for each bed, plus one space for each eight beds for guest parking, plus one space for each employee on largest shift.

	Duplex housing units	One and one-half space for each unit.

	Mobile homes (in mobile home parks)	One space for each mobile home, plus one guest parking space for each four units.

	Multifamily dwellings, condominiums and other attached dwellings	One and one-half space for each unit with one space for each unit covered, plus guest parking at the rate of 25% of total required spaces.

	Mixed use developments	Determined by use permit.

	Live-work developments	One space per 300 sq. ft. of the area devoted to work space, plus one space for every four units. 

	Accessory dwelling units	See SMC 19.50.090 (Accessory Dwelling Units).

	Accessory dwelling units, junior	None required.

	Senior housing projects	One space for each two units with half the spaces covered, plus one guest parking space for each 10 units. 

	Senior congregate care facilities	0.5 space for each residential unit, plus one space for each four units for guests and employees.

	Single-family housing	One space in a garage or carport per unit.

	Land Use Type:

Retail Trade	Vehicle Spaces Required

	Appliance, building materials, furniture, bulk goods, and plant nurseries	One space for each 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area and one space for each company vehicle, plus one space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area.

	Automobile, construction equipment, mobile home, machinery, and parts sale	One space for each 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus one space for each 3,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display, service area, plus one space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area for a parts department, plus one space for each three employees.

	Convenience stores	One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Restaurants (except fast food), cafes, cafeterias, nightclubs, taverns, lounges, wine bar/tap rooms, or similar establishments for the consumption of food and beverages on the premises	One space for each four seats. For outdoor seating, no off-street parking shall be required for up to 25% of the approved number of indoor seats.

	Retail sales/general merchandise	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross sales area, plus one space for each company vehicle, plus one space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area.

	Wine tasting facilities	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross sales area. For outdoor seating, no off-street parking shall be required. 

	Land Use Type:

Service Uses	Vehicle Spaces Required

	Banks and financial services	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Bed and breakfast establishment	One space for each guest room, plus one space for resident manager.

	Copy and reproduction centers	One space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Consumer products – repair and maintenance	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Equipment rental	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area, plus one space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor use area.

	Hotels and motels	One space for each guest room, plus one space for each two employees on the largest shift, plus required spaces for accessory uses.

	Medical services, clinics, medical/dental offices	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus one space for each employee/staff member.

	Extended care (convalescent hospitals, nursing homes, and residential care homes)	One space for each four beds the facility is licensed to accommodate.

	Hospitals	One space for each patient bed the facility is licensed to accommodate, plus required spaces for ancillary uses as determined by the city planner.

	Medical/dental labs	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Offices, administrative, corporate	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Pet grooming	One space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Personal services: Barber/beauty shops (and other personal services)	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 

	Dry cleaning pick-up facilities	One space for each 400 sq. ft. of activity area, plus one space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of storage area. 

	Laundromats	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	Service stations	One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area; plus three spaces for each service bay, plus additional spaces for food service or convenience market.

	Storage, personal storage facilities	Four spaces for manager office.

	Vehicle repair and maintenance/repair garage	Four spaces for each service bay, plus adequate queuing lanes for each bay, plus one space for each two employees on the largest shift.

	Full-service vehicle washing	Four spaces, plus one space for each wash lane or drying area, plus queuing area for vehicles ahead of each lane. 

	Vacation rental	One space per bedroom.

	Veterinary clinics and hospitals	One space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus one space for each 800 sq. ft. of boarding area.

E. Structures Demolished and Replaced. When a structure (or a portion of a structure) is intentionally demolished, any new use or structure shall provide the number of parking spaces required by this chapter, except that if a designated unreinforced masonry building is demolished, the new structure or use shall be required to provide only the number of parking spaces that existed prior to the demolition.

F. Existing Unreinforced Masonry Structures and Structures Adjoining the Plaza. For unreinforced masonry structures designated by the city in compliance with Government Code 8875 et seq. and existing structures that face the plaza, additional parking shall not be required for a new use unless the new use results in one of the following:

1. An increase in the square footage of the structure; or

2. An off-street parking requirement that exceeds one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area.

Additional off-street parking shall only be required for the expansion in building area or as associated with the increased parking ratio, as applicable.

G. Additional Parking Spaces Not Required. An addition to a structure made solely for the purpose of increasing access for disabled persons shall not require the provision of additional parking spaces.

H. Compact Parking Spaces. A maximum of 30 percent of the required parking spaces for multifamily, commercial, and industrial uses may be compact spaces.

I. Multitenant Sites. A site with multiple tenants or activities shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required by this chapter for each separate use, except where shared parking may be allowed in compliance with SMC 19.48.050(B), Shared Use of Parking Facilities.

J. Uses Not Listed. Land uses not specifically listed by subsection (A) of this section shall provide parking as required by the applicable review authority. The requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall be used as a guide in determining the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided.

K. Rounding of Quantities. When calculating the number of parking spaces required, fractional spaces equal to or greater than one-half shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions less than one-half shall be eliminated.

L. Bench or Bleacher Seating. Where fixed seating is provided in the form of benches or bleachers, a seat shall be construed to be 20 inches of continuous bench space for the purpose of calculating the number of required parking spaces. (Ord. 01-2017 § 1 (Exh. B), 2017; Ord. 03-2014 § 3, 2014; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.050 Adjustments to parking requirements.

A. General Reduction of Requirements.

1. Modification of Standards. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements outlined in this chapter in compliance with SMC 19.54.050, Exceptions.

2. Second Uses. Parking requirements for a second use within a single building (e.g., a restaurant in a hotel or a shop within a sports facility) may be reduced by up to one-half the normal parking requirement upon the determination by the planning commission that a reduction is justified.

3. Mixed Uses. Parking requirements for commercial and residential mixed uses located in a commercial zone may be reduced upon determination by the planning commission that a reduction is justified. If required by the planning commission, a parking demand study, prepared by an independent licensed traffic engineer, shall be provided by the applicant which presents justification for the requested modification.

B. Shared Use of Parking Facilities. Where two or more adjacent nonresidential uses have distinct and differing peak parking usage periods (e.g., a theater and a bank), a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be approved by the planning commission; provided, that the most remote space is located within 300 feet of the use it is intended to serve. The amount of reduction may be up to the amount of spaces required for the least intensive of the uses sharing the parking. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient data, including a parking study if required by the planning commission, to indicate that there is no conflict in the peak parking demand for the uses proposing to make joint use of the parking facilities. The property owners involved in the joint use of parking facilities shall record an agreement, approved by the city attorney, with the county recorder. A copy of the agreement shall be filed with the city planner.

C. In-Lieu Parking Fee. A portion of all of the parking spaces required for a commercial use need not be provided by the use if an in-lieu fee is approved by the planning commission and contributed by the developer to a parking improvement trust fund. The amount of the fee and time of payment shall be established by resolution of the city council. As a result of participating in the support of a public parking facility, an owner or developer may receive a reduction in the total number of parking spaces required based on the number of spaces purchased in the public parking facility and subject to approval by the commission. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.060 Disabled/handicapped parking requirements.

Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled in the following manner:

A. Number of Spaces, Design Standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with Section 1129B of the Uniform Building Code;

B. Reservation of Spaces Required. Disabled access spaces required by this chapter shall be reserved by the property owner/tenant for use by the disabled throughout the life of the approved land use;

C. Upgrading of Markings Required. If amendments to state law change standards for the marking, striping, and signing of disabled parking spaces, disabled accessible spaces shall be upgraded in compliance with the new standards. Upgrading shall be completed by affected property owners within 60 days of being notified in writing by the city of new state standards. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.070 Development standards for parking facilities.

Parking facilities shall be provided in the following manner:

A. Access. Access to off-street parking areas shall be provided in the following manner:

1. Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles enter an abutting street or alley in a forward direction. The review authority may approve exceptions for single-family homes and duplexes, and for nonresidential uses where parking areas immediately adjoin a public alley. 

2. A minimum unobstructed clearance height of 14 feet shall be maintained above vehicle lanes and parking spaces.

B. Parking Space and Driveway Dimensions. Parking spaces and access driveways shall be dimensioned in compliance with current city standards on file with the city clerk and made a part hereof. Two-way traffic aisles shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.

C. Drainage.

1. Surface water from parking lots shall not drain over sidewalks or adjacent parcels.

2. Parking lots shall be designed in compliance with the storm water quality and quantity standards of the city’s best management practices.

D. Directional Arrows and Signs.

1. Parking spaces, driveways, circulation aisles, and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles. 

2. The city planner may require the installation of the traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility.

E. Location. Off-street parking areas shall be located as follows:

1. Required parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served, except that parking may be located on a parcel adjacent to, or within 300 feet of, the use served subject to approval of the commission and the recording of a covenant with the county recorder guaranteeing that the required parking will be maintained exclusively for the use served. The agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and a copy shall be filed with the planning division. 

2. Uncovered parking spaces shall be set back from any street a minimum distance of five feet. The setback area shall be fully landscaped.

3. Parking facilities shall be separated from buildings by either a raised walkway, landscape strip, or preferably a combination of both. Situations where parking aisles or spaces directly abut the building are prohibited.

4. Parking for multifamily uses shall be located within 200 feet of the units they are intended to serve.

5. Bicycle spaces shall be situated so that they do not obstruct the flow of pedestrians at entrances or sidewalks.

F. Striping and Identification. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be striped and marked according to the applicable state and federal standards.

G. Surfacing. Parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete, or other all-weather surfacing in compliance with city standards. Alternative surfaces may be allowed subject to the review and approval of the planning commission.

H. Wheel Stops/Curbing. In parking lots of more than 10 spaces, continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided for parking spaces located adjacent to fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas, and structures. Individual wheel stops or a continuous curb with periodic depressions to the level of the adjacent parking surface may be provided in lieu of continuous curbing when the parking is adjacent to a landscaped area, and the drainage is directed to the landscaped area. Wheel stops shall be placed to allow for two feet of vehicle overhang area within the dimension of the parking space. (Ord. 05-2015 § 7, 2015; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.080 Development guidelines for parking facilities.

The following guidelines shall be considered by the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable, in the review of discretionary planning applications involving the creation or modification of parking facilities:

A. Access to Adjacent Sites. Applicants for nonresidential developments are encouraged to provide shared vehicle and pedestrian access to adjacent nonresidential properties for convenience, safety, and efficient circulation. Where parking facilities on adjoining parcels provide mutual access, a reduction in the number of required parking spaces may be considered in compliance with SMC 19.48.050(B), Shared Use of Parking Facilities. A joint access agreement guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared access between the properties and running with the land shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties, as approved by the city planner.


[IMAGE]


B. Access for Pedestrians. New commercial or multifamily residential development, or any change of use or expansion of an existing commercial or multifamily development requiring the installation of additional parking, should provide pedestrian access as follows:

1. A minimum of one pedestrian walkway from the nearest public sidewalk through the parking lot to the commercial or residential use(s). Additional walkways should be considered on a case-by-case basis.

2. Walkways should be a minimum of four feet in width, designed to be clearly separate physically (e.g., raised sidewalk) or in appearance (e.g., enhanced paving) from parking or driveway areas, and located in a manner that provides convenient access between the public sidewalk and the use.

3. Pedestrian access should incorporate enhanced paving (e.g., special paving materials), trellis structures, and landscaping.

C. Circulation. Within parking lots, vehicular circulation should be provided for as follows:

1. Parking facilities should be designed with a clear and efficient hierarchy of circulation: major access drives with no parking; circulation drives with little or no parking; and parking aisles for direct access to parking spaces.

2. Parking layouts that necessitate a cul-de-sac or similar type of turning facility for reversing direction of travel in order to exit from the parking area are discouraged. Cul-de-sac, hammer heads, and similar direction-reversing facilities may be approved by the review authority when other alternatives are not feasible. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.090 Landscaping of parking facilities.

Landscaping of parking facilities shall be provided and maintained in compliance with the provisions of this section.

A. Amount of Landscaping Required. At a minimum, parking facilities shall provide landscaping in the amounts as set forth in Table 4-5.

 



 

Table 4-5 

Required Landscaping for Parking Facilities 

	Parking Facility Size	Percent of Facility to be Landscaped

	 

	1 – 6 spaces	7%

	7 or more spaces	12%

B. Landscape Materials. Landscaping materials shall be provided throughout the parking lot area using a combination of trees, shrubs and ground cover. Drought-tolerant landscape materials shall be emphasized, consistent with the city’s low-water use landscaping ordinance. Trees shall be provided throughout the parking area at a rate of one tree for every 10 parking spaces. All trees within the parking area shall be a minimum one-inch caliper size at the time of planting.

C. Curbing, Irrigation. Landscaped areas shall be bordered by a concrete curb at least six inches high and shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system. Alternative barrier designs may be approved by the city planner.

D. Bumper Overhang Areas. To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of two feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. Bumper overhang areas shall not encroach over the required width of a sidewalk.

E. Parking Lot Screening. Parking areas adjoining a public street should be designed to provide a five-foot wide landscaped planting strip between the street right-of-way and parking area. The landscaping should be designed and maintained to screen cars from view from the street to a height of 36 inches. Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earth berms, wood fences, masonry walls, raised planters, or other screening devices that meet the intent of this requirement. Plant materials, walls, or structures within a traffic safety sight area of a driveway shall not exceed 30 inches in height.

F. Parking Lots Adjacent to Residential Uses. Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining residential uses shall provide a landscaped buffer yard between the parking area and the common property line bordering the residential use. A solid masonry wall or wooden fence and landscaping shall be provided along the property line. Trees shall be provided at a rate of one for each 30 linear feet of landscaped area.

G. Larger Projects. Parking facilities with more than 50 spaces shall provide a concentration of landscape elements at primary entrances, including specimen trees, flowering plants, and enhanced paving. Additionally, larger parking facilities should be broken up into a series of small parking lots separated by landscaping and pedestrian walkways.

H. Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the on-site structure(s). All illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way in compliance with SMC 19.40.030, Exterior lighting. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.100 Driveways.

Driveways providing site access shall be from an improved street, alley, or other public and/or private right-of-way, and shall be designed, constructed, and maintained as follows:

A. Number of Driveways. Up to two driveways shall be allowed for each parcel two acres or more in size unless the city engineer determines that more than two driveways are required to accommodate traffic volumes on specific projects. Additional driveways shall not be allowed if it is determined to be detrimental to traffic flow on the adjacent street(s). Whenever a property has access to more than one street, access shall be generally limited to the lowest volume street, where the impact of a new access will be minimized, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

B. Distance from Street Corners. Driveways to parking areas, except single-family residential drives, shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from the nearest intersection, as measured from the centerline of the driveway to the centerline of the nearest travel lane of the intersecting street. For parcels with frontages less than 150 feet, the minimum distance shall be 100 feet unless a lesser distance is approved by the city engineer.

C. Driveway Spacing. Driveways shall be separated along the street frontage as follows:

1. Single-Family and Duplex Residential Development. Driveways shall be separated by at least six feet, unless a shared, single driveway is approved by the city engineer. The six-foot separation does not include the transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway; and

2. Multifamily and Nonresidential Development. Where two or more driveways serve the same or adjacent multifamily or nonresidential development, the centerlines of the driveways shall be separated by a minimum of 50 feet. Exceptions to this standard shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.

D. Clearance from Obstruction. The nearest edge of a driveway apron or curb return shall be at least five feet from the nearest property line, centerline of a fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic signal, light standards, or other similar facilities. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.110 Bicycle parking requirements.

New multifamily residential and commercial development, and any change of a commercial use within an existing structure requiring approval of a conditional use permit shall provide bicycle parking as follows:

A. The amount and location of bicycle parking shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the review authority;

B. Bicycle parking areas shall have all-weather protection unless otherwise approved by the review authority;

C. Each bicycle parking space shall include a stationary device to adequately secure and support the bicycle; and

D. Bicycle parking spaces shall be conveniently located and generally within proximity to the main entrance to the structure. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.48.120 Loading space requirements.

A. Number of Loading Spaces Required. Nonresidential uses shall provide off-street loading space(s) in compliance with Table 4-6 below. Requirements for uses not listed shall be determined by the city planner or the planning commission, as applicable, based upon the requirements for comparable uses.

B. Standards for Loading Areas. Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the following manner:

1. Dimensions. Loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length, with 14 feet of vertical clearance;

2. Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting sources shall be shielded to prevent light spill beyond the property line. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of adjacent structure(s);

3. Loading Ramps. Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions and overhead clearances;

4. Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows:

a. As near as possible to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, if feasible;

b. Situated to ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets to the greatest degree possible;

c. Situated to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way or other on-site traffic circulation areas;

d. Situated to ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site; and

e. Situated to avoid adverse impacts upon neighboring residential properties;

5. Screening. Loading areas shall be screened from abutting parcels and streets with dense landscaping or solid walls or fences with a minimum height of six feet; and

6. Striping. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for “loading only.” The striping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times.

 

Table 4-6 

Loading Requirements 

	Type of Land Use	Loading Spaces Required

	 

	Commercial and other allowed uses	One space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area

	Manufacturing, research and development, institutional, and service	One space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area

	Office uses and public uses	One space for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor area

	Multifamily residential uses	One space for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor area

(Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.50 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS

Sections:

19.50.010    Purpose and applicability.

19.50.020    Agricultural structures.

19.50.030    Bed and breakfast inns.

19.50.032    Cannabis activities.

19.50.033    Emergency shelters.

19.50.035    Formula businesses.

19.50.040    Home occupations.

19.50.050    Live/work units.

19.50.060    Outdoor dining, display, and sales standards.

19.50.070    Produce stands.

19.50.080    Residential accessory uses and structures.

19.50.090    Accessory dwelling units.

19.50.100    Service stations.

19.50.110    Vacation rentals.

19.50.120    Wine tasting facilities and wine bars.

19.50.130    Tap rooms.


19.50.010 Purpose and applicability.

A. Purpose. This chapter provides site planning and development standards for land uses that are allowed by SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements.

B. Applicability.

1. All Zoning Districts. Except as otherwise specified, the standards of this chapter apply to all zoning districts (e.g., residential, commercial, manufacturing, etc.), and therefore are combined in this chapter.

2. Considered in Combination. These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Division II, Community Design, and for each subarea in Division III, Project Design.

3. In Case of Conflict. Where there may be a conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards.

4. Compliance. All new or modified structures and uses shall comply with the standards of this chapter as determined applicable by the city planner, except as specified in Chapter 19.82 SMC, Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Parcels. (Ord. 03-2012 § 2(A), 2012; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.020 Agricultural structures.

This section provides requirements for the location and establishment of agricultural structures (e.g., barns, corrals, greenhouses, sheds, stables, etc.) which shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

A. Required Setbacks.

1. Minimum Setbacks. All agricultural structures shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any existing on-site dwelling, and 30 feet from any building line/site on an adjoining parcel.

2. Compliance. Animal enclosures shall also comply with the accessory structure setbacks identified in SMC 19.50.080, Residential accessory uses and structures, or side setbacks of 10 feet from interior property lines and 25 feet from a street-side property line, whichever are more restrictive.

B. Animal Keeping Standards. In addition to the requirements set forth in Chapter 8.08 SMC, the following standards shall apply to the keeping of animals within agricultural structures:

1. Minimum Parcel Size. Animals shall be maintained only on parcels with a minimum area of one acre;

2. Agricultural Structures with Openings. All agricultural structures with openings (e.g., doors, windows, etc.) shall:

a. Be located a minimum of 200 feet from the nearest church, dwelling used for human habitation (other than the residence of the owner of the animal), hospital, or school; and 

b. Be set back at least 30 feet from any public right-of-way, except an alley.

C. Additional Livestock Standards. In addition to the requirements set forth in Chapter 8.08 SMC, the following standards shall apply to the keeping of livestock:

1. Livestock Corrals. Livestock corrals, or any agricultural structures used for livestock, shall:

a. Not be located closer than 30 feet to:

i. The public right-of-way upon which the parcel faces, except an alley;

ii. A dwelling on the same parcel;

b. Not be located in a required front setback; and

c. Be enclosed by a fence of suitable and durable corral-type materials, at least four feet in height.

2. Poultry and Rabbits. Poultry and/or rabbits may be kept and maintained in any residential zoning district, but only in compliance with the following provisions. Poultry and/or rabbits shall be kept:

a. To the rear of all front setbacks;

b. At least 20 feet back from any public right-of-way, except an alley; and

c. A minimum distance of five feet from all side and rear property lines, unless there is a solid fence or solid side of a structure (without openings), with a minimum height of five feet, between the poultry and/or rabbits and the adjoining property.

D. Residential Character and Scale. New agricultural structures, or additions to existing structures, shall maintain the established residential character and scale of existing on-site structures.

E. Processing Agricultural Products. Facilities that process agricultural products from the same site, or within a contiguous agricultural area, shall be located to provide convenient truck access with a minimum of interference to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

F. Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for all structures larger than 120 square feet.

G. Sale of Agricultural Products.

1. Permanent Structures. Permanent structures shall not be constructed, erected, or permanently maintained primarily for the sale of agricultural products; and

2. Temporary Structures. A temporary structure may be erected with temporary use permit approval, in compliance with SMC 19.54.030, and the standards identified in SMC 19.50.070, Produce stands.

H. Pre-Existing Uses. Any legally established noncommercial and nonconforming agricultural structure(s) that became nonconforming upon adoption of this development code shall be allowed to continue subject to the provisions of SMC 19.82.020, Restrictions on nonconforming uses and structures. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.030 Bed and breakfast inns.

This section provides requirements for the establishment and operation of bed and breakfast inns.

A. Permit and Operational Requirements. The approval and operation of a bed and breakfast inn shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Conditional Use Permit Required. The establishment and operation of a bed and breakfast inn shall require the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040;

2. Business License Required. A business license is required for the establishment and operation of a bed and breakfast inn;

3. Maximum Number of Rooms. Bed and breakfast inns shall be limited to five rental guest rooms plus accommodations for the manager/owner;

4. On-Site Management. An on-site manager shall maintain residence on the subject site;

5. Maximum Length of Stay. Visitor occupancy shall be limited to a maximum of 29 consecutive days;

6. Provision of Meals.

a. Limitations. Food service shall be limited to breakfast served to registered overnight guests only;

b. Guestroom Cooking Facilities Prohibited. Cooking facilities in individual rental guestrooms are prohibited;

7. Other Uses. Amplified music, lawn parties, outdoor weddings, or similar activities shall not occur on site unless specifically allowed by the required conditional use permit;

8. Fence Requirements. Where the site of a proposed bed and breakfast inn adjoins a residential zoning district, a six-foot high solid decorative fence of masonry and wood or solid masonry shall be erected and permanently maintained along the side and rear property lines;

9. Signs. Signs shall identify the establishment as an inn and not as a hotel, lodge, motel, or similar use. Signs shall be limited to two square feet, shall be subject to the approval of the city’s design review and historic preservation commission, and shall comply with the applicable standards of SMC Title 18, Signs and Display Advertising;

10. Waste Collection and Disposal. Waste collection areas shall be clearly designated on the proposed site plan. Areas shall be clearly accessible for pickup and shall be screened from view with solid walls and landscape materials. Waste disposal pickup bins (dumpsters) shall not occupy any required parking space(s) or intrude into required access drives;

11. Lighting Restrictions. Low-intensity safety and security lighting for parking areas and structures shall be required as a security and safety measure, shall not reflect on adjoining properties, and shall be confined to ground lighting wherever possible;

12. County Approvals Required. Applicants for bed and breakfast inns shall receive written approval of the county public health department and sanitation district before the business becomes operational.

B. Neighborhood Concentration. In the review of a use permit application for a bed and breakfast inn, the planning commission shall consider the following guidelines:

1. Bed and breakfast inns on contiguous lots are discouraged.

2. A concentration of bed and breakfast inns that would damage the residential character of a neighborhood is discouraged.

C. Design and Character Compatibility.

1. Unique Residential Structures. Bed and breakfast inns are limited to the adaptive conversion and reuse of, or reproductions of, architecturally or historically unique residential structures, which are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

2. Residential Character and Scale. New structures, or additions to existing structures, shall maintain the established residential character and scale, consistent with other on-site structures and the surrounding neighborhood. 

3. Accessory Structures Not for Guests. Accessory structures shall not be used for rental guest rooms.

4. Increase in Guest Rooms Prohibited. Additions to existing structures which would increase the number of rental guest rooms shall not be allowed except through conditional use permit review (see SMC 19.54.040). (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.032 Cannabis activities.

This section sets forth requirements for the establishment and operation of uses involving cannabis in zoning districts where they are allowed pursuant to SMC 19.10.050 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements). 

A. Personal, Indoor Cultivation. The indoor cultivation of medicinal and/or nonmedicinal cannabis shall only be permitted on a parcel with an approved private residence and shall only be conducted within a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a residence. Such cultivation shall be in conformance with the following minimum standards:

1. The primary use of the parcel shall be for a residence. Cannabis cultivation is prohibited as a home occupation.

2. All areas used for cultivation of cannabis shall comply with SMC Title 14 (Buildings and Construction), as well as applicable law, specifically including that the residence have: (a) a permanent connection to a public water source drawing water; and (b) a connection to a public sewer system, and there not exist: (a) unlawful or unpermitted surface drawing of water for such cultivation; and/or (b) illegal discharges of water from the parcel.

3. Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 1,000 watts per luminaire, and shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes). Lights shall be fully shielded, including adequate coverings on windows, to confine light and glare to the interior of the structure.

4. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators for cultivation of cannabis is prohibited.

5. Any fully enclosed and secure structure or residence used for the cultivation of cannabis must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that complies with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes).

6. A fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of cannabis shall be located in the rear yard area of the parcel and must maintain a minimum 10-foot setback from any parcel line and comply with all other applicable provisions of this title. The yard where the fully enclosed and secure structure is maintained must be enclosed by a solid fence at least six feet in height. A fully enclosed and secure structure shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes). 

7. Adequate mechanical locking or electronic security systems must be installed as part of the fully enclosed and secure structure or the residence prior to the commencement of cultivation.

8. Cannabis cultivation shall be limited to six cannabis plants per private residence, and as consistent with state law for qualified patients and caregivers, regardless of how many individuals reside at the private residence. 

9. Medical cannabis shall only be cultivated by:

a. A qualified patient exclusively for his or her own personal medical use but who does not provide, donate, sell, or distribute medical cannabis to any other person and who can provide a written doctor’s recommendation to the city; or

b. A primary caregiver who cultivates, possesses, stores, manufactures, transports, donates, or provides medical cannabis exclusively for the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does not receive remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full compliance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.765(c).

10. Nonmedical Cannabis Cultivation. For persons other than qualified patients or primary caregivers, all personal cultivation shall be conducted by persons 21 years of age or older. 

11. The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. These rooms shall not be used for cannabis cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping and bathing.

12. Indoor cultivation of cannabis shall only take place on impervious surfaces and shall be limited to a single location within the residence or the fully enclosed and secure structure.

13. From the ground level of a street, public right-of-way or adjoining parcel, there shall be no visible evidence whatsoever of cannabis cultivation occurring anywhere on the parcel.

14. Cannabis cultivation areas, whether in a fully enclosed and secure structure or inside a residence, shall not be accessible to persons under 21 years of age (unless the person is a qualified patient or primary caregiver, in which case access is permissible by these persons but the cannabis can only be used for medicinal purposes).

15. Indoor cultivation may only be conducted by a full-time resident responsible for the cultivation. Written consent of the property owner to cultivate cannabis within the residence or in a fully enclosed and secure structure shall be obtained and shall be kept on the premises, and available for inspection by the building official or his/her designee. If there is more than one owner of the residence, all owners must have acknowledged, consented to and granted permission to the authorized grower for the cultivation. The written consent shall be dated and signed by the owner or owners of the residence. The written consent shall be valid for 12 months from the signing of the written consent. If ownership of the residence changes during the 12-month period after the previous owner or owners had granted permission for the cultivation, the authorized grower must obtain, within 30 days of the change of ownership, a new permission statement from the new owner or owners of the residence. Upon request, the authorized grower shall provide the written consent from the owner or owners of the residence as proof that the owner or owners have acknowledged, consented to and granted permission to the authorized grower.

16. If cultivation occurs in a fully enclosed and secure structure, a portable fire extinguisher, that complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and applicable law, shall be kept in the fully enclosed and secure structure. If cultivation occurs in a residence, the portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the same room as where the cultivation occurs.

17. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators to power any cultivation equipment is prohibited, except as an emergency back-up system. The use of extension cords in the cultivation room is likewise prohibited.

18. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting personal cultivation of cannabis by tenants.

19. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize commercial cultivation of cannabis.

20. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize any public or private nuisance as specified in this code. 

21. The area of cultivation shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the occupants of the private residence or the parcel or any other property by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, mold, or other impacts, and shall not be maintained as to constitute a hazard due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.

22. The cannabis plants shall be in a locked space so to prevent access by children, visitors, casual passersby, vandals, or anyone not authorized to possess cannabis.

23. The following regulations apply to the disposal of cannabis waste on residential property:

a. Cannabis and cannabis infused products must be disposed in a secure waste receptacle located on the residential property.

b. Cannabis plants and products must be rendered unusable and unrecognizable by grinding and incorporating cannabis waste with any nonconsumable solid waste with a resulting mixture of at least 50 percent noncannabis waste.

24. Cannabis cultivation except as conducted in full compliance with this section is strictly prohibited indoors.

B. Personal, Outdoor Cultivation. The outdoor cultivation of medicinal and/or nonmedicinal cannabis is prohibited except when conducted in conformance with the following minimum standards:

1. A maximum of three plants on no more than 50 square feet in total per parcel with a private residence is allowed for outdoor cultivation of cannabis for personal use. The maximum number of plants and square footage established under this section shall be the maximum allowable under this code regardless of the number of persons, qualified patients, and primary caregivers residing at the property. It is the desire of the city that any cultivation that may be necessary for medicinal uses in excess of the limits in this subsection shall be conducted indoors in all cases. Accordingly, at no time may there be more than three plants cultivated outdoors on any parcel. For the purposes of this section, the area used to cultivate cannabis shall be measured by the aggregate area of vegetative growth of live cannabis plants on the premises.

2. Outdoor cultivation may only be conducted by a full-time resident responsible for the cultivation. Written consent of the property owner to cultivate cannabis outdoors shall be obtained and shall be kept on the premises, and available for inspection by the building official or his/her designee. If there is more than one owner of the residence, all owners must have acknowledged, consented to and granted permission to the authorized grower for the cultivation. The written consent shall be dated and signed by the owner or owners of the residence. The written consent shall be valid for 12 months from the signing of the written consent. If ownership of the residence changes during the 12-month period after the previous owner or owners had granted permission for the cultivation, the authorized grower must obtain, within 30 days of the change of ownership, a new permission statement from the new owner or owners of the residence. Upon request, the authorized grower shall provide the written consent from the owner or owners of the residence as proof that the owner or owners have acknowledged, consented to and granted permission to the authorized grower. All outdoor cultivation of cannabis may only occur on a parcel on which the private residence of the authorized grower is located. The authorized grower may only cultivate cannabis on one parcel. 

3. Outdoor cultivation shall not occur in the front or side yards. All outdoor cultivation shall occur in the rear yard and be set back by a minimum of 10 feet from all parcel property lines.

4. All outdoor cultivation shall not be closer to an existing private residence on an adjoining parcel than to the private residence of the authorized grower on the parcel whereon the outdoor cultivation site is located. 

5. All outdoor cultivation shall be screened with a solid fence from all public rights-of-way, private access easements, and exterior property lines of the parcel where the outdoor cultivation takes place to prevent any evidence of cultivation being visible at ground level from any adjoining properties, streets, public rights-of-way, school properties, or easements. 

6. The parcel where the outdoor cannabis is cultivated shall not be located within 600 feet of any school, church, park, library, fairgrounds, child care center, youth-oriented facility or the boundary of any incorporated city. Such distance shall be measured in a straight line from the fence or other enclosure to the nearest boundary line of the premises upon which the school, church, park, child care center, or youth-oriented facility is located. For the purposes of this article, a youth-oriented facility is any facility used for and predominantly occupied by individuals under 18 years of age, including, but not limited to, a boys or girls club, an indoor or outdoor soccer field, a little league baseball field, an amusement park, and a community swimming facility. 

7. Exterior lighting systems shall be provided for security purposes in a manner sufficient to provide illumination and clear visibility to all outdoor areas of the premises, including all points of ingress and egress. Exterior lighting shall be stationary, fully shielded, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood. All exterior lighting shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes).

8. The area for the outdoor cultivation of cannabis shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the occupants of the parcel or any other property by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, mold, or other impacts, and shall not be maintained so as to constitute a hazard due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes. 

9. All outdoor cultivation must be in accordance with applicable state and local regulations. Any accessory structures in which outdoor cultivation occurs shall fully comply with all permit requirements and other applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes).

10. It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this code for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city of Sonoma to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the outdoor cultivation of cannabis, unless the person is authorized by state law to grow cannabis, and such authorized grower is in compliance with all requirements of this section.

11. A public nuisance may also be deemed to exist, if such activity produces: (a) odors which are disturbing to people of normal sensitivity residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public; (b) repeated responses to the parcel or residence from enforcement officers; (c) a repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the immediate neighborhood; (d) excessive noise which is disturbing to people of normal sensitivity on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public; or (e) any other impacts on the neighborhood which are disruptive of normal activity in the area.

12. Outdoor cultivation shall not occur on parcels with multifamily dwellings or in mobile home parks.

C. Commercial Cannabis Activities. All commercial cannabis activities are prohibited throughout the city with the exception of cannabis delivery services operating at all times in conformance with the following requirements:

1. State-licensed and locally permitted retail cannabis delivery businesses located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city may personally deliver medicinal cannabis and medicinal cannabis products to qualified patients and/or primary caregivers within the city, provided that such deliveries are in strict compliance with state laws and the businesses have obtained a city business license and paid the requisite city business license tax.

2. Vehicles used in the delivery process must be unmarked without any designation or logo that identifies the vehicle as a cannabis delivery vehicle.

3. Cannabis and cannabis products deliveries within the city may not occur between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 08-2018 § 1, 2018; Ord. 05-2018 § 2, 2018).


19.50.033 Emergency shelters.

This section provides development and operational requirements for emergency shelters, as defined in Division VIII, Chapter 19.92 SMC (Definitions).

A. Site Development Standards. In addition to any other applicable requirements of the development code and any other applicable statutes and regulations, all emergency shelter facilities shall be subject to the following development standards:

1. Client Intake and Waiting Area. Each emergency shelter facility shall provide an indoor client intake and waiting area.

2. Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided throughout the facility to ensure the safety of all persons on site. The placement, illumination, and shielding of such lighting shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the municipal code.

3. Proximity to Other Emergency Shelters. No emergency shelter facility shall be less than 300 feet from any other emergency shelter facility. In determining the distance between two emergency shelter facilities, the distance shall be measured from the property line of one facility to the nearest property line of another facility.

B. Permitted Amenities and Services. A proposed emergency shelter facility offering immediate and short-term housing may provide on-site supplemental services and amenities to the homeless individuals and families staying at such facility. These on-site services and amenities may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Recreation Area. An indoor and/or outdoor recreation area may be provided.

2. Counseling Center. A counseling center for job placement, education, health care, legal or mental services, or similar services intended to assist homeless clients may be provided.

3. Laundry Facilities. Laundry facilities, located within an enclosed structure may be provided.

4. Kitchen and Dining Hall. A kitchen for the preparation of meals serving on-site clients and a dining hall may be provided.

5. Client Storage. A client storage area for the personal belongs of the on-site clients may be provided.

C. Operational Standards. All emergency shelter facilities shall be subject to the following operational standards:

1. Maximum Stay. The maximum stay of any individual shall not exceed 120 days in a 365-day period.

2. Availability of Beds. Stays at an emergency shelter facility shall be on a first-come, first-served basis with clients housed on site. Clients shall have no guaranteed bed for the next night.

3. Hours of Operation. Clients may only be permitted on site and admitted to the emergency shelter facility between 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. All clients shall vacate the emergency shelter facility no later than 9:00 a.m.

4. Minimum Staffing Requirements. A minimum of one employee for each 15 beds within an emergency shelter facility shall remain awake and on duty during the emergency shelter facility’s hours of operation.

5. Counseling Referrals and Reporting. Any counseling programs are to be provided with referrals to outside assistance agencies.

D. Safety, Security, and Operational Plan. A safety, security and operational plan shall be submitted to the police chief for review and approval, prior to initial occupancy of an emergency shelter facility. The site-specific safety, security and operational plan shall address all of the following:

1. Facility Management. The provisions necessary to manage the ongoing emergency shelter facility’s needs, both on and off site, including, but not limited to, the separation of individual male and female sleeping areas, provisions of family sleeping areas, and the various services and functions of such facility shall be provided.

2. Client Congregation. The specific measures used by the emergency shelter facility to discourage clients from congregating off site and/or disturbing nearby uses during the hours when clients are not allowed on site at the emergency shelter facility.

3. Admittance and Discharge. Procedures for the daily management of admittance and discharge shall be provided.

4. Refuse Collection. The refuse collections schedule to provide the timely removal of associated client litter and debris on and within the vicinity of the emergency shelter facility shall be provided.

5. Alcohol and Drug Regulation. The provisions for addressing how the operator will ensure that the emergency shelter facility remains alcohol and illegal drug free at all times.

6. Contact Information. The operator shall provide the city with the most current contact information for the operator of the facility during the normal daytime business hours, and the nighttime contact information for the “person on duty” when the emergency shelter is receiving and housing clients. The appropriate email addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers shall be provided.

The safety, security and operational plan shall include a site plan and a floor plan of the emergency shelter facility. The safety, security and operational plan approved by the police chief shall remain in effect for the entire life of the emergency shelter facility, unless an amended plan is prepared by the operator and approved by the police chief. (Ord. 02-2014 § 3 (Exh. B), 2014).


19.50.035 Formula businesses.

A. Historic District. The establishment or expansion of a formula business within the historic district shall require the approval of a use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040. 

B. Formula Business, Large. The establishment or expansion of a formula business, large shall require the approval of a use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040.

C. Additional Use Permit Findings Required. When use permit review is required, the planning commission shall approve, with or without conditions, the establishment or expansion of a formula business only if all of the following findings can be made, in addition to those identified in SMC 19.54.040, Use permits:

1. The formula business establishment will promote diversity and variety to assure a balanced mix of commercial uses available to serve both resident and visitor populations;

2. The proposed use, together with its design and improvements, is consistent with the unique and historic character of Sonoma, and will preserve the distinctive visual appearance and shopping/dining experience of Sonoma for its residents and visitors.

The following additional finding is required for the granting of a use permit for formula businesses on sites located within the /P (plaza retail) district:

3. The formula business establishment will be compatible with existing uses in the zone and will promote the zone’s economic vitality as the commercial, cultural, and civic center of the community.

D. Prohibition on Formula Restaurants, Large. Formula restaurants, large are prohibited within the plaza retail overlay zone.

E. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to formula businesses located or proposed to be located in the following shopping centers: (1) Sonoma Valley Center; (2) the Marketplace; (3) Maxwell Village; and (4) Fifth Street West Plaza. (Ord. 03-2012 § 2(B), 2012).


19.50.040 Home occupations.

A. Home Occupation Defined. A home occupation is a limited activity customarily conducted entirely within an enclosed residential dwelling unit or accessory structure and conducted only by its residents.

B. Basic Operating Standards. All home occupations shall comply with the following operating standards:

1. Main Residence. The location of the business shall be the main residence of the person(s) conducting the business and shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes;

2. Outdoor Storage Prohibited. Storage shall not occur out-of-doors, within a carport, or within an accessory structure;

3. Exterior Appearance.

a. There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation activity from the adjoining public rights-of-way or from surrounding properties; or 

b. The home occupation shall not be an impairment to the residential appearance of the facility within which the home occupation is conducted;

4. Alterations Prohibited. The home occupation shall not require any alteration(s) or modification(s) to the dwelling incompatible with residential use or that would change its occupancy classification in compliance with the city’s adopted Uniform Building Code;

5. Displays or Signs Prohibited. The home occupation shall not display window or advertising sign(s), merchandise, products, or stock in trade, or other identification of the home occupation on the premises. One name plate, not exceeding one square foot in total area, may be allowed by the city planner;

6. Equipment. Mechanical or electrical equipment shall not be installed or maintained other than that which is compatible with domestic residential use;

7. Articles Offered for Sale. Articles offered for sale shall be limited to those produced on the premises;

8. Only One Vehicle. Only one vehicle, with a capacity not exceeding one ton, may be used by the occupant directly or indirectly in connection with a home occupation;

9. Fire Safety. Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises;

10. Nuisances. The home occupation shall not cause or create offensive or objectionable levels of hazards or nuisances (e.g., cold, dirt, dust, electrical interference, fumes, heat, humidity, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke, solid waste, toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, etc.), in excess of that customarily associated with similar residential uses;

11. Traffic Generation. The home occupation shall not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic substantially greater than that normally associated with residential uses in the surrounding area;

12. Allowable Deliveries. The home occupation may receive up to two deliveries each day;

13. Maximum Hours of Operation. The home occupation shall not be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (except for child day care facilities).

C. Home Occupation Permit Required. Home occupations shall be allowed only through an administrative permit or a conditional use permit, as set forth in subsections (D) and (F) of this section.

D. Administrative Occupation Permit Procedures.

1. Application Review. Upon receipt of a complete administrative home occupation permit application, the city planner shall review the proposed home occupation for compliance with all applicable requirements of this section.

2. City Planner Action. The city planner shall take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the administrative home occupation permit.

3. Public Notice Not Required. A public notice or hearing shall not be required for the issuance of an administrative home occupation permit unless the city planner determines that the proposed home occupation is of a type or intensity that requires review by the planning commission. In those cases the permit shall be reviewed in compliance with subsection (F) of this section.

E. Limitations on Administrative Home Occupations. In addition to the basic requirements set forth in subsection (B) of this section, home occupations approved through an administrative permit shall be subject to the following limitations:

1. Location. Conduct of the home occupation shall be confined completely to the residential dwelling unit, and not within an accessory structure(s). A home occupation shall not impair the use of a garage in terms of providing required parking.

2. Maximum Allowable Floor Area. A home occupation shall not be allowed which requires more than one room or 20 percent of the gross floor area of the main floor.

3. Access. Access to the space devoted to a home occupation shall only be from within the main residential dwelling unit.

4. Employees Prohibited. A person(s) other than a resident of the residential dwelling unit shall not be employed in the conduct of the home occupation.

5. Allowable On-Site Visits. The home occupation may allow only one client, patient, or pupil to be present at any one time (except for child day care facilities).

F. Home Occupations Requiring a Conditional Use Permit. The following list identifies land use activities that may be allowable subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, in compliance with SMC 19.54.050, Use permits: 

1. Use of an accessory structure;

2. Use requiring more than more than one room or 20 percent of the gross floor area of the main floor;

3. Uses which entail food handling, processing, or packing;

4. Teaching of organized classes with more than six persons at a time;

5. Specified additional uses: direct product distribution, pet grooming, or any other use or occupation which the city planner determines is similar in nature to the previously listed uses;

6. Having more than one home occupation in a dwelling unit; and

7. Having an employee on-site who is not a resident.

G. Terms of the Home Occupation Permit.

1. Permit Nontransferable. A home occupation permit shall only be in effect as long as the approved business is operated by the original resident applicant at the address of the property appearing on the application.

2. Change(s) Requires New Permit. Any change in ownership or tenancy from that appearing on the approved application shall result in the home occupation permit being deemed void.

H. Business License Required. A business license is required for the establishment and operation of a home occupation.

I. Prohibited Home Occupations.

1. Criteria. A home occupation is prohibited if it would result in any of the following conditions:

a. Not comply with the standards and criteria identified in subsection (B) of this section, Basic Operating Standards;

b. Be inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

c. Threaten the health and safety of the citizens of the city;

d. Represent a use that would clearly conflict with the normal residential quality of the surrounding neighborhood.

2. Examples of Prohibited Home Occupation Uses. The following are examples of nonresi-dential uses that are not incidental to or compatible with residential activities, and are therefore prohibited as home occupations:

a. Adult businesses;

b. Animal hospitals or the boarding, caring, harboring, raising, training, or treatment of animals or birds for profit;

c. Dance or night clubs and music venues;

d. Maintenance and storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories for the construction and service trades;

e. Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories (not including chiropractors and counselors/psychotherapists);

f. Mini self-storage;

g. Vehicle repair or storage (body or mechanical, including boats and recreational vehicles), upholstery, automobile detailing and painting and the display and sale of any vehicle(s);

h. Welding and machining; and

i. Other uses determined by the city planner not to be incidental to or compatible with residential activities. (Ord. 02-2012 § 3, 2012; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.050 Live/work units.

A. Live/Work Defined. A live/work unit is defined as an area comprised of one or more rooms with cooking space and sanitary facilities in conformance with building code requirements and adequate working space available for and regularly used by persons residing therein. A live/work development is defined as one or more such units sharing a property or a building.

B. Conditional Use Permit Required. The establishment and operation of a live/work development shall require the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040. 

C. Business License Required. A business license is required for each business conducted within a live/work development.

D. Residential Density Limitations Not Applicable. The residential density limitations of the General Plan and this development code are not applicable to live/work developments due to their commercial nature. The number of live/work units allowed within a live/work development shall be subject to the discretion of the planning commission.

E. Design and Operating Standards. Live/work developments shall comply with the following standards:

1. Minimum and Average Size. The minimum size of a live/work unit shall be 700 square feet and the average unit size within a live/work development shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.

2. Work and Residential Areas. The area within a live/work unit devoted to residential use (including sleeping area, kitchen, bathroom, and closet space) shall not exceed 70 percent of the area of the unit. A minimum work area of 300 square feet is required within a live/work unit.

3. Access. Each live/work unit shall have a clearly identified, separate access from other live/work units within the building.

4. Limitation on Outside Employees. No more than one person other than residents of the live/work unit shall be employed in the conduct of the work, except that additional employees may be allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040.

5. Limitations on Displays and Signs. A live/work development shall not display window or advertising sign(s), merchandise, products, or stock in trade. One directory or building identification sign may be allowed subject to the review and approval of the design review and historic preservation commission.

6. Parking. Parking shall be provided as required in Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

7. Open Space. For each live/work unit, a minimum of 250 square feet of open space shall be provided in any combination of public and private space approved by the planning commission.

8. Appropriate Uses. Live/work units are appropriate for an individual or a household with at least one individual employed as an accountant, architect, artist, artisan, attorney (or similar professional), consultant, counselor, designer, editor, financial planner, therapist, and other uses of a similar intensity.

9. Limitations on Outdoor Uses. Except for parking areas, only activities related to the residential component of a live/work development are allowed outside of the confines of the building.

F. Prohibited Uses.

1. Criteria. No use shall be allowed within a live/work development if it would:

a. Not comply with the standards and criteria identified in subsection (E) of this section, Design and Operating Standards;

b. Be inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

c. Threaten the health and safety of residents of the development or the citizens of the city; or 

d. Represent a use that would clearly conflict with other live/work activities or the character of the surrounding neighborhood.

2. Examples of Prohibited Uses. The following are examples of uses that are not compatible with residential activities, and are therefore prohibited within live/work developments:

a. Adult businesses;

b. Animal hospitals;

c. Classroom instruction;

d. Dance or night clubs and music venues;

e. Day care (except to serve residents of the live/work development);

f. Maintenance and storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories for the construction and service trades;

g. Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories (not including chiropractors and counselors/psychotherapists);

h. Vacation rentals;

i. Other uses determined by the city planner to be incompatible with residential activities. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 02-2012 § 4, 2012; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.060 Outdoor dining, display, and sales standards.

This section provides development and operational requirements for the establishment of outdoor uses, including temporary outdoor displays and sales (subsection (A) of this section), permanent outdoor displays and sales (subsection (B) of this section), and outdoor dining and seating areas (subsection (C) of this section), which shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

A. Temporary Outdoor Displays and Sales. Temporary outdoor displays and sales may be allowed subject to the approval of a temporary use permit, in compliance with SMC 19.54.030 and the following standards. In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the city planner may impose conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the permit would be in compliance with the findings required by SMC 19.54.030(H), Findings, Decision. These conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use, and may include the following:

1. Fixed Period of Time. Provision for a fixed period of time as specified by the permit, or where not specified, not to exceed 10 consecutive days;

2. Landscaping. Landscaping may be required to ensure that the use has a pleasing appearance and that the screening requirements identified in subsection (B)(5) of this section are satisfied, subject to the approval of the city planner;

3. Nuisance Factors. Regulation of nuisance factors including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjoining parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, waste, and vibration;

4. Operating Hours. Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use, as identified in subsection (A)(1) of this section;

5. Parking. Provision for adequate temporary parking facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including vehicular ingress and egress and public transportation, if applicable, in compliance with Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards;

6. Performance Bond. Submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, satisfactory to the city planner, may be required to ensure that any temporary facilities would be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the activity, the property would be cleaned of debris, or other evidence of the activity, and the site restored to its former condition;

7. Sanitary and Medical Facilities. Provision for sanitary and medical facilities, as appropriate;

8. Security. Provision for security and safety measures, if applicable;

9. Setbacks. Provision of appropriate setbacks to ensure separation from adjoining land uses and a safe environment for pedestrians and vehicles, subject to the approval of the city planner; a minimum clearance of four feet shall be required;

10. Signs. Regulation of signs, in compliance with SMC Title 18, Signs and Display Advertising;

11. Temporary Structures. Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

12. Waste Collection and Disposal. Provision for solid, hazardous, and toxic waste collection, recycling and/or disposal; 

13. Development Code Compliance. A requirement that the approval of the requested temporary use permit is contingent upon a finding, by the city planner, that the activity would be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this section, the development code, and successful approval of all required permits from another department(s) or governing agency; and

14. Other Conditions. Other conditions that would ensure the operation of the proposed temporary activity in an orderly and efficient manner.

B. Permanent Outdoor Displays and Sales. The permanent outdoor display/sale of merchandise may be allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with SMC 19.54.040, and shall comply with the following standards and guidelines:

1. Height of Displayed Materials. The outdoor display/sale of merchandise shall not exceed a height of seven feet above finished grade.

2. Location. Outdoor display/sale area(s) shall be located entirely on private property. They shall not encroach into required setbacks. In zoning districts where no setback is required, the outdoor area(s) shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from adjoining property line(s) unless otherwise allowed through the approval of a conditional use permit, in compliance with SMC 19.54.040.

3. Location of Merchandise. Displayed merchandise shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved, and defined location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, parking spaces, or pedestrian walkways. Displays shall not obstruct traffic safety sight areas or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

4. Relationship to Main Use. The outdoor display/sales area(s) shall be directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the subject parcel.

5. Screening Required. Outdoor display/sales area(s) shall be screened from adjoining public rights-of-way by decorative walls, fences, and/or landscaping in compliance with SMC 19.40.100, Screening and buffering. Screening shall be provided to a height of one foot above the approved height of the merchandise and materials being displayed.

6. Signs. Additional signs, beyond those normally allowed for the subject use, shall not be provided as a result of the outdoor display/sales area(s).

C. Outdoor Dining and Seating Areas. Outdoor dining and seating area(s) shall be allowed in conjunction with legally established restaurants and other food service uses, in compliance with the following standards:

1. Limitation on Seating. The number of seats in the outdoor dining and seating area(s) shall not exceed 25 percent of the amount of approved indoor seats; otherwise, a conditional use permit shall be required.

2. Alcoholic Beverage Sales. Areas in which alcoholic beverages would be served shall comply with the standards established by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and the following standards. The dining and seating area(s) shall be:

a. Accessible from inside the restaurant only, unless the city planner waives or modifies this requirement in circumstances where this is not feasible or practical;

b. Clearly and physically defined. The area shall be clearly a part of the restaurant it serves; and

c. Supervised by a restaurant employee to ensure compliance with laws regarding on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages.

3. Parking Requirements. Outdoor dining and seating area(s) shall be calculated in compliance with Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

4. Clean-Up. Outdoor dining area(s), whether part of a restaurant or seating in common, shall be cleaned on a continual basis for removal of litter and food items that constitute a nuisance to public health and safety.

5. Design Compatibility. To ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and a high standard of design quality, the following standards shall be implemented:

a. Associated structural elements, awnings, covers, furniture, umbrellas, or other physical elements that are visible from the public rights-of-way, shall be compatible with the overall design of the main structure(s);

b. Awnings, plants, umbrellas, and other human scale elements shall be provided as necessary to enhance the pedestrian experience;

c. The relation of the outdoor seating area to churches, hospitals, public schools, and residential uses shall be considered by the city planner. Proper mitigation measures shall be applied to eliminate potential impacts related to glare, light, loitering, and noise;

d. Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow shall not be obstructed, nor shall existing pedestrian or vehicular movement areas be removed;

e. A minimum setback of five feet from adjoining property lines or parking lots shall be provided.

6. Sidewalk Seating Permit. A sidewalk seating permit shall be required pursuant to Chapter 12.06 SMC, for any new outdoor seating on a public right-of-way that is not subject to use permit review. (Ord. 01-2011 § 3, 2011; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.070 Produce stands.

This section provides requirements for the establishment and operation of produce stands in zoning districts where they are allowed by SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements. 

A. Accessory Use.

1. Agricultural Production On-Site. A produce stand shall be allowed only as an accessory use to an agricultural production use on the same or immediately adjoining parcel.

2. Area Devoted to Agriculture. At least 50 percent of the area of the parcel shall be devoted to agricultural production. 

3. Operator of the Stand. The operator of the produce stand shall be the owner or lessee of the land where the agricultural production occurs.

B. Laws and Regulations. Produce stand operations (including related agricultural operations) shall be subject to the laws and regulations administered by other city departments, the county public health department, the county agricultural commissioner’s office, as well as the requirements of other applicable agencies. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.080 Residential accessory uses and structures.

This section provides standards for accessory uses and structures allowed in the zoning district applicable to a parcel (see SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements). Accessory uses include any use that is customarily related to a residence, including carports, garages, greenhouses, storage sheds, studios, above ground swimming pools/spas, and workshops.

A. Relationship of Accessory Use to the Main Use. Accessory uses and structures shall be incidental to and not alter the residential character or scale of the parcel.
[IMAGE]


B. Attached Accessory Structures.

1. Structurally Part of the Main Structure. An accessory structure that is attached to a main structure shall be compatible with, and made structurally a part of the main structure (e.g., share a common wall with the main structure, rely partially on the main structure for structural support, or be attached to the main structure at a minimum of four points within 20 feet).

2. Compliance. An attached accessory structure shall comply with the requirements of this development code applicable to the main structure, including heights, setbacks, and site coverage.

3. Compatibility. Construction and the use of materials and colors shall be compatible with the main structure whenever feasible.

C. Detached Accessory Structures.

1. Minimum Separation. Detached accessory structures shall be separated from the main structure by a yard, open to the sky, having a minimum width of six feet.

2. Side and Rear Setbacks.

a. Detached accessory structures not exceeding nine feet in height, measured at the exterior wall line, 13 feet in height within 10 feet of any property line, and 15 feet at the highest point of the roof shall not be placed closer than five feet to a side or rear property line.

b. Detached accessory structures with an area of up to 120 square feet, and an overall height not exceeding eight feet, may be placed adjacent to a side or rear property line.

3. Prohibited in Specified Setbacks. Detached accessory structures are prohibited in required front and street-side setbacks, and in designated creek setback areas except as may be provided for in SMC 19.40.020, Creekside development.

4. Maximum Coverage. Within and in relation to the required rear yard area of a property, the coverage associated with detached accessory structures shall be limited as follows:

a. The total coverage of detached accessory structures shall not exceed 50 percent.

b. A swimming pool, covered patio or barbecue area shall not be deemed an accessory structure for the purpose of calculating coverage.

5. Height Limit. Detached accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above finished grade. 
[IMAGE]


6. Compatibility. Construction and the use of materials and colors shall be compatible with the main structure whenever feasible.

7. Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for all accessory structures with an area larger than 120 square feet.

8. Reconstruction. Detached accessory structures that existed before the adoption date of this development code, but do not meet the setback requirements identified in subsection (C)(2) of this section, may be reconstructed in their exact location provided the replacement structure is of the same size and height and there is no change of use. A demolition permit shall be issued before the demolition of the structure to be replaced (SMC 19.54.090).

D. Antennas. Antennas are subject to the provisions of Chapter 5.32 SMC, Telecommunications Facility and Antenna Criteria.

E. Garages. A detached accessory garage shall not occupy more than 1,000 square feet for each dwelling unit (including any workshop or storage space within the garage) unless a larger area is authorized by the planning commission through an exception, in compliance with SMC 19.54.050.

F. Guest Rooms and Pool Houses. Guest rooms and pool houses shall be allowed subject to the following limitations:

1. No more than one guest room and one pool house shall be allowed on a single parcel unless a use permit is obtained.

2. Kitchen facilities shall not be allowed within a guest room or pool house.

3. Detached guest rooms and pool houses shall be limited to ground-floor construction, unless a use permit allowing a second floor is obtained from the planning commission. 

G. Swimming Pools/Spas/Hot Tubs. Private swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs are allowed accessory to approved residential uses on the same parcel, subject to the following provisions: 

1. Limitation on Use. The pool is to be used solely by occupants of the dwelling(s) on the same parcel and their invited guests; and

2. Fencing. The swimming pool shall be secured by fencing and/or walls to prevent uncontrolled access by children, in compliance with the city’s adopted Uniform Building Code.

H. Tennis and Other Recreational Courts. Noncommercial outdoor tennis courts and courts for other sports (e.g., racquetball, etc.) accessory to a residential use are subject to the following provisions:

1. Fencing. Court fencing shall be subject to the height limits of Chapter 19.46 SMC, Fences, Hedges and Walls.

2. Lighting. Court lighting fixtures shall not exceed a maximum height of 20 feet, measured from the court surface. The lighting shall be directed downward, shall only illuminate the court, and shall not illuminate adjoining property, in compliance with SMC 19.40.030, Exterior lighting. 

I. Workshops or Studios. Any accessory structure intended solely or primarily for engaging in artwork, crafts, light hand manufacturing, mechanical work, etc., is subject to the following provisions when located in a residential zoning district:

1. Limitation on Use. An accessory structure may be constructed or used as a studio or workshop in any residential zoning district solely for the following noncommercial activities:

a. Amusements or hobbies;

b. Artistic endeavors (e.g., painting, photography, or sculpture);

c. Maintenance of the main structure or yards;

d. Maintenance or mechanical work on vehicles owned or operated by the occupants; or 

e. Other purposes deemed similar by the city planner.

2. Floor Area. A workshop shall not occupy an area larger than 25 percent of the floor area of the main structure, except where a workshop is combined with a garage. In this case subsection (E) of this section, Garages, shall apply. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.090 Accessory dwelling units.

This section provides requirements for the establishment of accessory dwelling units, including junior accessory dwelling units, in zoning districts where they are allowed by SMC 19.10.050, Allowable land uses and permit requirements.

A. General Requirements. All accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Owner and Resident. The applicant shall be the owner of the property and shall reside on the property in either the main or second unit (upon construction).

2. Number of Accessory Dwelling Units Allowed. Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per parcel.

3. Rental of Unit. An accessory dwelling unit may be rented for periods of 30 days or more, although rental is not required. The rental of an accessory unit for periods of less than 30 days shall be prohibited.

4. Sale of a Unit Prohibited. Individual sale of either the main or the accessory dwelling unit is prohibited.

5. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be located on any parcel already containing a dwelling unit that is nonconforming with respect to land use or density, or developed with a duplex, triplex, apartment, planned development, or condominium.

6. No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be located on a parcel.

B. Development Standards for Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units that comply with the requirements, criteria, and limitations set forth below shall be reviewed and approved ministerially, through the issuance of a zoning clearance, pursuant to SMC 19.54.020. Unless a longer time frame is requested by the applicant, the required zoning and building permits for an accessory dwelling unit shall be approved or denied within 120 days from submittal of an application that includes all materials required to process the permits.

1. Site Requirements. A minimum parcel size shall not be required, but all applicable residential zoning district requirements regarding coverage and floor area ratio shall be met. A primary residence must be in existence on the lot for which the accessory dwelling unit is proposed at the time the application for a zoning clearance is made.

2. Floor Area.

a. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall have a floor area not exceeding 30 percent of the existing living area of the main dwelling, and a minimum floor area of 150 square feet.

b. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall have a floor area not exceeding 850 square feet, and a minimum floor area of 150 square feet. Any accessory dwelling unit exceeding 650 square feet in area shall not exceed 50 percent of the existing living area of the main dwelling.

c. The limitations set forth above notwithstanding, an efficiency unit shall be allowed regardless of the size of the main unit.

3. Unit Type. An accessory dwelling unit may be within, attached to, or detached from the primary dwelling unit. A detached second accessory dwelling unit may take the form of a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. If detached, the accessory dwelling unit shall be separated from the main dwelling unit a minimum of 10 feet.

4. Setbacks. Setbacks for the accessory dwelling unit shall comply with those established in the zoning district where the parcel is located. Detached accessory dwelling units shall comply with setback restrictions for accessory structures while attached accessory dwelling units shall comply with setback restrictions for primary structures. The foregoing limitations notwithstanding, setbacks for an accessory dwelling unit converted from a legal, permitted garage shall be considered conforming. The required minimum side and rear yard setbacks for an accessory dwelling unit constructed above an existing garage shall be five feet.

5. Height/One-Story Limitation. Each accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the height limitations established in the zoning district where the structure is located. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be limited to a single story and shall comply with height restrictions for accessory structures. Attached accessory dwelling units shall comply with height restrictions for primary structures.

6. Design Compatibility. The accessory dwelling unit shall be similar or compatible in character to the primary residence on the site in terms of design and landscaping. Accessory dwelling units shall also comply with requirements or guidelines set forth in any applicable overlay district or development guideline.

7. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

8. Landscaping. Accessory dwelling units located within 15 feet of an adjoining residence shall require landscaping. In the event that the existing development lacks landscaping, the applicant shall submit a landscape screening plan, which shall specify irrigation and plant varieties.

9. Condominiums and Planned Developments. Accessory dwelling units proposed in conjunction with proposed condominium units or proposed planned developments shall not be permitted under this subsection, but may be allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit as set forth under subsection (D) of this section.

C. Development Standards for Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. Junior accessory dwelling units that comply with the requirements, criteria, and limitations set forth below shall be reviewed and approved ministerially, through the issuance of a zoning clearance. Unless a longer time frame is requested by the applicant, the required zoning and building permits for a junior accessory dwelling unit shall be approved or denied within 120 days from submittal of an application that includes all materials required to process the permits.

1. Site Requirements. A minimum parcel size shall not be required, but all applicable residential zoning district requirements regarding coverage and floor area ratio shall be met. A primary residence must be in existence on the lot for which the accessory unit is proposed at the time the application for a zoning clearance is made.

2. Size. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. If the bathroom is shared with the remainder of the single-family dwelling, it shall not be included in the square footage calculation.

3. Location. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be installed within a legally established bedroom within the existing walls of a fully permitted single-family dwelling.

4. Access. A separate entrance to the junior accessory dwelling unit shall be provided, and interior access to the remainder of the single-family dwelling shall be maintained. Two doors may be installed within one frame for noise attenuation.

5. Kitchen. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall contain an efficiency kitchen, as defined in SMC 19.92.020. The efficiency kitchen must be removed when the junior accessory dwelling unit use ceases.

6. Sanitation. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include a full bathroom, or the occupant(s) may use a full bathroom inside the remainder of the single-family dwelling.

7. Parking. A parking space is not required for the junior accessory dwelling unit.

D. Density. As provided by Government Code Section 65852.2(b)(5), accessory dwelling units are exempt from the density limitations of the general plan; provided, that no more than one second accessory dwelling unit may be located on any parcel.

E. Parking.

1. Required Parking. One off-street parking space with an all-weather surface shall be provided for the exclusive use of the accessory dwelling unit, in addition to the parking that is required for the primary dwelling. The parking space for the accessory dwelling unit may be allowed in the driveway and in tandem. Required parking shall be waived if:

a. The parcel containing the accessory dwelling unit is within one-half mile of a public transit stop; or

b. The accessory dwelling unit is located within a federal, state, or locally designated historic district;

c. The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing single-family dwelling or an existing accessory structure; or

d. On-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit; or

e. A car share vehicle is located within one block of the property in which the accessory dwelling unit is located.

2. Replacing Required Parking. If a garage or carport that provides required parking space(s) for the primary unit is demolished in conjunction with construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the required replacement spaces may be located in any configuration, covered or uncovered, or tandem, or by parking lift (unless exempt from parking altogether).

F. Exceptions. Exceptions to the standards set forth in subsection (B) of this section may be allowed in compliance with SMC 19.54.050. (Ord. 01-2017 § 3 (Exh. C), 2017).


19.50.100 Service stations.

This section provides requirements for the establishment and operation of service stations which shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

A. Applicability. The commission may approve the establishment of a new service station, or the enlargement or alteration of an established station, only through the granting of a conditional use permit. The commission shall make the following findings in addition to the findings required by SMC 19.54.040, Use permits:

1. The proposed use will not substantially increase vehicular traffic on any public rights-of-way in the immediate vicinity, especially those serving residential uses;

2. The proposed use will not create increased traffic hazards to pedestrians when located near a church, school, theater, or other place of assembly; and

3. The products offered for sale will be displayed with consideration to their visual impacts.

B. New Service Stations. New service stations shall comply with the following standards, in addition to those standards identified in subsection (C) of this section, Enlargement or Alteration of an Existing Service Station, except subsection (C)(6).

1. Major Intersections. Service stations shall be allowed only at the intersections of either two major streets or a major and a minor street;

2. Maximum at Each Intersection. A maximum of two service stations shall be allowed at each intersection;

3. Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area shall be 15,000 square feet;

4. Minimum Frontage. The minimum frontage shall be 150 feet on each street;

5. Minimum Side and Rear Setbacks. Structures shall be set back at least 10 feet from the side and rear property lines where the adjoining parcels are located in a residential zoning district;

6. Vehicular Access Points. There shall be no more than two vehicular access points to/from each public right-of-way; 

7. Distance Between Curb Cuts. There shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet between curb cuts along a public right-of-way;

8. Location of Driveways. Driveways shall not be located closer than 50 feet to the end of a curb corner nor closer than 25 feet to a common property line;

9. Driveway Widths. The width of a driveway shall not exceed 25 feet, measured at the sidewalk;

10. Parking. On-site parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one space for each pump island, plus one space for each service bay in compliance with Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading;

11. Pump Islands.

a. Pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any property line to the nearest edge of the pump island. A canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to 10 feet within this distance, but no closer than 10 feet to the property line;

b. When the property line is a public right-of-way line, an area of at least four feet in width along the line shall be landscaped in compliance with SMC 19.40.060, Landscape standards);

c. The cashier location shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands and the vehicles parked adjacent to the islands;

12. Canopies.

a. Canopy height shall be limited to a maximum of 18 feet;

b. Signs shall be prohibited on the canopy roof structure;

13. Landscaping. Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of 10 percent of the service station site area, exclusive of required setbacks, and shall be provided and permanently maintained in compliance with the following regulations, as well as those identified in SMC 19.40.060, Landscape standards:

a. A minimum four-foot wide, inside dimension, and six-inch high curbed landscaped planter area shall be provided along the front property lines, except for openings to facilitate vehicular circulation, and along side and rear property lines adjoining residentially zoned properties;

b. Where the planter area(s) is adjoining a peripheral wall, trees planted not more than 16 feet apart shall be included in the planter area(s) which shall be a minimum of six feet wide, inside dimension;

c. An on-site planter area of not less than 200 square feet shall be provided at the corner of the two intersecting streets. Landscaping shall not exceed a height of 42 inches at this location;

d. A minimum of 50 square feet of planter area shall be located along those portions of the main structure fronting on public rights-of-way; and

e. Additional landscaping may be required by the city planner to screen the service station from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties, in compliance with SMC 19.40.100, Screening and buffering;

14. Exterior Lighting.

a. All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter, shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed within the roof canopy to ensure that all light is directed away from adjoining public rights-of-way and properties;

b. Lighting shall not:

i. Be of a high intensity to cause a traffic hazard;

ii. Be used as an advertising element; or

iii. Adversely affect adjoining properties, in compliance with SMC 19.40.030, Exterior lighting;

15. Service Bays.

a. Openings of service bays shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining public rights-of-way and properties;

b. Service bay doors shall not directly face a public right-of-way, or an existing or proposed residential development or zoning district;

16. Peripheral Wall.

a. Where a service station adjoins property in a residential zoning district, a solid decorative masonry wall shall be constructed along the common property line. The height of the wall, which shall be at least six feet, shall be measured from the finished grade of the residential property. Colors, design, materials, and textures of the wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjoining properties and subject to the approval of the city planner.

b. When the wall reaches the established front setback line of a residentially zoned parcel adjoining the service station, the wall shall decrease to a maximum height of 42 inches.

C. Enlargement or Alteration of an Existing Service Station. Any enlargement or alteration of an established service station shall comply with all of the following standards:

1. Permit Required to Modify a Service Station. A request to enlarge or alter an existing service station, where the proposed construction/alteration would cost more than 25 percent of the appraised value of the structure, as shown in the county assessor’s records, or $25,000, whichever is less, shall require the approval of a conditional use permit, in compliance with SMC 19.54.040;

2. Location of Activities. All activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within the enclosed service station structure(s), except as follows:

a. The dispensing of petroleum products, air, and water from pump islands;

b. The provision of emergency service of a minor nature;

c. The sale of items via vending machines which may only be placed next to the main structure in a designated area not to exceed 32 square feet and which shall be screened from public view;

d. The display of allowed automotive merchandise on each pump island; provided, that the aggregate display area on each island shall not exceed 12 square feet and that the products shall be located in a specially designed enclosed case; and

e. Motor vehicle products displayed along the front of the structure shall be within 36 inches of the structure, and limited to five feet in height and not more than 10 feet in length;

3. Vehicle Parking.

a. Outside storage of motor vehicles is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, outside storage shall mean the parking of a motor vehicle in an unenclosed area of the service station for longer than 24 hours, unless the vehicle is in the process of being serviced, in which case it may be parked for a maximum period of 72 hours;

b. Vehicles shall not be parked on alleys, driveways, parkways, or sidewalks;

c. Vehicles shall not be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering same for sale;

d. Parking shall be located and screened to minimize visibility of parked vehicles from adjoining public rights-of-way;

4. Signs. All on-site signs shall be in compliance with SMC Title 18, Signs and Display Advertising;

5. Storage of Parts or Equipment. Used or discarded vehicle parts or equipment, or disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles shall not be located in any open area outside of the main structure;

6. Masonry Wall.

a. Where an existing service station adjoins property in a residential zoning district, a six-foot high solid masonry wall shall be constructed along the common property line at the time the station receives an entitlement for any on-site enlargement or alteration costing more than 10 percent of the appraised value of the structure, as shown in the county assessor’s records, or $10,000, whichever is less;

b. The height of the wall, which shall be at least six feet, shall be measured from the finished grade of the residential property;

c. When the wall reaches the established front setback line of the residential property adjoining or directly across an alley from the service station, the wall shall decrease to a maximum height of 42 inches;

d. Colors, design, materials, and textures of the wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjoining properties and subject to the approval of the design review and historic preservation commission;

7. Site Maintenance.

a. Used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or permanently disabled junked or wrecked vehicles shall not be located outside of the main structure;

b. A waste collection and disposal storage area, completely enclosed with a masonry wall not less than six feet high with a solid gated opening, and large enough to accommodate standard-sized commercial trash bins, shall be located on the rear portion of the property in a manner which is accessible to refuse collection vehicles;

c. Driveways and service areas shall be maintained and kept free of grease, oil, and other petroleum products in addition to litter. These areas shall be periodically cleaned with equipment that dissolves spilled grease, oil, and other petroleum products without washing them into the drainage, gutter, or sewer systems;

8. Public Service Facilities. All service stations:

a. Shall provide restrooms on-site, at no charge, for public use during normal business hours. The restrooms shall be continuously maintained in compliance with the standards of the county health department;

b. Shall provide and maintain, in usable and good working order, an air pump and radiator water hose for public use.

9. Restroom Screening. Restroom entrances viewable from adjoining rights-of-way or properties shall be concealed from view by planters or decorative screening subject to the approval of the city planner;

10. Noise. Service station noise (e.g., bells, loudspeakers, tools, etc.) shall not be audible from residentially zoned or occupied parcels between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and nationally recognized holidays;

11. Oil Collection Centers. All service stations shall:

a. Provide petroleum and solvent waste dispensers, at no or a minimum charge, for use by customers to dispose of their used petroleum product liquids and shall accept used oil and containers during normal business hours;

b. Provide petroleum and solvent waste containers, at no or a minimal charge, for use by customers to return and to recycle their oil and other used petroleum product liquids;

c. Submit a plan describing the methods of collection, disposal, handling, and recycling;

d. Recycle all oil collected and make every effort to recycle the returned containers and other used petroleum product liquids. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; amended during June 2011 supplement; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.110 Vacation rentals.

This section sets forth requirements for the establishment and operation of vacation rental facilities.

A. Permit and Operational Requirements. The approval and operation of a vacation rental shall be subject to the following requirements and restrictions:

1. Maximum Number of Units. A vacation rental shall consist of no more than two complete residential units.

2. Maximum Length of Stay. Visitor occupancy per unit shall be limited to a maximum of 29 consecutive days.

3. Occupancy Limits: Maximum Overnight Occupancy. Maximum overnight occupancy for vacation rentals shall be limited to up to a maximum of two persons per sleeping room or guest room, plus two additional persons per unit.

4. Noise Limits. Vacation rentals shall be operated in conformance with the noise ordinance (Chapter 9.56 SMC). Outdoor amplified sound shall be prohibited.

5. Property Manager. All vacation rentals shall have a property manager who is available 24 hours per day, seven days per week during all times that the property is rented or used on a transient basis. The name and contact information of the property manager shall be provided to the city planning department and shall be provided to any interested person upon request.

6. Requirements – Internet Advertisements and Listings. To inform prospective guests of the rules and to simplify enforcement of illegal vacation rentals, online advertisements and/or listings for the vacation rental property shall include reference to the maximum occupancy limits and shall list the business license or transient occupancy tax certificate number of the establishment.

7. Business License Required. A business license is required for the establishment and operation of a vacation rental.

8. Transient Occupancy Tax. A transient occupancy tax registration form shall be completed, and the owner or manager shall pay transient occupancy tax and all other required fees.

9. Fire and Life Safety. Fire and life safety requirements as required by the fire department and the building department shall be implemented and appropriately maintained.

10. Annual Inspection. Each vacation rental shall comply with the annual fire and life safety certification procedures of the fire department.

11. Signs. One sign, with a maximum area of two square feet, shall be allowed subject to the approval of the city’s design review and historic preservation commission.

B. Licensed Vacation Rentals. Existing, licensed vacation rentals shall be allowed to continue as a legal, nonconforming use provided they comply with the requirements set forth in subsections (A)(2) through (11) of this section. For the purpose of this section, “licensed” shall mean a vacation rental which as of November 3, 1999, has a valid business license and has registered to pay transient occupancy tax pursuant to SMC 3.16.060. (Ord. 11-2017 § 3, 2017; Ord. 03-2016 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.50.120 Wine tasting facilities and wine bars.

This section sets forth requirements for the establishment and operation of wine tasting facilities and wine bars in zoning districts where they are allowed pursuant to SMC 19.10.050 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements).

A. All wine tasting facilities and wine bars in zoning districts where they are allowed pursuant to SMC 19.10.050 shall be subject to the issuance of a wine tasting use permit (“WTUP”).

1. Purpose. A WTUP is intended to allow for a limited number of wine tasting facilities and wine bars in the city. The numerical limitation on wine tasting facilities and wine bars in specified zoning districts is intended promote the health, safety and welfare of the city of Sonoma, its residents and visitors, by addressing an overconcentration of such establishments, providing for a mix of uses to promote a vibrant and healthy community, retail synergy, and a balance of visitor serving and resident serving uses. In addition, the provisions set forth in this section are intended to provide specific regulations for activities and uses which may be desirable in the applicable zoning district and compatible with adjacent land uses, but whose effect on the site and surroundings cannot be determined prior to being proposed for a particular location. The procedures of this section provide for the review of the location, design, configuration, and potential impacts of the proposed use, to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses and the suitability of the use to the site.

2. Applicability. A WTUP is required to authorize all new wine tasting facilities and wine bars in the city. No WTUP shall be issued for any such use in the plaza retail overlay district (PROD) until the number of existing nonconforming wine tasting facilities and wine bars in the PROD are less than 25 in combined total. A WTUP may be issued for wine tasting facilities and wine bars not proposed to be located in the PROD without regard to the numerical limitations set forth herein.

3. Application Requirements. An application for a WTUP shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing.

4. Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each WTUP permit application shall be analyzed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a WTUP. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings.

5. Findings, Decision. Following a public hearing, the planning commission may approve or disapprove an application for a WTUP. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The planning commission may approve a WTUP only if the planning commission first finds that:

a. The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any specific plan;

b. The proposed use is allowed with a WTUP within the applicable zoning district and complies with all applicable standards and regulations of this development code (except for approved variances and exceptions);

c. The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity;

d. For a WTUP in the PROD, the total number of wine tasting facilities and wine bars in the PROD, including all legal nonconforming and all existing wine tasting facilities and wine bars with a valid WTUP are less than 25 in combined total;

e. For wine tasting facilities and wine bars proposed to face the Plaza on West Napa Street, First Street East, First Street West or Spain Street, there is no more than two wine tasting facilities/wine bars already located or permitted by WTUP on the block face set forth in the application. For the purpose of this subsection “block face” shall mean the block upon which the main entrance to the wine tasting facility or wine bar is located and shall include the structures located at each corner of the above mentioned streets as depicted in Figure A below.


[IMAGE]


f. The proposed use will not adversely affect the welfare of the area residents, or result in an undue concentration of establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages in the area.

g. The proposed use is located at an appropriate distance from:

i. Potentially sensitive or incompatible uses such as religious facilities, schools, public parks and playgrounds, and other similar uses; and

ii. The size and proposed activity level of the use will be compatible with the uses, and/or character of, the surrounding area.

h. The proposed use will not impair the architectural integrity and character of the zoning district in which it is to be located.

6. Conditions of Approval. In approving a WTUP, the planning commission may adopt any conditions of approval deemed necessary to achieve consistency with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, compliance with the provisions and purposes of this development code, and the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. In addition, all WTUPs shall be subject to the following conditions:

a. Ongoing compliance with applicable requirements and licensing of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the Sonoma County health department is required.

b. Hours for visits by appointment and by invitation-only wine functions (e.g., wine club events, marketing lunches, and winemaker dinners) shall not exceed 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. or as otherwise specified in the WTUP.

c. Hours of operation for general public access shall not exceed 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. or as otherwise specified in the WTUP.

d. Invitation-only functions shall be limited and shall occur no more frequently than 26 times per calendar year and no more than two times per week or as otherwise specified in the WTUP.

e. No outdoor seating is permitted unless specifically allowed in the WTUP.

f. All activity shall be limited specifically to the activity described in the WTUP. No expansion, enlargement of the area of use, or relocation/reconfiguration of any number of tables or seats shall be permitted without an issuance of amendment to the WTUP by the planning commission.

7. Expiration. A WTUP shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions.

8. Wine Tasting Use Permit to Run with the Land. A WTUP granted in compliance with this section shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use or structure that was the subject of the permit application; provided, that the use allowed pursuant to the such WTUP remains in continuous operation at the subject site without interruption or abandonment. It shall be conclusively presumed that such use has been interrupted or abandoned if such use is discontinued for a period in excess of 60 calendar days. In the event of any of the following circumstances, the WTUP shall expire and be of no further force and effect: (a) the discontinuance of the wine tasting facilities or wine bar use for a period in excess of 60 calendar; or (b) the establishment of a different use at the site.

9. In all building permit and business license applications, the description of the premises shall match that provided to and approved by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

B. Nonconforming Wine Tasting Facilities and Wine Bars. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 19.82 SMC, the following shall apply to all nonconforming wine tasting facilities and wine bars in the city:

1. Nonconforming wine tasting facilities and wine bars may be continued subject to the following provisions, except as otherwise provided by subsection (C)(3) of this section.

2. Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming wine tasting facility or wine bar use may be continued, transferred, or sold; provided, that:

a. The use shall conform to all conditions of approval for any previously issued use permit, if any, and in all circumstances, the use shall not be enlarged, increased, extended to occupy a greater floor area or portion of the site or structure, than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use; and no increase, relocation or reconfiguration of any number of tables or seats shall be permitted without an issuance of a WTUP by the planning commission.

b. Additional uses on the site shall not be allowed unless the nonconforming use is first discontinued or made to conform, and any replacement use complies with all applicable provisions of this development code.

c. The use shall be operated in ongoing compliance with applicable requirements and licensing of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the Sonoma County health department.

d. Hours of operation for general public access shall not exceed 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., or as otherwise set forth in any use permit conditions of approval.

e. For wine tasting facilties, hours for visits by appointment and by invitation-only wine functions (e.g., wine club events, marketing lunches, and winemaker dinners) shall not exceed 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

f. For wine tasting facilities, invitation-only functions shall be limited and shall occur no more frequently than 26 times per calendar year and no more than two times per week.

3. Loss of Nonconforming Status. If a nonconforming wine tasting facility or wine bar use is discontinued for a continuous period of 60 calendar days, it shall be concluded that the use has been abandoned. Without further action by the city, further use of the site or structure shall comply with all the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this development code. The owner of the property in which a non-conforming wine tasting facility or wine bar is located and the owner of the nonconforming wine tasting facility or wine bar shall notify the city clerk, on a form approved and provided by the city, and delivered to the city clerk of the date that the wine tasting or wine bar use of any site or structure ceases for any period of time and the date that such use is reestablished after a period of discontinuance. Such notice shall be delivered by personal delivery or certified mail, to the city clerk no later than 10 days following the date that any wine tasting or wine bar use of any site or structure ceases, The failure to provide notice pursuant to this subsection shall result in a presumption that the discontinuance has been in effect for a continuous period in excess of 60 calendar days. (Ord. 01-2019 § 2, 2019).


19.50.130 Tap rooms.

This section sets forth requirements for the establishment and operation of tap rooms in zoning districts where they are allowed pursuant to SMC 19.10.050 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements).

A. General Requirements. All tap rooms shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. In use permit and building permit applications for any tap room, the description of the premises shall match that provided to and approved by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

2. Ongoing compliance with applicable requirements and licensing of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the Sonoma County health department is required.

3. Hours of operation for general public access shall not exceed 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., although more restrictive hours may be imposed through the use permit review process.

B. Additional Use Permit Findings. In addition to the findings set forth in SMC 19.54.040, the approval of a use permit for a tap room shall be subject to the following additional findings of the planning commission:

1. The proposed use will not adversely affect the welfare of the area residents, or result in an undue concentration of establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages in the area.

2. The proposed use is located at an appropriate distance from:

a. Potentially sensitive or incompatible uses such as religious facilities, schools, public parks and playgrounds, and other similar uses; and

b. The size and proposed activity level of the use will be compatible with the uses in, and/or character of, the surrounding area.

3. The proposed use will provide a service not currently available in the area that it will serve, or unique or unusual circumstances justify a new wine bar in a location where there are similar uses nearby. (Ord. 01-2019 § 3, 2019).


Chapter 19.51 PUBLIC ART PROGRAM

Sections:

19.51.010    Purpose.

19.51.020    Definitions.

19.51.030    Funding.

19.51.040    Cultural and fine arts commission responsibilities.

19.51.050    Application.


19.51.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to authorize, fund, and establish procedures for art works in the public realm within the city of Sonoma. It will help to guarantee the development of public art work as a whole in the city, ensuring a closer relationship between the landscape, buildings, community, and art. It creates a process for the community to work together to make Sonoma an even more interesting, memorable, and beautiful place to live, go to school, work, and visit. 

The public art program seeks to: 

A. Contribute to the city’s civic pride and sense of identity, and enhance its physical and aesthetic environment; 

B. Augment Sonoma’s reputation as a city that celebrates the arts; 

C. Enrich the lives of Sonoma residents and visitors by incorporating the visual arts into public spaces, and expand their concepts of art by encouraging site-specific works that engage the surrounding environment; 

D. Encourage collaboration between artists, landscape architects, urban planners, architects, engineers, and other designers; 

E. Integrate the work and thinking of artists into the planning, design, and construction of city facilities, buildings, and public spaces; 

F. Engage the citizens of Sonoma in creative partnerships with artists; 

G. Provide curatorial expertise and project management for the acquisition and maintenance of public art work in Sonoma. (Ord. 04-2009 § 1, 2009).


19.51.020 Definitions.

“Permanent installation” means art work or art place with a permanent site as opposed to a temporary site. 

“Public art annual plan” means a prioritized list of visual arts projects to be undertaken in any given year with budgets and recommended site and design approach, developed by the cultural and fine arts commission in conjunction with city officials.

“Public art fund” means a fund within the city of Sonoma into which all monetary contributions for public art work shall be deposited.

“Public art guidelines” means the regulations adopted by the cultural and fine arts commission and approved by the city council which establish procedures to carry out the purpose of this chapter.  The guidelines shall include but not be limited to criteria for selection of artists and art works, procedures for maintenance of a file of interested artists, procedures for artistic competitions, and requirements for the maintenance of works of art.  The cultural and fine arts commission may amend the guidelines from time to time with the approval of the city council.

“Public art master plan” means a planning document including public art policies and guidelines, recommending sites and expenditures for public art work, and describing public art’s relationship to the city of Sonoma’s general plan. 

Public Art Work. Public art works involve visual artists working through the public art process creating original works in public spaces that include, but are not limited to, paintings, murals, stained glass, fiber work, statues, reliefs or other sculpture, monuments, fountains, arches, or other structures intended for ornament or commemoration, carvings, frescoes, mosaics, mobiles, photographs, drawings, collages, prints, crafts or other decorative and utilitarian works in clay, fiber, wood, metal, plastics and other materials. Public art work includes media works such as film, video, photo projections, and computer-generated art works. Works of art may be temporary as well as permanent. Public art work projects also include artists serving on design and development teams to identify opportunities to incorporate art in the public space. 

“Public development project” shall include but not be limited to the construction or remodel of any city-owned building, structure, park, utility, street, sidewalk, or parking facility, or any portion thereof, within the limits of the city of Sonoma. 

“Public space” means any place or property within the city limits which is open to the general public for its use, or which is in public view or is generally accessible and visible to the public. 

“Temporary installation” means artwork that is installed in a given place for a limited time. (Ord. 04-2009 § 1, 2009).


19.51.030 Funding.

A. Establish a Public Art Fund. The city shall establish a special revenue fund designated as the “public art fund” for the deposit of gifts, bequests to the city for public art work, and other funds for works of art in accordance with the public art program. The public art fund is used exclusively as a means of isolating and identifying all monetary transactions pertaining to the city public art program. Appropriation of funds to support the public art program shall be made to the public art fund, consistent with the city’s budget cycle, capital facilities program plan, and major capital projects identified by the city council. 

B. Public Development Projects. All public city-owned development projects with total building permit valuation costs in excess of $250,000 shall devote an amount equal to one percent of such costs for the acquisition of works of art for placement in the city. For public projects with federal and/or state matching requirements or grant-funded projects, the one percent shall only apply to the city’s portion of the project funding. 

C. Annual City Allocation. An amount equal to one-quarter of one percent of the city of Sonoma’s budgeted general fund expenditures shall be appropriated annually to the city’s public art fund; provided, that said appropriation shall be capped at $25,000 per fiscal year. The city council reserves the right to waive or reduce the annual allocation if the city’s financial situation does not allow for the funding to be set aside. The city council shall adopt such a waiver or reduction by adopting a resolution setting forth the findings for the waiver. (Ord. 04-2009 § 1, 2009).


19.51.040 Cultural and fine arts commission responsibilities.

The Sonoma cultural and fine arts commission shall:

A. Establish guidelines to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The guidelines shall include but not be limited to criteria for selection of artists and art work, review criteria for proposed gifts of artwork to the city, commercial and industrial development project art selection guidelines, procedures for art competitions, and requirements for the maintenance of artwork. 

B. Develop and implement a public art annual plan for the city of Sonoma in conjunction with city officials. 

C. Recommend the expenditure of funds for the purchase of public art work or for the commission of design, execution and/or placement of works of art, for maintenance of public art work, and for administration of the public art program. 

D. Collaborate with city staff in the identification and evaluation of potential sites for exterior artwork. 

E. Approve artist or artists to be commissioned for a project; artist or artists to develop design proposals for a project; or artist or artists whose existing work is to be selected for a project.

F. Approve artist design proposals and sites for permanent public art work. 

G. Approve designs and sites for temporary public art work. 

H. Appoint panels for the selection of public art work.

I. Recommend to the city council the acceptance or rejection of gifts or loans of public art work.

J. Oversee the maintenance, care, and record of the public art work collection. (Ord. 04-2009 § 1, 2009).


19.51.050 Application.

This chapter shall apply to any public development project as of the date the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect. (Ord. 04-2009 § 2, 2009).

Division V. Planning Permit Procedures

This division describes each type of land use and development permit required by the development code and the city’s requirements for the preparation, filing, processing, and approval or disapproval of each permit application. The division also sets time limits for the establishment of a land use or commencement of development as authorized by an approved permit, and provides for permit time extensions when needed.


Chapter 19.52 APPLICATIONS: FILING AND PROCESSING

Sections:

19.52.010    Purpose of division.

19.52.020    Authority for land use and zoning decisions.

19.52.030    Concurrent permit processing.

19.52.040    Application preparation and filing.

19.52.050    Application fees.

19.52.060    Initial application review.

19.52.070    Environmental assessment.

19.52.080    Staff report and recommendations.


19.52.010 Purpose of division.

This division provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing and processing of applications for the planning permits required by this development code. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.020 Authority for land use and zoning decisions.

Table 5-1, Review Authority for Planning Permits, identifies the city official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application, planning permit and other approval required by this development code. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.030 Concurrent permit processing.

When a single project incorporates different land uses or features so that this development code requires multiple planning permit applications, all the applications shall be reviewed concurrently, to the extent feasible. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.040 Application preparation and filing.

A. Preapplication Review. Prospective applicants and agents are encouraged to request a pre-application review prior to completion of project design and the formal submittal of a permit application. A request by an applicant for preapplication review, accompanied by preliminary project plans and designs, will be reviewed by the city’s project advisory committee (PAC). The PAC will inform the applicant of city requirements as they apply to the proposed development project, provide a preliminary list of issues that will likely be of concern during formal application review, suggest possible alternatives or modifications to the project, based on identified development standards and other adopted policies and regulations, and identify technical studies that may be necessary for the environmental review process when a formal application is filed.

B. Planning Commission Study Session. Prospective applicants and agents considering development applications that are large, complex, or potentially controversial, are encouraged to request a study session with the planning commission prior to or immediately following the submittal of a formal application. Such sessions are structured so as to provide an opportunity for a free dialog between an applicant and the planning commission in order to explore issues and alternatives related to site design, building massing and architecture, environmental mitigation, and other planning issues at an early stage of project review. 

C. Application Contents. Applications for planning permits, amendments (e.g., General Plan, zoning map and development code) and other matters pertaining to this development code shall be filed with the division using the forms provided by the division. Applications shall include all information and materials required by the application content requirements list provided by the division for the specific type of application (i.e., conditional use permit, variance, or others).

D. Eligibility for Filing. Applications may be made by the owner of the subject property, or by a lessee or any other person, with the consent of the property owner. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.050 Application fees.

The council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for permits, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this development code. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution of the council. The city’s processing fees are cumulative, unless otherwise specified in the city fee resolution. Processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees have been paid. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.060 Initial application review.

All applications filed with the city planner in compliance with this development code shall be initially processed as follows: 

A. Completeness Review. The city planner shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete.

1. Notification of Applicant. The applicant shall be informed, as required by the Government Code, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information shall be provided. All additional information needed shall be specified in the letter providing notice of an incomplete application.

2. Appeal of Determination. Where the city planner has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the city planner is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals.

3. Environmental Information. The city planner may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with SMC 19.52.070, Environmental assessment.

4. Expiration of Application. If the applicant does not provide sufficient information to complete an application within six months after the first filing with the city planner, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. A new application, including fees, plans, exhibits and other materials that are required to commence processing of any development project on the same property, must then be filed in compliance with this division before processing will begin.

B. Referral of Application. At the discretion of the city planner, or where otherwise required by this development code, state or federal law, any application filed in compliance with this development code may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use activity. 

 

Table 5-1 

Review Authority for Planning Permits1

	Type of Decision	Role of Review Authority2

	City  Planner	Planning Commission	Design Review and Historic Preservation Commission	City  Council

	 

	Administrative Approvals and Amendments

	Development Agreements	Recommend	Recommend	 	Decision

	Interpretations	Decision3	Appeal	Appeal	Appeal

	General Plan Amendment4	Recommend	Recommend	 	Decision

	Development Code Amendment	Recommend	Recommend	 	Decision

	Zoning Map Amendment	Recommend	Recommend	 	Decision

	 

	Planning Permits and Development Approvals

	Zoning Clearance	Decision	Appeal	Appeal	Appeal

	Temporary Use Permits	Decision	Appeal	 	Appeal

	Use Permits	Recommend	Decision	 	Appeal

	Exceptions	Recommend	Decision	 	Appeal

	Variances	Recommend	Decision	 	Appeal

	Planned Development Permit	Recommend	Decision	 	Appeal

	Site Design and Architectural Review	Recommend	Decision	Decision	Appeal

	Demolition Permit	Recommend	 	Decision	Appeal

	Notes:

1.    The review authority for subdivision-related approvals is set forth in Table 6-1 (Division VI, Subdivisions).

2.    “Recommend” means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; “Decision” means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; “Appeal” means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals.

3.    The city planner may refer any matter subject to his/her decision to the planning commission, so that the commission may instead make the decision.

4.    See Chapter 19.86 SMC, General Plan and Development Code/Zoning Map Amendments.

(Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.070 Environmental assessment.

After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and city CEQA guidelines to determine whether the proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA, whether it is a project which requires review under CEQA and if so, whether a negative declaration may be issued, or an environmental impact report (EIR) must be required. These determinations and, where required, the preparation of EIRs shall be in compliance with the city’s CEQA guidelines. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.52.080 Staff report and recommendations.

A. Staff Evaluation. City planner shall review all applications filed in compliance with this chapter to determine whether they comply and are consistent with the provisions of this development code, other applicable provisions of the municipal code, and the General Plan, and shall provide a recommendation to the reviewing commission and/or council (as applicable) on whether the application should be approved, approved subject to conditions, or disapproved.

B. Staff Report Preparation. A staff report shall be prepared by the city planner that describes their conclusions about the proposed land use and any development as to its compliance and consistency with the provisions of this development code, other applicable provisions of the municipal code, applicable specific plans, and the General Plan. The staff report shall include recommendations on the approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the application, based on the evaluation and consideration of information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report.

C. Report Distribution. Staff reports shall be furnished to applicants at the same time as they are provided to members of the commission and/or council prior to a hearing on the application. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.54 PLANNING PERMIT APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL

Sections:

19.54.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.54.020    Zoning clearance.

19.54.030    Temporary use permits.

19.54.040    Use permits.

19.54.050    Exceptions.

19.54.060    Variances.

19.54.070    Planned development permit.

19.54.080    Site design and architectural review.

19.54.090    Demolition permit.

19.54.100    Request for reasonable accommodation.


19.54.010 Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides procedures for the final review, and approval or disapproval of the planning permit applications established by this development code. Procedures and standards for the review and approval of subdivision maps and related applications are found in Division VI, Subdivisions. Where applicable, the procedures of this chapter are carried out after those described in Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing, for each application. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.020 Zoning clearance.

A. Purpose. The issuance of a zoning clearance is the procedure used by the city to verify that a proposed structure or land use complies with the permitted list of activities allowed in the applicable zoning district, and the development standards applicable to the type of use. Where Division II, Community Design, requires a zoning clearance as a prerequisite to establishing a land use, the city planner shall evaluate the proposed use to determine whether the clearance may be granted in compliance with this section.

B. Applicability. A zoning clearance shall be required at the time of planning division review of any building, grading or other construction permit, or other authorization required by this development code for the proposed use. Where no other authorization is required, a request for zoning clearance shall be filed with, and use the forms provided by the division. 

C. Criteria for Clearance. The city planner may issue the zoning clearance after determining that the request complies with all development code provisions applicable to the proposed use. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.030 Temporary use permits.

A. Purpose. A temporary use permit allows short-term activities that might not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may be acceptable because of their temporary nature. In addition, a temporary use permit may be granted by the planning commission in order to test the compatibility of a conditionally allowed use.

B. Permitted Temporary Uses. The following temporary uses may be permitted in any zoning district (except as otherwise stated below) subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit. Uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall instead comply with the use and development restrictions and permit requirements that otherwise apply to the property, in compliance with Division II of this title (Community Design).

1. Construction Yards. Off-site contractors’ construction yards in conjunction with an approved construction project.

2. Seasonal Sales Lots and Activities. Christmas tree sales lots or the sale of other seasonal products, haunted houses, along with temporary residence/security trailers. A permit shall not be required when the sales are in conjunction with an established commercial business holding a valid business license, provided the activity does not consume more than 15 percent of the total parking spaces on the site and does not impair emergency vehicle access.

3. Festivals on Private Property. Carnivals, circuses, festivals, ethnic celebrations, and other similar special events on private property may be approved in mixed use, wine production, and commercial zoning districts; provided, that they do not continue for more than five consecutive days, and do not occur more often than four times per year. These uses shall also comply with any requirements of other city departments.

4. Temporary Offices and Work Trailers. A trailer, coach or mobile home as a temporary office facility, or work site for employees of a business:

a. During construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or industrial structure or residential development when a valid building permit is in force; or

b. Upon demonstration by the applicant that this temporary facility is a short-term necessity while a permanent facility is being obtained or constructed.

5. Special Events. The rental or other use of property by third parties for weddings, receptions, private parties, music performances, and similar events may be approved in any zoning district; provided, that they do not continue for more than one day and do not occur more often than two times per year. These uses shall also comply with any requirements of other city departments. The requirement for a temporary use permit shall not apply to special events conducted in accordance with applicable conditions of approval within an approved special events venue or other site for which a use permit for the same or substantially similar special events has previously been issued. 

6. Similar Temporary Uses. Similar temporary uses to those specified above which, in the opinion of the city planner, are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses.

7. Trial Use. At its discretion, the planning commission may approve a temporary use permit in order to verify the compatibility of a proposed conditional use. This allowance shall not apply to applications involving new structures or building modifications for which a building permit is required. 

C. Duration. A temporary use permit may be granted for up to one year. An extension, not to exceed one year, may be authorized by the planning commission, subject to the findings set forth in subsection (J) of this section. The extension of a temporary use permit by the planning commission shall be subject to the public notice and hearing requirements set forth in Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings).

D. Temporary Uses Regulated by Other Provisions of the Municipal Code. The following temporary uses are subject to the referenced municipal code provisions instead of the requirements of this section:

1. Location Filming. Location filming is subject to the provisions of Chapter 7.40 SMC.

2. City Parks and Playing Fields. The use of city parks, playing fields and other city-owned property is subject to the provisions of SMC 9.12.280.

3. Parades. Parades on city streets are subject to the provisions of SMC 12.20.030.

E. Development Standards. Standards for structure setbacks, heights, floor areas, parking and other structure and property development standards that apply to the type of use or the zoning district of the site may be applied to temporary uses, as deemed appropriate by the review authority.

F. Application Requirements. A temporary use permit application shall be filed with the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

1. Illustrations. Sketches or drawings of sufficient size and clarity to show without further explanation the following: size and location of the property, location of adjacent streets, location and size of all structures on the site, location of structures on adjacent lots, location and number of parking spaces, and location of any temporary fences, signs, or structures to be installed as part of the temporary use;

2. Statement of Operations. Letter describing the hours of operation, days that the temporary use will be on the site, number of people staffing the use during operation, anticipated number of people using the facility during commercial operation, and other information about the operation of the use that pertains to the impact of the use on the community or on adjacent uses; and

3. Notice to Abutting Property Owners. The applicant shall be responsible for providing notice to abutting property owners of the proposed use. This notice shall describe the proposed use, including dates and times of operation.

G. Administrative Approval. At the discretion of the city planner, an application for a temporary use permit may be approved administratively, except for “trial uses” and any activity of more than one year in duration.

H. Referral to Planning Commission. At the discretion of the city planner, a temporary use permit may be referred to the planning commission for a hearing and decision.

I. Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each temporary use permit application shall be analyzed by the city planner to ensure that the application is complete and proposes a use that is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section and shall be circulated to other city departments and outside agencies as applicable. For a temporary use permit application or extension that is subject to the review of the planning commission, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings).

J. Findings, Decision. A temporary use permit may be approved, modified, conditioned, or disapproved by the review authority (city planner or planning commission, as applicable). The review authority may approve or conditionally approve a temporary use permit application only if all the following findings are made:

1. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the temporary use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use; 

2. The temporary use, as described and conditionally approved, will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city; and

3. The temporary use does not involve the construction of new permanent structures for which a building permit is required.

In making these determinations, the review authority shall take into consideration the limited duration of the proposed use.

K. Conditions of Approval. In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the review authority may impose conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the permit will be in compliance with the findings required by subsection (J) of this section.

L. Condition of Site Following Temporary Use. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this development code. A bond may be required prior to initiation of the use to ensure cleanup after the use is finished.

M. Revocation. A temporary use permit may be revoked by the city planner at any time for failure to comply with the conditions of approval, this section, or the SMC.

N. Temporary Use Permits Not Transferable. A temporary use permit granted in compliance with this section and all of the rights and privileges granted thereunder are restricted to and operate only in favor only of the applicant and shall not be transferable upon a change of ownership or tenancy of the site that was the subject of the permit application. (Ord. 02-2012 § 5 (Exh. B), 2012; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.040 Use permits.

A. Purpose. Use permits are intended to allow for activities and uses which may be desirable in the applicable zoning district and compatible with adjacent land uses, but whose effect on the site and surroundings cannot be determined prior to being proposed for a particular location. The procedures of this section provide for the review of the location, design, configuration, and potential impacts of the proposed use, to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses and the suitability of the use to the site.

B. Applicability. A use permit is required to authorize proposed land uses and activities identified by Division II, Community Design, as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of a use permit and to authorize modifications to previously approved use permits. 

C. Application Requirements. An application for a use permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing.

D. Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each use permit application shall be analyzed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a use permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings.

E. Findings, Decision. Following a public hearing, the planning commission may approve or disapprove an application for a use permit. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The planning commission may approve a use permit only if the planning commission first finds that:

1. The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any specific plan;

2. The proposed use is allowed with a conditional use permit within the applicable zoning district and complies with all applicable standards and regulations of this development code (except for approved variances and exceptions);

3. The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity; and

4. The proposed use will not impair the architectural integrity and character of the zoning district in which it is to be located.

F. Conditions of Approval. In approving a use permit, the planning commission may adopt any conditions of approval deemed necessary to achieve consistency with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, compliance with the provisions and purposes of this development code, and the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.

G. Expiration. A use permit shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions.

H. Use Permits to Run with the Land. A use permit granted in compliance with this section shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use or structure that was the subject of the permit application. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.050 Exceptions.

A. Purpose. The provisions of this section allow for limited adjustments to the physical and quantified development standards of this development code in response to environmental features and site conditions, historic development patterns of the property or neighborhood, and in the interest in promoting creativity and personal expression in site planning and development. 

B. Applicability. The planning commission may grant an exception to the requirements of this development code governing only the following requirements of Divisions II, III, and IV:

1. Dimensional standards (i.e., distance between structures, building area and coverage, landscape and paving requirements, setbacks, and structure heights);

2. Number and dimensions of parking areas, loading spaces, landscaping or lighting requirements, except as otherwise provided in this development code;

The authority to grant exceptions does not include allowed land uses, residential density regulations, subdivision standards, or fence heights. An exception may not exceed 30 percent of the standard from which relief is sought.

C. Application Requirements. An application for an exception shall be filed in compliance with SMC 19.52.040, Application preparation and filing. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection (E) of this section, Findings, Decision.

D. Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each exception application shall be reviewed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings, and may approve or disapprove the exception in compliance with this section. 

E. Findings, Decision. Following a public hearing, the planning commission may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the exception. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The planning commission may approve an application, with or without conditions, only if the planning commission first finds that:

1. The adjustment authorized by the exception is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the overall objectives of this development code;

2. An exception to the normal standards of the development code is justified by environmental features or site conditions; historic development patterns of the property or neighborhood; or the interest in promoting creativity and personal expression in site planning and development; 

3. Granting the exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and in the same zoning district.

F. Conditions. Any exception granted shall be subject to conditions that will ensure that the exception is compatible with adjacent properties.

G. Expiration. An exception shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval, or the exception shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.060 Variances.

A. Purpose. The provisions of this section allow for variances from the development standards of this development code only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this development code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts.

B. Applicability. The planning commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this development code governing only the following development standards:

1. Dimensional standards (i.e., distance between structures, parcel area, building coverage, landscape and paving requirements, parcel dimensions, setbacks, and structure heights);

2. Number and dimensions of parking areas, loading spaces, landscaping or lighting requirements, except as otherwise provided in this development code.

The power to grant variances does not include allowed land uses, or residential density regulations.

C. Application Requirements. An application for a variance shall be filed in compliance with SMC 19.52.040, Application preparation and filing. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection (E) of this section, Findings, Decision.

D. Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each variance application shall be reviewed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings, and may approve or disapprove the variance in compliance with this section. 

E. Findings, Decision. Following a public hearing, the planning commission may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the variance. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The planning commission may approve an application, with or without conditions, only if the planning commission first finds that:

1. The adjustment authorized by the variance is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

2. There are special circumstances applicable to the property (i.e., size, shape, topography, location or surroundings), such that the strict application of the requirements of this development code deprives the property owner of privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and within the same zoning district;

3. Granting the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other property owners in the same vicinity and zoning district and denied to the property owner for which the variance is sought;

4. The adjustment authorized by the variance will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and in the same zoning district;

5. Granting the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and in the same zoning district.

F. Conditions. Any variance granted shall be subject to conditions that will ensure that the variance does not grant special privilege(s) inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and same zoning district.

G. Expiration. A variance shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval, or the variance shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.070 Planned development permit.

A. Purpose. The planned development permit is intended to provide a process for allowing greater flexibility in site planning and design than afforded by the general development standards of this development code, to encourage more innovative and desirable projects, and efficient use of land than may be possible through strict application of conventional zoning regulations. In general, planned development permits are intended to address development under the following circumstances:

1. Properties with unique, challenging, or valuable topographic or environmental features;

2. Infill properties that are oddly shaped, narrow, or otherwise difficult to design for using normal development standards;

3. Site plans or building designs that are clearly responsive to the objectives of this development code, but which require variations from the normal development standards in order to achieve a useful innovation or a higher level of design quality than would otherwise be possible;

4. Developments that include affordable housing, where departures from normal development standards are used to reduce development costs while maintaining design quality. 

A planned development permit shall not be granted solely for the purpose of maximizing development potential or for merely allowing the development of individual units on separate lots.

B. Applicability. Planned development permits may be requested for any development project in any residential, mixed use, or commercial zoning district. Flexibility in the application of development standards may only be authorized with regard to the following requirements of Divisions II, III, and IV:

1. Structure location and setbacks, yard areas, and open spaces;

2. Parking and loading requirements, ingress and egress location;

3. Fences, walls and screening;

4. Landscaping requirements;

5. Lot area and dimensions.

The power to modify development standards through a planned development permit does not include allowed land uses, residential density regulations, or building heights.

C. Application Requirements. An application for a planned development shall be filed in compliance with SMC 19.52.040, Application preparation and filing. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection (F) of this section, Findings, Decision.

D. Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each planned development application shall be reviewed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings, and may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the planned development permit in compliance with this section.

E. Objectives. In the course of reviewing an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission shall evaluate it in terms of the following objectives, as applicable:

1. General Objectives.

a. Integrating environmental features and other site characteristics into the development plan;

b. Establishing appropriate relationships between the development and adjoining properties, in terms of setbacks, yard orientation, and building heights;

c. Creating high quality common and/or private open space; and

d. Appropriately relating building mass to lot size and to adjacent development.

2. Objectives for Residential and Mixed Use Development.

a. Providing well-designed affordable units;

b. Contributing toward variety in housing types and tenure, especially through the provision of a substantial component of smaller, attached units and unit types that address identified community needs, to the extent compatible with neighborhood conditions;

c. Facilitating mixed use development that is well-integrated internally and with respect to adjoining uses in terms of the type, siting, and arrangement of uses.

Any application for a planned development permit shall be shall be considered in relation to these objectives, the development standards and design guidelines of this development code, other applicable ordinances of the city, and applicable General Plan policies.

F. Findings, Decision. Following a public hearing, the planning commission may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the planned development permit. The planning commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The planning commission may approve a planned development permit application with or without conditions, only if the planning commission finds that:

1. The planned development permit is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the intent and applicable objectives of this section;

2. The design of the development is consistent with the intent of applicable regulations and design guidelines of the development code;

3. The various use and development elements of the planned development relate to one another in such a way as to justify exceptions to the normal standards of the development code;

4. The design flexibility allowed by the planned development permit has been used to creatively address identified physical and environmental constraints and/or meet identified housing needs; and

5. The proposed development will be well-integrated into its setting, will relate appropriately to adjacent uses, and will retain desirable natural features of the site and the surrounding area.

G. Expiration. A planned development permit shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions. (Ord. 03-2016 § 4 (Exh. D), 2016; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.080 Site design and architectural review.

A. Purpose. This section establishes the review procedures necessary to ensure that all applicable development projects comply with the required standards, design guidelines and ordinances of the city; minimize potential adverse effects on surrounding properties and the environment; implement general plan policies regarding community design; and promote the general health, safety, welfare, and economy of the residents of the city. Therefore, it is the purpose of this section to:

1. Protect and enhance historic buildings and the city’s historic character;

2. Encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of structures and property within the city along with associated facilities, landscaping, parking areas, and streets;

3. Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and provide a method by which the city may implement this interdependence; and

4. Ensure that new developments, including residential, institutional, commercial, and industrial developments, build on the city’s character and do not have an adverse aesthetic impact upon existing adjoining properties, the natural environment, or the city in general.

B. Applicability. The review of project site planning and architectural design is an integral part of the development approval process. Therefore, each project that requires approval of a building permit, unless exempted as set forth below, shall require review and approval by the planning commission and/or the design review and historic preservation commission (DRHPC), as applicable, prior to the issuance of a building permit or the commencement of any work on a new structure, or improvements to alter, enlarge, remodel, repair, or otherwise change the exterior of an existing structure.

1. Residential Development. Design review shall be required for new residential development, the alteration and enlargement of existing residential structures, and residential accessory structures, as set forth in the following table:



	Design Review Requirements for Residential Development 

	Development Type/Condition	Design Review Requirement

	Inside Historic Zone	Outside Historic Zone

	1. New Development

	Single-family development, fewer than five units, and associated accessory structures.	Yes	No

	Single-family development, five or more units.	Yes	Yes

	Duplex, and associated accessory structures.	Yes	No

	Triplex, PUD, or other multifamily, and associated accessory structures.	Yes	Yes

	2. Existing Development

	Maintenance, repainting, in-kind replacement of exterior materials.	No	No

	Reroofing.	No	No

	Interior remodeling.	No	No

	Exterior alterations for which no building permit is required.	No	No

	3. Existing Residential Development, Constructed Prior to 1945

	Alterations to existing structures that increase floor area by 10% or 200 square feet, whichever is greater.	Yes	No

	Alterations to existing structures requiring a building permit that result in substantive changes to a primary or street-side building elevation.	Yes	No

	Other exterior alterations or additions for which a building permit is required.	No	No

	Building relocation.	Yes	Yes

	Change in roof design (e.g., alterations in pitch and height).	Yes	No

	4. SFD/Duplexes, Constructed in 1945 or Later

	Additions.	No	No

	Exterior alterations (including change in roof design).	No	No

	Relocation.	No	No

	5. Multifamily, Constructed in 1945 or Later (Including Planned Unit Developments)

	Alterations to existing structures that do not increase floor area by more than 10% or result in substantive changes to a primary or street-side building elevation.	No	No

	Other exterior alterations or additions that require a building permit.	Yes	Yes

	Change in roof design (e.g., alterations in pitch and height).	Yes	Yes

	6. Other

	Detached residential accessory structures developed in conjunction with an existing primary residence.	No	No

	Landscape modifications, existing single-family residences and duplexes.	No	No

	Significant alterations to approved landscaping plan, existing multifamily development/PUDs (private yard areas excepted).	Yes	Yes

2. Commercial and Mixed Use Development. Design review shall be required for new commercial and mixed use development (including public and quasi-public facilities) and the alteration and enlargement of existing structures, as set forth in the following table:

 

	Design Review Requirements for Commercial Uses and Mixed Uses 

	Development Type/Condition	Design Review Requirement

	New construction and building additions.	Yes

	Maintenance and in-kind replacement of exterior materials.	No

	Exterior building modifications for which a building permit is required.	Yes

	Repainting, except when the existing color scheme is substantially retained.	Yes

	Improvements to existing parking facilities with 10 or less spaces.	No

	Improvements to existing parking facilities with 10 or more parking spaces.	Yes

	Lighting of parking areas.	Yes

	Landscaping for a new development or significant alteration to an approved landscape plan (excluding private yards).	Yes

	Accessory structures not in public view.	No

3. Demolitions. Demolitions shall be regulated as provided for under SMC 19.54.090 (Demolition permit).

4. Signs. Signs shall be regulated as provided for under SMC Title 18.

5. Use Permits. Notwithstanding the exemptions identified in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, the planning commission may impose design review as a condition of use permit approval.

C. Application Requirements. Any person proposing to construct, alter, enlarge, remodel, or otherwise change a new or existing structure subject to site design and architectural review in compliance with this chapter shall make application for project review prior to the application for a building permit in compliance with SMC 19.52.040 (Application preparation and filing). It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection (G) of this section (Findings, Decision).

D. Review Responsibility. Certain types of projects are subject to review by both the planning commission and the design review and historic preservation commission, while other types of projects are subject to review by only one commission. The responsibilities of the two commissions with regard to site design and architectural review are as follows:

1. Nondiscretionary Projects. Projects subject to site design and architectural review, as set forth in subsection (B) of this section, but which are not otherwise subject to discretionary review by the planning commission (e.g., use permit review), shall be reviewed by the design review and historic preservation commission only.

2. Discretionary Projects. For projects subject to discretionary review by the planning commission, the planning commission shall be responsible for reviewing and acting upon the project site plan, building massing and elevation concepts to the extent it deems necessary. Subsequent review by the design review and historic preservation commission shall be limited to elevation details, colors and materials, landscaping (including fences and walls), lighting, site details (such as the placement of bike racks and trash enclosures), and any issues specifically referred to the DRHPC by the planning commission.

3. Single-Family Development of Five or More Units. For new single-family development of five or more units, except in conjunction with a planned development permit, the planning commission shall be responsible for reviewing and approving design guidelines to ensure an appropriate variety of unit types and styles. Design guidelines may include building heights and mix of stories, setbacks, architectural concepts, elevation details, building materials, and landscaping. The topics and level of detail required for the review of a particular project shall be as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. Review by the design review and historic preservation commission shall not be required, except as referred to the design review and historic preservation commission by the planning commission.

E. Review Procedures. Each application for site design and architectural review shall be reviewed by the city planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section and with applicable requirements of this development code. The review authority shall hold a public meeting, and may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application for site design and architectural review in compliance with this section.

Notice and hearing requirements for such applications are as follows:

1. New Single-Family Residential Structures and Additions within the Historic Overlay Zone. The design review commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application involving a new single-family structure or an addition to a single-family structure within the historic overlay zone. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC (Public Hearings).

2. All Other Applications for Site Design and Architectural Review. Notice shall be accomplished through the posting of the meeting agenda at least 72 hours in advance of the meeting date.

F. Factors to Be Considered. In the course of site design and architectural review, the consideration of the review authority shall include the following factors:

1. The historical significance, if any, of the site or buildings or other features on the site;

2. Environmental features on or adjacent to the site;

3. The context of uses and architecture established by adjacent development;

4. The location, design, site plan configuration, and effect of the proposed development.

These factors shall be considered in relation to the development standards and design guidelines of this development code, other applicable ordinances of the city, and applicable general plan policies.

G. Findings, Decision. The review authority may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove an application for site design and architectural review. The review authority may approve an application, with or without conditions, only if it first makes the findings set forth below.

1. Basic Findings. In order to approve any application for site design and architectural review, the review authority must make the following findings:

a. The project complies with applicable policies and regulations, as set forth in this development code (except for approved variances and exceptions), other city ordinances, and the general plan;

b. On balance, the project is consistent with the intent of applicable design guidelines set forth in this development code; and

c. The project responds appropriately to the context of adjacent development, as well as existing site conditions and environmental features.

2. Projects within the Historic Overlay District or a Local Historic District. In addition to the basic findings set forth in subsection (G)(1) of this section, the review authority must make the following additional findings for any project located within the historic overlay district:

a. The project will not impair the historic character of its surroundings;

b. The project substantially preserves the qualities of any significant historic structures or other significant historic features on the site;

c. The project substantially complies with the applicable guidelines set forth in Chapter 19.42 SMC (Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone); and

d. The project substantially complies with any applicable preservation plan or other guidelines or requirements pertaining to a local historic district as designated through SMC 19.42.020.

These findings shall not apply to demolitions associated with a project which have been approved under SMC 19.54.090 (Demolition permit).

3. Projects Involving Historically Significant Resources. In addition to the basic findings set forth in subsection (G)(1) of this section, the review authority must make the following additional findings for any project on which site is located a resource that is listed or eligible for listing on the State Register of Historic Resources or that has been designated as a local historic resource pursuant to SMC 19.42.020:

a. The project substantially preserves the qualities of any significant historic structures or other significant historic features on the site.

b. The project substantially complies with the applicable guidelines set forth in Chapter 19.42 SMC (Historic Preservation and Infill in the Historic Zone).

c. The project substantially complies with the applicable Secretary of the Interior Standards and Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Properties.

These findings shall not apply to demolitions associated with a project which have been approved under SMC 19.54.090 (Demolition permit).

H. Expiration. If a building permit has not been applied for and issued within one year of site design and architectural review approval, the approval shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions). (Ord. 06-2013 §§ 2(B) (Exh. C), 3, 2013; Ord. 07-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2007 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.090 Demolition permit.

A. Purpose. Sonoma has a significant heritage of historic buildings, as exemplified by the designation of the Sonoma Plaza as a National Historic Landmark. These buildings provide a tangible link to the city’s past, foster civic pride and a sense of community, and constitute an important aesthetic, cultural, and economic resource. In order to preserve this heritage while respecting the rights of the property owners, this chapter establishes provisions for the review of demolitions, including a requirement for demolition permits.

B. Applicability. For any proposed demolition, a demolition permit shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit, unless the demolition is exempted by subsection (C) of this section. Applications for a demolition permit shall be subject to the review and approval by the design review and historic preservation commission (DRHPC).

C. Exemptions. The following categories of demolition shall be exempt from DRHPC review:

1. Structures that are less than 50 years of age and that are not identified in the inventory of historic structures prepared by the League for Historic Preservation;

2. Detached accessory structures that are not identified in the inventory of historic structures prepared by the League for Historic Preservation;

3. Structures that the building official has determined present a clear and immediate threat to public safety.

D. Timing. When an application for demolition is associated with a development proposal that requires a discretionary permit from the planning commission, the review of the demolition application shall be completed prior to commencing review of any other application for a discretionary permit.

E. Application Requirements and Procedures. Any person seeking approval of a nonexempt demolition in compliance with this chapter shall make application for a demolition permit prior to an application for a building permit, in compliance with SMC 19.52.040, Application preparation and filing. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection (G) of this section, Findings, Decision.

1. Commencement of Review. The review of an application for a demolition permit shall not be initiated until the planning division receives a complete application, including all required documentation as specified in the application form and any additional information required by the city planner in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed demolition.

2. Notice and Hearing. The design review and historic preservation commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a demolition permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings, and may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the demolition permit in compliance with this section.

3. Factors to Be Considered. In the course of demolition permit review, the consideration of the design review and historic preservation commission shall include the following factors:

a. The relative historical significance, if any, of the structure proposed for demolition;

b. The contribution, if any, the structure makes to a historic context;

c. The cost of preserving or rehabilitating the structure;

d. The potential for adaptive re-use; and

e. The potential for relocating the structure.

4. Cooling-Off Period. Prior to taking final action on an application for a demolition permit, the design review and historic preservation commission may impose a cooling-off period of up to six months in order to allow an opportunity to investigate alternatives to demolition.

F. Determination of Significance. For purposes of requiring an application for a demolition permit, it shall be presumed that a structure possesses historic significance if said structure is identified in the inventory of historic structures prepared by the Sonoma League for Historic Preservation. However, in its review of an application for a demolition permit, the design review and historic preservation commission may determine that a listed structure is not historically significant if, based on evidence in the record, it finds that:

1. The listing in the inventory is based on erroneous information; or

2. The structure does not meet the criteria for historic significance as defined by the State Office of Historic Preservation.

G. Findings, Decision. Following the public hearing, the design review and historic preservation commission may approve or approve with conditions or disapprove a demolition permit application. In order to approve an application for a demolition permit, the design review and historic preservation commission must find that:

1. The structure is not historically significant, based upon the criteria established by the State Office of Historic Preservation; or

2. The structure does not represent a unique and irreplaceable historic or architectural resource;

3. The community benefit of preserving the structure is outweighed by the cost of preservation and rehabilitation;

4. The adaptive re-use of the structure is infeasible or inappropriate, due to economic considerations, structural conditions or land use incompatibility; and

5. The relocation of the structure is infeasible due to cost, structural conditions or lack of an interested taker.

H. Review of Replacement Structures. Notwithstanding the limitations on the architectural review set forth in SMC 19.54.080(B), the DRHPC may require, as a condition of approval for a demolition permit issued within the Historic Overlay zone, that any replacement structures, including single-family residences, be subject to architectural review in order to assure that the new construction is compatible with the historic context of the site.

I. Expiration. If a building permit has not been applied for and issued within one year of demolition permit approval, the approval shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 07-2007 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.54.100 Request for reasonable accommodation.

A. Purpose. It is the city’s policy to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing, and to facilitate the development of housing. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure under which a disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning requirements. This chapter is based on requirements of the federal and state fair housing laws, and implements the housing element of the city’s general plan. It is distinct from the requirements for exceptions and variances as set forth in SMC 19.54.050 and 19.54.060, respectively. To make specific housing available to a disabled person as defined in SMC 19.92.020, any person may request reasonable accommodation under this section to modify a land use or zoning standard, regulation, policy, or procedure of the city as may be necessary to afford the disabled person equal opportunity for the use and enjoyment of their dwelling. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by filing an application under this section.

B. Applicability. A request for a reasonable accommodation consists of modifications or exceptions to the standards, regulations, policies, and procedures contained in this title for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities, that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a disabled person equal opportunity for the use and enjoyment of housing of their choice, and that does not impose undue financial or administrative burdens on the city or require a fundamental or substantial alteration of the city’s planning and zoning programs.

C. Application. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing.

1. Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process. The city shall prominently display in City Hall a notice advising disabled persons or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this section.

2. Application Form. An application for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the planning director.

3. Privacy. Any information related to a disability status and identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.

4. Assistance. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible.

5. Timing. A request for reasonable accommodation may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.

6. Filing Fees. There shall be no fee imposed in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under the provisions of this section.

D. Review, Decision, and Referral.

1. Review by Planning Director. An application for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the planning director, or his or her designee, as appropriate.

2. Decision. Within 30 days of acceptance of the application as complete, the planning director shall issue a written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny an application for reasonable accommodation in accordance with this section and shall notify the applicant of the decision. The written decision shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the planning director’s findings on the factors stated in subsection (F) of this section. If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the planning director may request additional information from the applicant consistent with the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, specifying in detail the information that is required. If a request for additional information is made, the 30-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request.

3. Referral to Other Review Authority. The planning director shall have the authority, upon his or her sole discretion, to refer any reasonable accommodation application to any other reviewing authority, including, but not limited to, the planning commission and the design review and historic preservation commission, to review the reasonable accommodation application and make a determination on the same in accordance with the applicable sections of the development code.

E. Factors to be Considered. The decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny an application for reasonable accommodation shall take into consideration all of the following factors:

1. Whether the housing or housing related facilities, which are the subject of the request, will be used by a disabled person.

2. Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to a disabled person.

3. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

4. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning.

5. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would be contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements of adjacent properties.

6. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation adequately considers the physical attributes of the property and structures.

7. Whether alternative reasonable accommodations could provide an equivalent level of benefit.

8. Whether the property is in compliance with the then existing laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request. If any noncompliance is through no fault of the applicant or unrelated to the request for reasonable accommodation, the planning director may waive this requirement. However, such a waiver shall not preclude the city from requiring that the existing violations be corrected in accordance with the city of Sonoma Municipal Code.

F. Findings, Decision. A request for reasonable accommodation may be approved, modified, conditioned, or disapproved by the review authority (planning director or the commission to which the request was referred, as applicable). The review authority may approve or conditionally approve a request for reasonable accommodation only if all the following findings are made:

1. The housing will be used by a disabled person or persons;

2. The requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to a disabled person;

3. The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city;

4. The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including land use and zoning.

G. Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the review authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation will comply with the findings required by this section. Conditions may be imposed to ensure that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical design features are unnecessary to afford a disabled person for whom the reasonable accommodation was granted the use and enjoyment of the dwelling.

H. Restrictive Covenant. When applicable, the city shall enter into a restrictive covenant with the owner of the property which provides that prior to any sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the property, or at the time the need for the reasonable accommodation is no longer necessary, that the owner of the property shall bring the property into conformance with the city’s zoning code to the extent that relief was provided under the zoning code as part of the request for reasonable accommodation. The restrictive covenant shall be recorded against the property being granted the reasonable accommodation. The restrictive covenant shall provide that the reasonable accommodation does not run with the land and shall terminate upon any sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the property. Upon submittal of a new application for a successor-in-interest to the property, the planning director may consider a continuation of the reasonable accommodation if it is consistent with and does not extend the original approval.

I. Expiration. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved in compliance with Chapter 19.56 SMC, Permit Implementation, Time Limits, Extensions. (Ord. 07-2014 § 2, 2014).


Chapter 19.56       PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, EXTENSIONS

Sections:

19.56.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.56.020  Effective date of permits.

19.56.030  Performance guarantees.

19.56.040  Time limits and extensions.

19.56.050  Changes to an approved project.

19.56.060  Permits to run with the land.


19.56.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides requirements for the implementation or exercising of the permits required by this development code, including time limits, and procedures for extensions of time. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.56.020  Effective date of permits.

The approval of a planning permit shall become effective on the sixteenth day following the date of application approval by the appropriate review authority, where no appeal of the review authority’s action has been filed in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.56.030  Performance guarantees.

A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval or by action of the city planner to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance and proper completion of any approved work, and/or compliance with conditions of approval imposed by the review authority. The provisions of this section apply to performance guarantees for projects authorized by any of the planning permits covered by this division.

A.  Form and Amount of Security. The required security shall be in the form of a cash deposit, cashiers check or certified check deposited with the city treasurer, or a performance bond approved by the city planner. Also, where approved by the city planner, a certificate of deposit, instrument or letter of credit may be used, with the city named as beneficiary, where the security pledges that funds necessary to complete permitted work are on deposit and guaranteed for payment to the city when required by the city. The amount of security shall be as determined by the city planner to be necessary to ensure proper completion of the work and/or compliance with conditions of approval.

B.  Security for Maintenance. In addition to any improvement security required to guarantee proper completion of work, the city planner may require security for maintenance of the work, in an amount determined by the city planner to be sufficient to ensure the proper maintenance and functioning of improvements.

C.  Duration of Security. Required improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all work has been accepted by the city planner, or until any warranty period required by the city planner has elapsed. Maintenance security shall remain in effect for one year after the date of final inspection.

D.  Release or Forfeit of Security. Upon satisfactory completion of work and the approval of a final inspection (or after the end of the required time for maintenance security), the improvement and/or maintenance deposits or bonds shall be released. However, upon failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms of any applicable permit, or failure of the completed improvements to function properly, the city may do the required work or cause it to be done, and collect from the permittee or surety all the costs incurred by the city, including the costs of the work, and all administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the funding source after deduction of the cost of the work by the city. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.56.040  Time limits and extensions.

A.  Time Limits. Unless conditions of approval or other provisions of this development code establish a different time limit, any permit or approval not exercised within one year of approval shall expire and become void. The permit shall not be deemed "exercised" until the permittee has actually obtained a building permit and commenced construction, or has actually commenced the permitted use on the subject property in compliance with the conditions of approval.

B.  Longest Time Controls. For projects having 	multiple permit approvals, the longest time limit associated with any one permit shall apply to all of the other permits.

C.  Extensions of Time. Upon request by the applicant, the city planner may extend the time for an approved permit to be exercised for any permit approved by the city planner, and the planning commission may grant an extension for any permit approved by the planning commission.

1.  The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the division at least 10 days before the expiration of the permit, together with the filing fee required by the city fee resolution.

2.  The city planner or the planning commission shall then determine whether the permittee has attempted to comply with the conditions of the permit. The burden of proof is on the permittee to establish with substantial evidence that the permit should not expire.

3.  If the city planner or the planning commission determines that the permittee has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in complying with the conditions in a timely manner, the city planner or the planning commission may renew the permit for up to an additional two years from the date of the decision.

D.  Hearing on Expiration. At the request of the applicant, the city planner may hold a hearing on any proposed expiration of a permit, in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.56.050  Changes to an approved project.

Development or a new land use authorized through a permit granted in compliance with this development code shall be established only as approved by the review authority and subject to any conditions of approval, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section.

A.  Request in Writing. An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request. Changes may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use.

B.  Limits on Administrative Changes. The city planner may approve one request for changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved use, if the changes:

1.  Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this development code;

2.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed in, or was a basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project;

3.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed in, or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the approval of the permit;

4.  Do not expand the approved floor area or any outdoor activity area by 10 percent or more over the life of the project;

5.  Do not involve the deletion of buildings or units, a reduction in building floors, or a reduction in total floor area of more than 20 percent; and

6.  Do not substantially change the approved site plan or architecture of the project.

C.  Review Authority Approval Required. Changes to the project involving features described in subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section, or changes other than those described in subsection (B) of this section, shall only be approved by the review authority through a new permit application or permit revision processed in compliance with this development code.

D.  Exemptions. The substitution of equivalent plant varieties in project landscaping shall be exempt from the limitations otherwise set forth in this section. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.56.060  Permits to run with the land. 

A planning permit granted in compliance with Chapter 19.54 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing, shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use or structure that was the subject of the permit application. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.60       APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS

Sections:

19.60.010  Title.

19.60.020  Purpose of division.

19.60.030  Authority.

19.60.040  Applicability.

19.60.050  Responsibility for administration.

19.60.060  Advisory agency.

19.60.070  Authority for subdivision decisions.

19.60.080  Enforcement.


19.60.010  Title.

This division shall be known as the city of Sonoma subdivision ordinance, hereafter referred to as "this division." (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.020  Purpose of division.

The provisions of this division are intended to supplement, implement, and work with the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410 et seq. of the California Government Code (hereafter referred to as the "Map Act"). This division is not intended to replace the Map Act, and must be used in conjunction with the Map Act in the preparation of subdivision applications, and the review, approval, and construction of proposed subdivisions. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.030  Authority.

This development code is adopted in compliance with the Map Act as a "local ordinance," as the term is used in the Map Act. All provisions of the Map Act and future amendments to the Map Act not incorporated in this division shall, nevertheless, apply to all subdivision maps and proceedings under this division. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.040  Applicability.

A.  Subdivision Approval Required. All subdivisions within the city shall be authorized through the approval of a map or other entitlement in compliance with Chapter 19.61 SMC, Subdivision Map Approval Requirements, and all other applicable provisions of this title.

B.  Conflicts with Map Act. In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of this title and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.

C.  Compliance with Other Regulations Required. The approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not authorize or be deemed to authorize an exception or deviation from any zoning regulation in this development code, or as an approval to proceed with any development in violation of other applicable provisions of the municipal code or other applicable ordinances or regulations of the city. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.050  Responsibility for administration.

The city planner and city engineer are authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division and applicable provisions of the Map Act for subdivisions within the city, except as otherwise provided by this division. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.060  Advisory agency.

A.  Composition of Advisory Agency. An advisory agency as described in the Map Act is hereby established. The advisory agency shall consist of: the city planner; the city engineer; and the city manager.

B.  Authority and Duties. The advisory agency shall perform the following duties, and as further detailed in SMC 19.60.070, Authority for subdivision decisions.

1.  Recommend to the council the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of requests for modification of the design and improvement standards of this division in compliance with SMC 19.61.050, Exceptions to subdivision standards;

2.  Recommend modifications of the requirements of this division;

3.  Review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in the unincorporated areas of Sonoma County in compliance with the provisions of the Map Act when the advisory agency has elected to do so;

4.  Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove parcel map waiver applications in compliance with SMC 19.64.030, Waiver of parcel map; and

5.  Perform additional duties and exercise additional authorities as prescribed by law and by this division. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.070  Authority for subdivision decisions.

Table 6-1, Review Authority for Subdivision Permits, identifies the city official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of subdivision application and other decision required by this division.

 

Table 6-1 Review Authority for Subdivision Permits1

	Type of Decision	Role of Review Authority2	 	 	 

	 	City  Planner	City  Engineer	Planning Commission	City  Council

	 	 	 	 	 

	Certificates of Compliance	Decision	Recommend	Appeal	Appeal

	Conditional Certificates of Compliance	Decision	Recommend	Appeal	Decision

	Final Maps	 	Recommend	 	Decision

	Lot Line Adjustments	 	Decision	Appeal	Appeal

	Mergers	 	Decision	Appeal	Appeal

	Parcel Map Waivers	Recommend	 	Decision	Appeal

	Tentative Maps	Recommend	 	Decision	Appeal

	Tentative Map Time Extensions	Recommend	 	Decision	Appeal

	Parcel Maps	Recommend	Recommend	Decision	Appeal

	Reversions to Acreage	Recommend	 	 	Decision

	Exceptions	Recommend	Recommend	Decision	Appeal

	Notes:

1.	The review authority for planning permits is set forth in Table 5-1 (Division V, Planning Permit Procedures).

2.	"Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals.	 	 	 	 

(Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.60.080  Enforcement.

A.  Notification of City Planner. Any city officer or employee who has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Map Act or this division shall immediately notify the city planner.

B.  Notice of Violation. Upon the city planner receiving information from any source that real property has been divided in violation of the Map Act or this division, the city shall take the actions described in Map Act Section 66499.36.

C.  Permit Issuance Prohibited. No commission, officer, or employee of the city shall issue any permit or certificate, or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property within the city if it is known or suspected that the property was divided, or resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Map Act or this division. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.61       SUBDIVISION MAP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

19.61.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.61.020  Type of subdivision approval required.

19.61.030  Exemptions from subdivision approval requirements.

19.61.040  Applications deemed approved.

19.61.050  Exceptions to subdivision standards.


19.61.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter determines when city approval of a tentative map, parcel or final map is required. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.61.020  Type of subdivision approval required.

Any subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more parcels shall generally require approval by the city in compliance with the provisions of this division. In general, the procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a tentative map, and then the approval of a parcel map or final map to complete the subdivision process. The tentative map review process is used to evaluate the compliance of the proposed subdivision with the standards of this division, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Parcel and final maps are precise engineering documents that detail the location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries in an approved subdivision and, after approval, are recorded in the office of the county recorder. 

A.  Tentative Map Requirements. Any subdivision or resubdivision of land shall require the filing and approval of a tentative map (see Chapter 19.63 SMC, Tentative Map Filing and Processing), except as otherwise provided by SMC 19.61.030, Exemptions from subdivision approval requirements.

B.  Parcel and Final Map Requirements. A parcel or final map shall be required as follows:

1.  Parcel Map. The filing and approval of a parcel map (Chapter 19.64 SMC) shall be required for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels, with or without a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Article 2, Chapter l, except for the following subdivisions:

a.  Public Agency or Utility Conveyances. Any conveyance of land, including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way, unless the city planner determines based on substantial evidence that public policy necessitates a parcel map in an individual case;

b.  Rail Right-of-Way Leases. Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by Section 230 of the California Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing); or

c.  Waived Parcel Map. A subdivision that has been granted a waiver of parcel map requirements in compliance with SMC 19.64.030, Waiver of parcel map.

2.  Final Map. The filing and approval of a final map (Chapter 19.64 SMC) shall be required for a subdivision of five or more parcels. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.61.030  Exemptions from subdivision approval requirements.

As provided by Map Act Article 1, Chapter 1, the following subdivisions do not require the filing or approval of tentative, parcel or final maps.

A.  Agricultural Leases. Leases of agricultural land for the cultivation of food or fiber, or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 

B.  Cellular Antenna Facilities. The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, use permit, or similar right on a portion of a parcel, to a telephone corporation as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234, exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, including antenna support structures, microwave dishes, structures to house cellular communications transmission equipment, power sources, and other incidental equipment. 

C.  Cemeteries. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code.

D.  Commercial/Industrial Financing or Leases. The financing or leasing of:

1.  Offices, stores or similar spaces within commercial or industrial buildings; existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; or

2.  The financing or leasing of any parcel or portion of a parcel, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on the same site, if Division II of this development code, Community Design, requires a use permit for the project.

E.  Condominium Conversions. The conversion of:

1.  A community apartment project or a stock cooperative to condominiums, if the conversion satisfies the requirements of Map Act Sections 66412(g) or 66412(h), respectively; or 

2.  The conversion of certain mobile home parks to condominiums in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(b).

F.  Lot Line Adjustments. A lot line adjustment processed in compliance with Chapter 19.66 SMC, Lot Line Adjustments and Parcel Mergers.

G.  Mineral Leases. Mineral, oil or gas leases.

H.  Public Agency or Utility Conveyances. Any conveyance of land, including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way.

I.  Rail Right-of-Way Leases. Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by Section 230 of the California Public Utilities Code, unless the city planner determines in an individual case, based on substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates the application of the subdivision regulations of this division to the short-term lease.

J.  Residential Financing or Leases. The financing or leasing of apartments, or similar spaces within apartment buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; or "granny" units or residential second units in compliance with Government Code Sections 65852.1 or 65852.2, respectively.

K.  Separate Assessments. Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

L.  Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS). The leasing of, or granting of an easement to a parcel or portion of a parcel in conjunction with the financing, installation, and sale or lease of a WECS, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.61.040  Applications deemed approved.

Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956 or Map Act Article 2, Chapter 3 (Government Code Sections 66452 et seq.), shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this division which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any building permits or land use permits are issued. Parcel or final maps filed for record after their tentative map is deemed approved shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this division and the Map Act, including Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.61.050  Exceptions to subdivision standards.

An exception to any of the provisions of this division may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section. An exception shall not be used to waive or modify provisions of the Map Act, or any provision of this division that is duplicated or paraphrased from the Map Act.

A.  Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on forms provided by the department together with the required filing fee. The application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why the subdivider believes the exception is justified.

B.  Filing and Processing. A request for an exception may be filed with the tentative map application to which it applies, or after approval of the tentative map. An exception shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the tentative map, concurrently with the tentative map if the exception request was filed at the same time; however, the decision on a request for an exception shall only be made by the city council. The approval of an exception shall not constitute approval of the tentative map and shall not extend the time limits for the expiration of the map established by SMC 19.63.140, Expiration of approved tentative map.

C.  Approval of Exception. The council shall have the authority to approve or deny exception requests in compliance with this section. The council shall not grant an exception unless all the following findings are first made:

1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the proposed subdivision, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings;

2.  The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions are not due to any action of the subdivider subsequent to the enactment of this division;

3.  The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and zoning district and denied to the proposed subdivision;

4.  Granting the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and

5.  The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed subdivision with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan.

In granting an exception, the council shall secure substantially the same objectives of the regulations for which the exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and convenience, and to mitigate any environmental impacts in compliance with CEQA. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.62 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

19.62.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.62.020    Applicability of design and improvement standards.

19.62.030    Access, circulation, streets.

19.62.040    Energy conservation.

19.62.050    Fire hydrants.

19.62.060    Grading, erosion and sediment control.

19.62.070    Landscaping.

19.62.080    Monuments.

19.62.090    Parcel design.

19.62.100    Public utilities and utility easements.

19.62.110    Sewage disposal.

19.62.120    Street lighting.

19.62.130    Street names and signs.

19.62.140    Storm drainage.

19.62.150    Water supply.


19.62.010 Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels that are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.020 Applicability of design and improvement standards.

The requirements of this chapter apply to subdivisions, and conditional certificates of compliance, in addition to all applicable requirements of this development code, as follows:

A. Extent of Required Improvements. All subdivisions shall provide the improvements required by this chapter, and any additional improvements required by conditions of approval.

B. Applicable Design Standards, Timing of Installation. The subdivider shall construct all on- and off-site improvements according to standards approved by the city engineer. No final or parcel map shall be presented to the council or parcel map to the city engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city for the work, except as provided in SMC 19.03.030(A)(2).

C. Subdivision Improvement Standards – Conditions of Tentative Map Approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this chapter and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in compliance with SMC 19.63.070, Tentative map approval or disapproval, shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved tentative map (SMC 19.63.080). The design, construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the requirements of the city engineer.

D. Conflicting Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this development code, or other provisions of the municipal code, the most restrictive provisions shall control. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.

E. Extent of Improvements Required – Four or Fewer Parcels. As required by Map Act Section 66411.1, improvements required for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created.

F. Oversizing of Improvements. At the discretion of the review authority, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be dedicated to the city, in compliance with Article 6, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. In the event that oversizing is required, the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of Map Act Sections 66485 et seq., including the reimbursement provisions of Map Act Section 66486.

G. Exceptions. Exceptions to the provisions of this chapter may be requested and considered in compliance with SMC 19.61.050, Exceptions to subdivision standards. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.030 Access, circulation, streets.

Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a city street, in compliance with this section, and with the requirements of Division II, Community Design.

A. General Access and Circulation Requirements. The subdivider shall provide a comprehensive street system, designed and constructed in compliance with this section, the city’s improvement standards, and with the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

1. Street design shall provide for safe vehicular operation at a specified design speed.

2. Public streets shall be required when:

a. The street is shown as an arterial or collector in the Circulation Element of the General Plan, or any other specific or precise plan;

b. The street will be used by the general public as a through access route;

c. A public street is necessary for special needs including bus routes, public service access, bicycle routes and pedestrian access; or

d. When necessary to assure fire safety.

Private streets are allowed only in compliance with subsection (F) of this section.

B. Alternative Standards. The review authority may consider and approve proposed access and street design solutions that differ from the provisions of this section, and the city’s improvement standards where deemed necessary to properly address the characteristics of adjacent land uses and/or anticipated traffic volumes, or to maintain neighborhood character. The use of alternative standards shall be authorized through the exception procedure in SMC 19.61.050.

C. Access to Subdivision. Every subdivision shall be designed to have access to a city street. Access shall be provided by:

1. The subdivision abutting a city street, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way, and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all road improvements required by this section; or

2. The subdivision being connected to a city street by a nonexclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility, and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement shall be:

a. Offered for dedication;

b. Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use; and 

c. Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by this section and the city’s improvement standards.

D. Access to New Parcels. Parcels within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access as follows:

1. City Street Access Required. Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access by being located on an existing city street or a new city street designed and improved in compliance with subsection (C) of this section, or to a private street if allowed by subsection (F) of this section.

2. Access Denial. When a state highway or a street classified as a major arterial in the Circulation Element of the General Plan passes through or abuts a proposed subdivision, direct access to the highway or arterial shall not be permitted from proposed parcels. Reservation strips shall be dedicated to the state or city, as appropriate, where required to control access over certain lot lines over the ends of street stubs.

3. Frontage Roads. When lots are proposed to front on a major arterial or state highway, the review authority may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway.

4. Alleys. Alleys may be proposed as part of residential and nonresidential subdivisions. The use of alleys shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission.

E. Design and Improvement of Proposed Streets. New streets proposed or required within a new subdivision or adjacent to a new subdivision shall be located and designed as follows, and in compliance with the city’s improvement standards:

1. Alignment, Intersections, Curves. The alignment of streets shown on a tentative map shall be:

a. Consistent with the Circulation Element of the General Plan and Division II of this development code, where applicable;

b. Located to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuation of their centerlines, or by adjustments by curves; and 

c. Located so that all streets intersect at an angle as near to 90 degrees as feasible.

The centerline curve radii of all proposed streets shall be subject to approval by the city engineer.

2. Right-of-Way and Surfaced Width. The width of the right-of-way and improved surface of streets shown on a tentative map shall be as generally provided by Chapter 19.12 SMC, Streetscape, except where other standards are approved by the council.

3. Corners. All block corners and “T” alley intersections shall be rounded or cut off as approved by the city engineer. 

4. Access to Unsubdivided Property. When a proposed subdivision abuts vacant land that is designated by the General Plan for future subdivision and development, the review authority may require that streets to be constructed with the proposed subdivision be extended to the boundary of the property to provide access to the future development. 

5. Improvements to Existing Streets. When an existing city street provides access to, passes through, or is contiguous with a proposed subdivision, the review authority may require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements in compliance with the General Plan, if it determines that the proposed subdivision will create the need for the improvements.

6. Curbs and Sidewalks. Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed upon all streets in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications unless specifically waived in the conditions of approval. The location of sidewalks shall conform to that of adjacent areas and shall be at the discretion of the review authority. 

F. Private Roads. Private roads are allowed as provided in this section. Private roads shall not be permitted except where the planning commission determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision.

1. Maintenance Requirements. Provisions satisfactory to the city engineer and city attorney shall be made for lot owners association or other organization to assume responsibility for the maintenance of private roads and ownership of the street rights-of-way of any subdivision.

2. Design and Improvement Standards. Private roads shall be designed and improved as set forth in subsections (B) and (C) of this section.

3. Security and Conditions. The review authority may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this development code pertaining to private roads. Private roads and easements providing access to parcels within a subdivision shall be located and shown on the parcel or final map.

4. Offer of Dedication. The review authority may require that proposed private roads be subject to irrevocable offers of dedication to the city on the applicable parcel or final map, or separate instrument submitted to the city along with the parcel or final map.

G. Alternative Circulation Systems. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the Circulation Element of the General Plan, and/or other applicable General Plan provisions. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.040 Energy conservation.

The design of a subdivision for which a tentative and final map are required by this development code shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivisions, in compliance with Map Act Section 66473.1. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.050 Fire hydrants.

The subdivider shall install fire hydrants at locations approved by the fire chief. Fire hydrants shall be constructed per applicable city standard plans. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.060 Grading, erosion and sediment control.

New subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control measures as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.070 Landscaping.

A. Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping shall be provided as follows, and in compliance with Chapter 19.12 SMC, Streetscape, and SMC 19.40.060, Landscape standards, where applicable.

B. Deferral of Installation. The installation of required landscaping may be deferred until the development of the subdivided lots through the provisions of SMC 19.70.040, Improvement agreements and security; provided, that interim erosion and sediment control measures are first installed in compliance with SMC 19.62.060, Grading, erosion and sediment control. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.080 Monuments.

The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with Chapter 19.71 SMC, Surveys and Monuments, and the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.090 Parcel design.

The size, shape and arrangement of proposed parcels shall comply with this section, and with Chapter 19.14 SMC, Block Structure, and with any applicable specific plan requirement, other development code provision, or other municipal code provision applicable to a proposed subdivision.

A. Parcel Area. The minimum area for new parcels shall be as required by Division II, Community Design, except as otherwise provided by this section.

B. Minimum Lot Area Requirements for Common Interest Projects. The minimum lot area requirements of Division II shall not apply to condominiums and condominium conversions, planned developments, townhouses, zero lot-line, and similar projects, but shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the location of the common interest development.

C. Dimensions. The dimensions of new parcels and blocks shall comply with the applicable provisions of Division II, Community Design, or as otherwise required by the review authority. 

D. Driveway Standards. Proposed parcels shall be designed to accommodate driveways designed in compliance with SMC 19.48.100, Driveways. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.100 Public utilities and utility easements.

Each approved parcel shall be provided connections to public utilities, including electricity, gas, water, sewer, and telecommunications services, which shall be installed as part of the subdivision improvements as provided by this section, and by SMC 19.62.110, Sewage disposal, and SMC 19.62.150, Water supply.

A. Underground Utilities Required. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows. These requirements do not apply to utility lines which do not serve the area being subdivided.

1. When Undergrounding Is Required. All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be installed underground. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts, shall also be underground, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation. The review authority may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil, or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical.

2. Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or along a lot line, subject to appropriate easements being provided if necessary. When installed within street rights-of-way, their location and method of installation, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right-of-way, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.

B. Utility Easements.

1. Minimum Width. The minimum width of easements for public or private utilities, sanitary sewers, or water distribution systems shall be determined by the review authority based on the recommendations of the city engineer for city facilities, and the recommendations of the applicable utility company, for public or private utilities.

2. Overhead Lines. When overhead utility lines are approved by the review authority, easements shall be located at the rear of lots where practical, and along the side of lots where necessary. Where practical, the poles supporting overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alley, or easement designated exclusively for drainage purposes.

C. Timing of Installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed before the streets are surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines, and sanitary sewers shall be laid to sufficient lengths to avoid the need for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.110 Sewage disposal.

Each parcel within an approved subdivision shall be provided a connection to the Sonoma Valley County sanitation district’s sewage collection, treatment, and disposal system, in compliance with the district’s improvement standards and specifications. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.120 Street lighting.

All proposed subdivisions shall provide street lighting facilities designed and constructed in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.130 Street names and signs.

A. Street Name Requirements. All streets within a proposed subdivision shall be named, and the names shall be approved by the review authority. Duplication of existing names within the same area shall not be allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of an existing street.

B. Street Name Signs. The subdivider shall provide a minimum of two street name signs in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications at each street intersection. The signs shall be located on the diagonally opposite sides of the intersection. One street name sign shall be provided at each “T” intersection. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.140 Storm drainage.

Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the drainage area. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development, including natural channel morphology that may be modified as a result of increased stormwater runoff from the subdivision; off-site storm drain improvements including stormwater runoff detention and/or infiltration may be required to satisfy this requirement. Any easement for drainage or flood control shall be improved as specified by the city engineer. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the Sonoma County water agency “flood control design criteria.” (Ord. 05-2015 § 8, 2015; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.62.150 Water supply.

Each approved parcel shall be served by the city’s water system. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.63       TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING

Sections:

19.63.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.63.020  Tentative map preparation, application contents.

19.63.030  Tentative map filing, initial processing.

19.63.040  Evaluation of application.

19.63.050  Review and decision.

19.63.060  Tentative map public hearings.

19.63.070  Tentative map approval or disapproval.

19.63.080  Conditions of approval.

19.63.090  Effective date of tentative map approval.

19.63.100  Changes to approved tentative map or conditions.

19.63.110  Completion of subdivision process.

19.63.120  Vesting tentative maps.

19.63.130  Tentative map time limits.

19.63.140  Expiration of approved tentative map.

19.63.150  Extensions of time for tentative maps.

19.63.160  Applications deemed approved.


19.63.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval or disapproval of tentative maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.020  Tentative map preparation, application contents.

Tentative map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the department. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.030  Tentative map filing, initial processing.

A.  General Filing and Processing Requirements. Tentative map applications shall be submitted to the department for processing, be reviewed for completeness and accuracy, referred to affected agencies, reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) where applicable, and evaluated in a staff report in compliance with Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing.

B.  Referral to Affected Agencies. In addition to the procedures outlined in Chapter 19.52 SMC, a tentative map application shall be referred to the agencies outlined in this subsection as required by the Map Act, as well as any other city department, county, state or federal agency, or other individual or group that the city planner believes may be affected by the subdivision, or may have information useful to the city about issues raised by the proposed subdivision.

1.  Time Limits for Referrals. As required by Map Act Sections 66453 through 66455.7, referral shall occur within five days of the tentative map application being determined to be complete in compliance with SMC 19.63.040, Evaluation of application. An agency wishing to respond to a referral shall provide the department with its recommendations within 15 days after receiving the tentative map application.

2.  Required Referrals. The city planner shall refer tentative map applications for review and comment to each of the following agencies, which will be expected to provide service to the proposed subdivision.

a.  Caltrans. The California Department of Transportation shall be referred any tentative map located within an area shown on a territorial map filed with the city in compliance with Map Act Section 66455.

b.  Other Cities and Local Agencies. Other cities and other local agencies shall be referred any tentative map or conditional certificate of compliance application that is located within the area shown on a territorial map filed with the city in compliance with Map Act Section 66453, and within three miles of their official boundaries.

c.  Public Utilities. Public utility companies and other service agencies which will be expected to provide service to the proposed subdivision, including providers of gas, electrical, telephone, and cable television services, shall be referred any tentative map or conditional certificate of compliance within their respective jurisdictions.

d.  School Districts. Tentative maps shall be referred to the governing board of any elementary, high school, or unified school district within which the property to be subdivided is located.

e.  State Department of Education. The State Department of Education shall be notified of any tentative map that includes a proposed public school site. Along with the subdivision application referral, the department shall include notification that if no written response to the referral is received within 15 calendar days of receipt by the department, the city shall presume that no recommendations or comments are forthcoming. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.040  Evaluation of application.

After completion of the initial processing and the application being deemed complete in compliance with SMC 19.63.030, Tentative map filing, initial processing, the city planner shall:

A.  Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this development code, the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Map Act;

B.  Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with the findings in SMC 19.63.070, Tentative map approval or disapproval; and

C.  Prepare a staff report to the review authority in compliance with SMC 19.63.060, Tentative map public hearings, describing the conclusions of the evaluations of the map, and recommending to the review authority the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the tentative map. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.050  Review and decision.

After review of a tentative map in compliance with SMC 19.63.040, the planning commission shall:

A.  Conduct a public hearing on a proposed tentative map in compliance with SMC 19.63.060, Tentative map public hearings, and consider the recommendations of the city planner, any agency comments on the map, and any public testimony; and

B.  Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this development code, the General Plan, any specific plan, and the Map Act. The review authority’s evaluation shall be based on the staff report (SMC 19.63.040), information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report (EIR), where applicable, and any public testimony received; and

C.  Within 30 days after the filing of the report and recommendation of the city planner with the review authority, approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map.

Approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be granted only after the commission has first made all findings required by SMC 19.63.070, Tentative map approval or disapproval. The commission may impose conditions of approval in compliance with SMC 19.63.080, Conditions of approval. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.060  Tentative map public hearings.

When a public hearing is required by this development code for a tentative map, the hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in compliance with this section, with public notice being provided in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings.

A.  Scheduling of Hearing, Action. A public hearing on a tentative map shall be scheduled, and action shall be taken, within 50 days after the tentative map application has been deemed complete.

B.  Distribution of Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion (Chapter 19.65 SMC)) at least three days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the commission. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.070  Tentative map approval or disapproval.

In order to approve a tentative map and conditions of approval, or to disapprove a tentative map, the commission shall first make the findings required by this section. In determining whether to approve a tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date the department determined that the application was complete in compliance with SMC 19.63.030, Tentative map filing, initial processing, except where the city has initiated General Plan, specific plan or development code changes, and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2. 

A.  Required Findings for Approval. The commission may approve a tentative map only when it shall first find that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan, and that none of the findings for denial in subsection (C) of this section can be made. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6.

B.  Supplemental Findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a tentative map by subsection (A) of this section, the commission shall not approve a tentative map unless it can also make the following findings, when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal.

1.  Construction of Improvements. It is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to require the construction of public improvements within a specified time after recordation of the parcel map, where public improvements are required.

2.  Condominiums. Any applicable findings required by SMC 19.65.030(F) for condominium conversions.

3.  Dedications or Exactions. Any applicable findings required by SMC 19.69.020, Findings required for dedications and exactions, if dedications or exactions are required. 

4.  Waiver of Parcel Map. The findings required by SMC 19.64.030, Waiver of parcel map, if waiver of a parcel map has been requested with the tentative map application.

C.  Findings Requiring Denial. A tentative map shall be denied if the commission makes any of the following findings:

1.  The proposed subdivision including design and improvements is not consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan;

2.  The site is not physically suitable for the type or proposed density of development;

3.  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

4.  The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health or safety problems;

5.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may not be made if the commission finds that alternate easements for access or use will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This finding shall apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the review authority to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

6.  The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board;

7.  A preliminary soils report or geological hazard report indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the city engineer or the commission that the conditions can be corrected in the plan for the development; or

8.  The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this chapter, the development code, any other applicable provisions of the municipal code, and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.080  Conditions of approval.

Along with the approval of a tentative map, the adoption of conditions of approval shall occur in compliance with this section; provided, that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.

A.  Mandatory Conditions. The commission shall adopt conditions of approval that will:

1.  Require that parcels, easements or rights-of-way be provided for streets, water supply and distribution systems, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, solid waste disposal, and public utilities providing electric, gas and communications services, as may be required to properly serve the subdivision. Easements for public utilities shall be limited to those needed to provide service to present and future development;

2.  Mitigate or eliminate environmental problems identified through the environmental review process, except where a statement of overriding consideration has been adopted in compliance with CEQA;

3.  Carry out the specific requirements of Chapter 19.62 SMC, Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements, and Chapter 19.70 SMC, Improvement Plans and Agreements;

4.  Secure compliance with the requirements of this development code and the General Plan;

5.  Require that any designated remainder parcels not be subsequently sold or further subdivided unless a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance (Chapter 19.67 SMC) is obtained in compliance with this development code; and

6.  Require the dedication of additional land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities (including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, etc.), sunlight easements, and school sites, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3, where required by the General Plan;

B.  Optional Conditions. The commission may also require as conditions of approval:

1.  The waiver of direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets;

2.  The reservation of sites for public facilities, including schools, and fire stations, libraries, and other public uses in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 4;

3.  Time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, when deemed appropriate; or

4.  Any other conditions deemed necessary by the review authority to achieve compatibility between the proposed subdivision, its immediate surroundings, and the community, or to achieve consistency with city ordinances or state law. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.090  Effective date of tentative map approval.

The approval of a tentative map shall become effective for the purposes of filing a parcel or final map, including compliance with conditions of approval, immediately after the adoption of the resolution of decision by the council. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.100  Changes to approved tentative map or conditions.

A subdivider may request changes to an approved tentative map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a parcel or final map in compliance with this section. Changes to a parcel or final map after recordation are subject to SMC 19.64.130, Amendments to recorded maps.

A.  Limitation on Allowed Changes. Changes to a tentative map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section include minor adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved lots (but no increase in the number of approved lots), and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection (D) of this section. Other changes shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative map.

B.  Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the department, using the forms furnished by the department, together with the following additional information:

1.  A statement identifying the tentative map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes; and

2.  Any additional information deemed appropriate by the department.

C.  Processing. Proposed changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map, except as otherwise provided by this section.

D.  Findings for Approval. The commission shall not modify the approved tentative map or conditions of approval unless it shall first find that the change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by SMC 19.63.070(A) and (B) can still be made:

1.  There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval;

2.  There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval; and

3.  A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this development code.

E.  Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by SMC 19.63.140, Expiration of approved tentative map. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.110  Completion of subdivision process.

A.  Compliance with Conditions and Improvement Plans. Following the approval of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file and receive approval of improvement plans in compliance with Chapter 19.70 SMC, Improvement Plans and Agreements, before constructing any required improvements.

B.  Parcel or Final Map Preparation, Filing and Recordation.

1.  A parcel map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded in compliance with Chapter 19.64 SMC, Parcel Maps and Final Maps, to complete the subdivision, unless a parcel map has been waived in compliance with SMC 19.64.030, Waiver of parcel map.

2.  A final map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 19.64 SMC, Parcel Maps and Final Maps, to complete the subdivision. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.120  Vesting tentative maps.

This section establishes procedures to implement the vesting tentative map requirements of state law, Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Map Act.

A.  Applicability. Whenever this development code requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed; provided, that the vesting tentative map is prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section. A vesting tentative map may be filed for either residential, commercial or industrial developments.

B.  Processing of a Vesting Tentative Map. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth by this chapter as a tentative map, except as follows:

1.  Application Content. The vesting tentative map shall include the following information in addition to that required by SMC 19.63.020, Tentative map preparation, application contents:

a.  Title. The vesting tentative map shall be prepared with the words "Vesting Tentative Map" printed conspicuously on its face;

b.  Intended Development. The vesting tentative map application shall include accurately drawn, preliminary floor plans and architectural elevations for all buildings and structures intended to be constructed on the property after subdivision; and

c.  The vesting tentative map application shall include plans prepared by a registered civil engineer showing all off-site improvements necessary to carry out the specific requirements of Chapter 19.62 SMC, Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements.

2.  Findings for Approval. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall not be granted unless the commission first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing, in addition to all other findings required for tentative map approval by SMC 19.63.070, Tentative map approval or disapproval.

C.  Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting tentative map shall be subject to the same time limits for expiration as are established for tentative maps by SMC 19.63.130 et seq., Tentative map time limits.

D.  Changes to Approved Map or Conditions. The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map or conditions of approval at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. An amendment request shall be considered and processed through the same procedures as a new application, in compliance with this section and pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act Section 66498.2.

E.  Development Rights Vested.

1.  The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development of the subdivided lots in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards (excluding fees) as provided in Map Act Section 66498.1.

2.  If Map Act Section 66474.2 is repealed, approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the map is approved or conditionally approved.

3.  Subsequent land use permits, building permits, extensions of time or other entitlements filed on parcels created by the subdivision may be conditioned or denied only if the commission determines that:

a.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or 

b.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

4.  Fees charged for building or land use permits, filed after the approval of a vesting tentative map shall be as required at the time the subsequent permit applications are filed, including any related utility or development impact fees (e.g., sewer/water hookup fees, traffic mitigation fees, etc.). Application contents shall be as required by ordinance requirements in effect at the time the subsequent application is filed.

F.  Duration of Vested Rights. The development rights vested by this section shall expire if a parcel map or final map is not approved before the expiration of the vesting tentative map in compliance with SMC 19.63.130 et seq., Tentative map time limits. If the parcel or final map is approved and recorded, the development rights shall be vested for the following periods of time:

1.  An initial time period of 24 months from the date of recordation of the parcel or final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

2.  The initial 24 months shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if processing exceeds 30 days from the date the application is accepted for processing as complete.

3.  The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial 24 months expires. Application for an extension shall be submitted to the department and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The planning commission shall approve or deny any request for extension.

4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section, the vested rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.130  Tentative map time limits.

The processing of a tentative map shall be completed, and an approved tentative map shall be subject to the time limits for expiration and procedures for extension in compliance with SMC 19.63.140 through 19.63.150. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.140  Expiration of approved tentative map.

An approved tentative map is valid for 24 months after its effective date, except as otherwise provided by Map Act Sections 66452.6, 66452.11, 66452.13, or 66463.5. At the end of 24 months, the approval shall expire and become void unless:

A.  A parcel or final map, and related bonds and improvement agreements, have been filed with the city engineer in compliance with Chapter 19.64 SMC, Parcel Maps and Final Maps; or

B.  An extension of time has been granted in compliance with SMC 19.63.150, Extensions of time for tentative maps. 

Expiration of an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new tentative map application is filed. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.150  Extensions of time for tentative maps.

When a subdivider has not completed all tentative map conditions of approval and filed a parcel or final map with the city within the time limits established by SMC 19.63.130, time extensions may be granted in compliance with this section. Extension requests shall be in writing and shall be filed with the department on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee.

A.  Tentative Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps – Findings for Extensions. The planning commission may grant extensions to the initial time limit up to a maximum total of three years, only after finding that:

1.  There have been no changes to the provisions of the General Plan, any applicable specific plan or this development code applicable to the project since the approval of the tentative map;

2.  There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the General Plan or other standards of this development code apply to the project; and

3.  There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project.

B.  Tentative Maps with Multiple Final Maps. Where a subdivider is required to expend more than $125,000 on improvements as specified in Map Act Section 66452.6 and multiple final maps are filed covering portions of a single approved tentative map, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by an additional 36 months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later; provided, that the total of all extensions shall not extend the approval of the tentative map more than 10 years from its approval. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.63.160  Applications deemed approved.

Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956, or Map Act Sections 66452 et seq., shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this development code, which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any building permits or other land use entitlements are issued. Parcel or final maps filed for record after the automatic approval of their tentative map shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this development code and the Map Act, including, but not limited to, Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.64       PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS 

Sections:

19.64.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.64.020  Parcel maps.

19.64.030  Waiver of parcel map.

19.64.040  Parcel map form and content.

19.64.050  Filing and processing of parcel maps.

19.64.060  Parcel map approval.

19.64.070  Final maps.

19.64.080  Final map form and content.

19.64.090  Filing and processing of final maps.

19.64.100  Final map approval.

19.64.110  Supplemental information sheets.

19.64.120  Recordation of maps.

19.64.130  Amendments to recorded maps.


19.64.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of parcel and final maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.020  Parcel maps.

As required by SMC 19.61.020, Type of subdivision approval required, and SMC 19.63.110, Completion of subdivision process, a parcel map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a parcel map is waived as set forth in SMC 19.64.030. A parcel map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in SMC 19.64.040 through 19.64.060. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.030  Waiver of parcel map.

A subdivider may request waiver of a parcel map, and the waiver may be granted, in compliance with this section.

A.  When Waiver Is Allowed. Waiver of a parcel map may be requested by a subdivider and granted by the commission for an approved subdivision where the following circumstances exist, and the boundaries of the original parcel have been previously surveyed and a map recorded, and are certain as to location. 

1.  Until January 1, 2003, the land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision in compliance with Map Act Section 66418.2; or

2.  The subdivision or interests in the subdivision have been created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

3.  The subdivision results from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.

B.  Application Processing and Approval. A request for waiver of parcel map shall be submitted with the tentative map application, together with the required filing fee. The waiver request shall be processed and acted upon concurrently with the tentative map application. The commission may grant a requested waiver if:

1.  The proposed tentative map satisfies all findings required for approval by SMC 19.63.070, Tentative map approval or disapproval; and

2.  The proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements of the Map Act and this development code as to lot area, improvement and design, drainage, flood control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection.

C.  Expiration of Waiver. An approved waiver of parcel map shall be subject to the same time limits and opportunities for extension of time as the accompanying tentative map, in compliance with SMC 19.63.140, Expiration of approved tentative map, and SMC 19.63.150, Extensions of time for tentative maps, and subsection (D) of this section.

D.  Completion of Subdivision. A subdivision for which a parcel map has been waived shall be completed by the subdivider satisfying any tentative map conditions of approval, including any conditions providing for the payment of fees, and by the city engineer filing with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided and a plat map showing the division. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.040  Parcel map form and content.

A parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Parcel map submittal shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the department and Section 66444 et seq. of the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.050  Filing and processing of parcel maps.

A.  Filing with the City Engineer. The parcel map, together with all data, information and materials required by SMC 19.64.040, shall be submitted to the city engineer. The parcel map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act.

B.  Review of Parcel Map. The city engineer shall:

1.  Determine whether all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and

2.  Obtain verification from the department that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

If the parcel map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data if the tentative map has not expired. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.060  Parcel map approval.

A.  Map Without Dedications. After determining that the parcel map is technically correct in compliance with SMC 19.64.050, the city engineer shall approve the parcel map and execute the city engineer’s certificate. The map shall then be transmitted by the city engineer to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Section 66450 of the Map Act.

B.  Map with Dedications. After determining that the parcel map is technically correct in compliance with SMC 19.64.050, the city engineer shall refer the parcel map to the city council to accept or reject offers of dedications. The council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the parcel map. Following council action on offers of dedication, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s certificate. The map shall then be transmitted by the city engineer to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Section 66450 of the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.070  Final maps.

As required by SMC 19.61.020, Type of subdivision approval required, a final map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A final map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in SMC 19.64.080 through 19.64.120. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.080  Final map form and content.

A final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Final map submittal shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by Section 66433 et seq. of the Map Act. A final map submittal shall also include a digital copy of the final map, prepared using computer software and standards specified by the city engineer. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.090  Filing and processing of final maps.

A.  Filing with City Engineer. The final map, together with all data, information and materials required by SMC 19.64.080, shall be submitted to the city engineer. The final map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act.

B.  Review of Final Map. The city engineer shall review the final map and all accompanying materials, and shall:

1.  Determine whether all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and

2.  Obtain verification from the department that the final map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

If the final map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes prior to tentative map expiration and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data.

C.  Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple final maps on the approved tentative map if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the tentative map or, if after the filing of the tentative map, the city engineer approved the request. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.100  Final map approval.

After determining that the final map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with SMC 19.64.080, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the final map to the council for action, as follows:

A.  Review and Approval by Council. The council shall approve or disapprove the final map at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent of the city engineer and the subdivider.

1.  Criteria for Approval. The council shall approve the final map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this development code that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

2.  Waiver of Errors. The council may approve a final map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this development code or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, when the council finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the council does not materially affect the validity of the map.

3.  Approval by Inaction. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the map conforms to all applicable requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval on the map. 

B.  Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the final map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the final map. If the city council rejects the offer of dedication, the offer shall remain open and may be accepted by the city council at a later date pursuant to Section 66477.2 of the Map Act. Any termination of an offer of dedication shall be processed in compliance with Section 66477.2 of the Map Act and the street vacation procedure.

C.  Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this development code, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the final map, the council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and SMC 19.70.040, Improvement agreements and security, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map. 

D.  Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the city clerk shall transmit the final map to the county recorder for filing, in compliance with SMC 19.64.120, Recordation of maps. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.110  Supplemental information sheets.

In addition to the information required to be included in parcel maps and final maps (SMC 19.64.040 and 19.64.080, respectively), additional information may be required to be submitted and recorded simultaneously with a final map as required by this section.

A.  Preparation and Form. The additional information required by this section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the city engineer determines that the type of information required would be more clearly and understandably presented in the form of a report or other document. Unless otherwise directed by the city engineer, the additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for parcel maps by SMC 19.64.040, Parcel map form and content.

B.  Content of Information Sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following statements and information:

1.  Title. A title, including the number assigned to the accompanying parcel or final map by the city engineer, the words "Supplemental Information Sheet";

2.  Explanatory Statement. A statement following the title that the supplemental information sheet is recorded along with the subject parcel or final map, and that the additional information being recorded with the parcel or final map is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest;

3.  Location Map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed one inch equals 2,000 feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision within the city;

4.  Areas Subject to Flooding. Identification of all lands within the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by water; 

5.  Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. When a soils report or geological hazard report has been prepared, the existence of the report shall be noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report; and

6.  Information Required by Conditions of Approval. Any information required by the approval body to be included on the supplemental information sheet(s) because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property, including any other easements or dedications. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.120  Recordation of maps.

A.  At the time of filing of a parcel or final map with the county recorder, the subdivider shall present to the county recorder evidence that, at the time of filing the map, the parties consenting to the filing are all parties having vested fee interest in the property being subdivided and are parties required to sign the certificate described in Map Act Section 66445(e).

B.  The county recorder will review and act upon parcel and final maps filed with that office as set forth in Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act and other applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.64.130  Amendments to recorded maps.

A recorded parcel or final map shall be modified to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision only as set forth in this section.

A.  Corrections. In the event that errors in a parcel or final map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, the corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. For the purposes of this section, "errors" include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the parcel or final map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any other map error or omission as approved by the city engineer that does not affect any property right, including but not limited to lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or that has been changed.

B.  Changes to Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including but not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with SMC 19.70.040, Improvement agreements and security, a new tentative and parcel or final map shall be filed and approved as required by SMC 19.61.020, Type of subdivision approval required. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.65       CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS

Sections:

19.65.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.65.020  Condominiums.

19.65.030  Condominium conversions.


19.65.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes requirements for applications for the creation of a condominium or other common interest development (including a community apartment project, planned development or stock cooperative, as provided by California Civil Code Section 1351) simultaneously with the construction of a new structure, and the conversion of an existing structure to a condominium, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.65.020  Condominiums.

When a residential structure is proposed at the time of construction as a condominium or other common interest development, a tentative map for the project shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or denied in the same manner in compliance with Chapter 19.63 SMC, Tentative Map Filing and Processing. Chapter 19.64 SMC, Parcel Maps and Final Maps, determines whether a parcel or final map shall also be filed. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.65.030  Condominium conversions.

A condominium conversion is the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code.

A.  Approvals Required. A conversion shall require the approval of a tentative map, and parcel or final map, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived in compliance with Map Act Sections 66428(b) or 66428.1, for the conversion of a mobile home park. If a parcel map is waived, a tentative map shall still be required.

B.  Application Filing and Processing. A tentative map for a condominium conversion shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 19.63 SMC, Tentative Map Filing and Processing, except as otherwise provided by the following provisions of this section.

C.  Application Contents. Condominium conversion applications shall include the same information and materials as tentative map applications, except for conversions of residential projects, which shall also include the following information and materials:

1.  Tentative Map. The tentative map for a condominium, community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative need not show the manner in which the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided. However, the applicant shall provide an illustration of how division will occur to enable verification of the accuracy of the legal descriptions on deeds for the transfer of ownership of the units.

2.  Verification of Stock Cooperative Vote. If the development being converted to a condominium is a stock cooperative, the application shall also include verification of the vote required by Map Act Section 66452.10.

3.  Relocation Assistance Program. A program proposed by the applicant that will assist tenants displaced through the conversion in relocating to equivalent or better housing. 

4.  Vacancy Rate Assessment. An assessment of the vacancy rate in multifamily rental housing within the city.

5.  Mobile Home Park Conversion Impact Report. If the development being converted to a condominium is a mobile home park, the application shall also include the report required by Map Act Section 66427.4.

D.  Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map for the condominium conversion (SMC 19.63.040) shall be provided the subdivider and each tenant of the subject property at least three days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the commission or council.

E.  Public Notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition to that required by Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings:

1.  Tenant Notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing or prospective tenants as set forth in Map Act Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9, and shall provide the department satisfactory proof that the notice was given; and

2.  Public Hearing Notice. Notice of the public hearing(s) on the tentative map shall be provided to all tenants of the subject property, as required by Map Act Section 66451.3. 

F.  Approval of Conversion, Required Findings.

1.  Time Limit, Stock Cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall occur within 120 days of the application being found complete in compliance with SMC 19.63.030, Tentative map filing, initial processing. The 120-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city.

2.  Conversion Findings, Residential Projects. Approval of a tentative or final map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative shall not be granted unless the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66427.1 are first made. 

G.  Completion of Conversion. The filing, approval and recordation of a parcel map or final map in compliance with Chapter 19.64 SMC, Parcel Maps and Final Maps, shall be required to complete the subdivision process, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived for the conversion of a mobile home park in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(b). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.66       LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS AND PARCEL MERGERS

Sections:

19.66.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.66.020  Applicability.

19.66.030  Adjustment application and processing.

19.66.040  Approval or denial of adjustment.

19.66.050  Completion of adjustment.

19.66.060  Parcel mergers.


19.66.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides procedures for the preparation, filing, processing, and approval or denial of lot line adjustment applications, consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the requirements of Map Act Section 66412(d). This chapter also provides procedures for voluntary parcel mergers. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.66.020  Applicability.

A.  As provided by Map Act Section 66412(d), the lot line adjustment procedure is for the purpose of relocating lot lines between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. For the purposes of this chapter, an "adjacent parcel" is one that directly touches at least one of the other parcels involved in the adjustment.

B.  Parcels combined by encumbrances or encroachments of existing structures shall be considered a single original parcel for purposes of an adjustment in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.66.030  Adjustment application and processing.

A lot line adjustment application shall be prepared, filed and processed as provided by this section.

A.  Application Content. A lot line adjustment application shall include all information and other materials required by the department.

B.  Processing. Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted to the department and shall be processed in compliance with the procedures specified by Chapter 19.52 SMC, Applications: Filing and Processing. No environmental review shall be required, in compliance with the CEQA guidelines. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.66.040  Approval or denial of adjustment.

The city engineer shall determine whether the parcels resulting from the adjustment will conform with the applicable provisions of this development code. The city engineer may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the lot line adjustment in compliance with this section. Decisions made by the city engineer may be appealed to the commission in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals.

A.  Required Findings. A proposed lot line adjustment shall be denied if the city engineer finds any of the following:

1.  The adjustment will have the effect of creating a greater number of parcels than exist before adjustment;

2.  Any parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with any applicable regulations of this development code; or

3.  The adjustment will result in an increase in the number of nonconforming parcels.

B.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot line adjustment, the city engineer shall adopt conditions only as necessary to conform the adjustment and proposed parcels to the requirements of this development code and SMC Title 14, Buildings and Construction, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.66.050  Completion of adjustment.

Within 12 months after approval, the lot line adjustment process shall be completed in compliance with this section through the recordation of a deed, after all conditions of approval have been satisfied.

A.  Completion by Deed. A lot line adjustment shall not be effective or finally completed until recordation of a grant deed or deeds signed by the record owners. The applicant shall submit deeds to the city engineer for review and approval in compliance with subsection (B) of this section, before recordation of the grant deed. The legal descriptions provided in the deeds shall be prepared by a qualified registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor licensed or registered in the state.

B.  Review and Approval by City Engineer. The city engineer shall:

1.  Examine the deeds to ensure that all record title owners and lien holders have consented to the adjustment;

2.  Verify that all conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed and that the deeds are in substantial compliance with the lot line adjustment as approved by the review authority;

3.  Verify that the property owners have either obtained partial reconveyances from any mortgagor or other lien holder for any portion of a parcel being transferred to an adjacent parcel, and that any liens covering the adjacent property have been modified to cover the newly created larger parcel;

4.  If satisfied that the deeds comply with the above requirements, place an endorsed approval upon the deeds; and

5.  After approval of the legal descriptions, assemble the deeds and return them to the applicant’s title company for recordation.

C.  Expiration. The approval of a lot line adjustment shall expire and become void if the adjustment has not been completed as required by this section within 12 months of approval. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.66.060  Parcel mergers.

A.  Merger Not Required. Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of this development code or the Map Act shall not merge by virtue of the fact that the contiguous parcels are held by the same ownership. No further proceedings under this development code shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, except as provided by this chapter.

B.  Processing of Requested Merger. Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the city may approve the merger of the property in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.20 3/4. The request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by data and documents as required by the department.

1.  Review Authority. The city engineer shall have the authority to review and approve proposed parcel mergers, except that council review and approval shall be required for a proposed merger associated with a project that has not been previously considered by the commission.

2.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a merger, the city engineer may impose reasonable conditions. The reasonableness of conditions imposed by the city engineer may be appealed within 10 days of written notice of the conditions to the council in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals.

3.  Completion of Merger. Upon approval, a notice of lot merger shall be filed with the county recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.67       CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE

Sections:

19.67.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.67.020  Applicability.

19.67.030  Application contents.

19.67.040  Review and approval.

19.67.050  Conditional certificates of compliance.


19.67.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides procedures for the filing, processing, and approval or denial of certificates of compliance and conditional certificates of compliance, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.67.020  Applicability.

A certificate of compliance is a document recorded by the county recorder, which acknowledges that the subject parcel is considered by the city to be a legal lot of record. A conditional certificate of compliance is used instead of a certificate of compliance to validate a parcel that was not legally subdivided. Any person owning real property, or a purchaser of the property in a contract of sale of the property, may request a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.67.030  Application contents.

A certificate of compliance application shall include the form provided by the department, the required filing fee, and a chain of title, consisting of copies of all deeds beginning before the division and thereafter, unless the parcels were created through a recorded subdivision map. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.67.040  Review and approval.

A.  City Engineer Review. The city engineer shall review all available information and make a determination whether the real property was divided in accordance with the Map Act, this development code, and other applicable provisions of the municipal code. Upon making the determination, the city engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. In the event that the city engineer determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this development code or the Map Act, the application shall instead be processed as a conditional certificate of compliance, SMC 19.67.050, Conditional certificates of compliance.

B.  Form of Certificate. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property, shall state that the division complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this development code, and shall include all information required by Map Act Section 66499.35.

C.  Effective Date of Certificate. A certificate of compliance shall not become final until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.67.050  Conditional certificates of compliance.

A conditional certificate of compliance is used to validate a parcel that was not legally divided. If the current owners are the original subdividers, conditions may be based on current standards. The preparation, filing and processing of a conditional certificate of compliance application shall occur in compliance with this section. 

A.  Application. An application for a conditional certificate of compliance shall be prepared and include the same materials as a certificate of compliance (SMC 19.67.030).

B.  Review and Approval. Upon making a determination that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this development code or the Map Act, the city engineer shall grant a conditional certificate of compliance, imposing conditions as provided by subsection (C) of this section, Conditions of Approval.

C.  Conditions of Approval. If the owners of the property for which a certificate is requested are the original subdividers, the city engineer may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision, as provided by the Map Act and this development code, regardless of when the property was divided. If the owners had no responsibility for the subdivision that created the parcel, the city engineer may only impose conditions that would have been applicable at the time the property was acquired by the current owners.

D.  Appeal. A decision to issue a conditional certificate of compliance and/or the conditions imposed by the city engineer may be appealed to the commission in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals.

E.  Completion of Process. Following expiration of the 10-day appeal period after the determination and imposition of conditions by the city engineer, the city engineer shall file a conditional certificate of compliance with the county recorder. The certificate shall identify the property, and serve as notice to the property owner or purchaser who applied for the certificate, a grantee of the owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for the development of the property.

F.  Effective Date of Certificate. A conditional certificate of compliance shall not become effective until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.68       REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE

Sections:

19.68.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.68.020  Applicability.

19.68.030  Initiation of reversion, application requirements.

19.68.040  Application filing and processing.

19.68.050  Council action.


19.68.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides procedures for the filing, processing, and approval or denial of reversions to acreage, in compliance with Map Act Sections 66499.11 et seq. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.68.020  Applicability.

Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage in compliance with this chapter and the Map Act. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.68.030  Initiation of reversion, application requirements.

A reversion to acreage may be initiated by the property owner or the council in compliance with this section.

A.  Initiation by Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by the filing of an application by all of the record owners of the property. The application shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer, and shall contain the information required by subsection (C) of this section and any other information as required by the city engineer.

B.  Initiation by Council. The city council may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage at the request of any person or on its own motion. The council shall direct the city engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings.

C.  Application Requirements. An application for reversion to acreage submitted by the property owners shall include the application forms and all information and materials required by the department, the required filing fee, and the following additional information:

1.  Evidence of title to the real property; and

2.  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property; or

3.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by an agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

4.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record;

5.  A tentative map in the form prescribed by SMC 19.63.030;

6.  A final or parcel map in the form prescribed by SMC 19.64.040 and 19.64.080, respectively, which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition of reversion. The final or parcel map shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion to Acreage." (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.68.040  Application filing and processing.

A.  Submittal to City Engineer. The final or parcel map for the reversion together with all other required application materials shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.

B.  Recommendation to Council. Upon finding that the proposed reversion meets with all the requirements of this development code and the Map Act, the city engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage to the council for their consideration. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.68.050  Council action.

A.  Notice and Hearing. The council shall hold a public hearing on an application for reversion to acreage after providing notice in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings.

B.  Findings for Approval. The council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and either:

1.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or

2.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements whichever is later; or

3.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record.

C.  Conditions of Approval. The council may require as condition of the reversion:

1.  The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements; and

2.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this development code.

D.  Completion of Process. Upon approving the reversion to acreage, the city engineer will transmit the final or parcel map, together with the council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.69       DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS

Sections:

19.69.000  Purpose of chapter.

19.69.010  Applicability.

19.69.020  Findings required for dedications and exactions.

19.69.030  Parkland dedications and fees.

19.69.040  Reservations of land.

19.69.050  Right-of-way dedications.

19.69.060  School site dedications.


19.69.000  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees, in conjunction with subdivision approval. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.69.010  Applicability.

A.  Compliance Required. All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this chapter for dedications, reservations, or the payment of fees.

B.  Conditions of Approval. The requirements of this chapter as they apply to a specific subdivision shall be described in conditions of approval adopted by the review authority for the tentative map. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.69.020  Findings required for dedications and exactions.

The review authority may require any of the dedications or exactions described in this chapter through conditions of approval of a proposed tentative map only after first making findings which:

A.  Identify the purpose for the dedication or exaction; and

B.  Demonstrate that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the dedication or exaction and the characteristics and impacts of the subdivision from which the dedication or exaction is required. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.69.030  Parkland dedications and fees.

A.  Purpose. This section provides for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees to the city for park and recreational purposes as a condition of the approval of a tentative map. This section is enacted as authorized by the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 4 of the Map Act, also known as the "Quimby Act."

B.  Applicability.

1.  Land Dedication and/or Fee Payment Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee in compliance with this section for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreation facilities to serve the subdivision.

2.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to industrial or commercial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added, or to any other subdivisions exempted by Map Act Section 66477.

C.  Amount of Parkland Required. The amount of acreage required to be dedicated by a residential subdivider for park and recreational purposes shall be based upon the number of dwelling units expected in the subdivision. The required dedication shall be computed using the following formula:

X =.005(UP)

Where:

X = Amount of parkland required, in acres.

U = Total number of approved dwelling units in the subdivision.

P = The projected average number of residents per dwelling unit in the proposed subdivision, as determined by the city planner.

D.  Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land. If the entire parkland obligation for a proposed residential subdivision is not satisfied by dedication in compliance with subsection (C) of this section, the subdivider shall pay a fee to the city in lieu of dedication, as a condition of tentative map approval. The fee shall equal the parkland obligation derived from the formula in subsection (C) of this section, less the amount of parkland, if any, offered for dedication by the subdivider, times the average per-acre fair market value for the appropriate park planning area. For purposes of determining the required fee, the term "fair market value" shall mean the market value of the land as determined by the city, and approved by the commission, prior to or at tentative map approval. If the subdivider objects to the valuation, the subdivider, at his/her own expense, may obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser approved by the city whose appraisal may be accepted by the city if found reasonable. Fair market value may be determined by mutual agreement of the city and subdivider; however, decisions of the city as to fair market value shall be final and conclusive.

E.  Criteria for Requiring Dedication and Fees. In subdivisions of over 50 lots, the city may require the subdivider to dedicate both land and pay a fee, as follows:

1.  Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

a.  The provisions of the General Plan, and any applicable specific plans, and the compatibility of dedication with those plans;

b.  Access, size, shape and the location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

c.  Feasibility of dedication; and 

d.  Availability of previously acquired park property.

2.  Fees Only. Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions of 50 parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required even though the number of actual parcels may be less than 50.

3.  Procedure for Determining Land or Fee. The review authority shall determine whether the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay in-lieu fees, or provide a combination of both, at the time of tentative map approval. The determination of the review authority shall be based on a report and recommendation from the city planner. The recommendation by the city planner and the action of the review authority shall consider the factors in subsection (E)(1) of this section, and shall include the following:

a.  The amount of land required;

b.  Whether a fee shall be charged in lieu of land;

c.  Whether land and a fee shall be required, and/or that a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation facilities;

d.  The location and suitability of the parkland to be dedicated or use of in-lieu fees; and 

e.  The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

4.  Formula for Land and Fees. When both land dedication and fee payment are required, they shall be subject to the following formula:

a.  When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the General Plan or applicable specific plan as the site for a local park, that portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes, and a fee computed as provided by subsection (D) of this section shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated by subsection (C) of this section.

b.  When a major part of the local park or recreational site has been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated, and a fee computed as provided by subsection (D) of this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land that would otherwise have been required to be dedicated by subsection (C) of this section. The fees shall be used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility serving the subdivision.

5.  Credit for Improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements on dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any installed equipment shall be a credit against the required fees or land.

6.  Credit for Private Recreation or Open Space. Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision, and will be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed 75 percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the review authority finds all of the following:

a.  Yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of the private open space;

b.  The private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyances, or restrictions;

c.  The use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants, which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city;

d.  The proposed private open space is usable for active recreation; and

e.  Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the Resource Management Element and Master Plan of Parks.

F.  Suitability of Land to Be Dedicated. Each park site proposed for dedication in compliance with this section shall be physically suited for the intended use.

1.  Land which is made part of a park site for subdivision design purposes, but which is physically unsuited for park use, shall not be considered when calculating the area of the park site provided in compliance with this section. The park space provided shall be calculated from the road rights-of-way and interior property lines abutting the site, and not from any abutting roadway centerline.

2.  If the council determines that any of the land proposed to be dedicated is not suitable for park use, it may reject all or any portion of the land offered, and in that event the subdivider shall instead pay a fee in compliance with subsection (D) of this section.

G.  Conveyance of Land, Payment of Fees. Real property being dedicated for park purposes shall be conveyed by the parcel or final map in fee simple absolute, to the city by the subdivider, free and clear of all encumbrances except those which, in the opinion of the city attorney, will not interfere with use of the property for park and recreational purposes, and which the council agrees to accept. The amount of required fees shall be deposited with the city at the time of submittal of a parcel or final map. The fees shall be held by the city until the map is recorded, or the time for recordation expires. The subdivider shall provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land, and title insurance approved by the city attorney in favor of the city in an amount equal to the value of the land.

H.  Use of Collected Fees. Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be used only for the purpose of providing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the proposed subdivision. Any fees collected shall be committed within five years after payment, or issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.69.040  Reservations of land.

As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the city may require the subdivider to reserve sites appropriate in area and location for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses, in compliance with this section.

A.  Standards for Reservation of Land.

1.  Location of Land. Where a park, recreational facilities, fire station, library, or other public use is shown in the General Plan or applicable specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as determined by the city in compliance with the standards in the applicable plan.

2.  Configuration. The reserved area shall be of a size and shape that will permit the balance of the property to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The land to be reserved shall be in multiples of streets and parcels that will permit an efficient division of the reserved area if it is not acquired within the period determined by subsection (B) of this section, Procedure for Reservation of Land.

B.  Procedure for Reservation of Land. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the parcel or final map enter into a binding agreement with the subdivider to acquire the reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless a longer time is authorized by mutual agreement.

C.  Purchase Price of Reserved Land. The purchase price shall be the market value of the land at the time the tentative map is filed, plus the property taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintaining the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

D.  Termination of Reservation. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement as described in subsection (B) of this section, Procedure for Reservation of Land, the reservation shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.69.050  Right-of-way dedications.

A.  Offers of Dedication Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the review authority to be needed for public and private streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; drainage; public and private greenways; scenic easements, public utility easements; and any other necessary public and private easements.

B.  Improvements. The subdivider shall construct or agree to construct all improvements approved or required for the subdivision, including access rights and abutters’ rights, in compliance with the city’s improvement standards.

C.  Rights-of-Way, Generally. Rights-of-way shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required improvements. In addition, where parcels front on a city-maintained road of insufficient width, or when the existing right-of-way is not deeded, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient for the ultimate facility.

D.  Bicycle Paths. Any subdivider who is required to dedicate roadways to the public may be required to dedicate additional land for bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision, if necessary to offset impacts otherwise associated with the subdivision.

E.  Transit Facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision will be required for local transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing paths and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if:

1.  The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for 200 dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the General Plan; and

2.  The review authority finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision.

F.  Alternative Transportation Systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways, hiking or equestrian trails in the General Plan, Parks and Recreation or Bikeways Master Plans, applicable specific plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate land as is necessary to provide for these ways. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.69.060  School site dedications.

A.  Dedication Requirement. In compliance with Map Act Section 66478, a subdivider may be required to dedicate land as the review authority determines to be necessary for adequate elementary school facilities for the residents of the subdivision. Dedication may be required only if the subdivider and/or successors in interest to the property:

1.  Have owned the land being subdivided for less than 10 years before filing the tentative map; and

2.  Develop, or complete the development, of a subdivision of more than 400 dwelling units within a single school district, within a period of three years or less.

B.  Tentative Map Approval. If the school district responds to the referral of the tentative map application (SMC 19.63.030) with a report to the city describing the land the district deems necessary and suitable to provide adequate elementary school service to residents of the proposed subdivision, the review authority shall require the dedication of land as a condition of approval of the tentative map. As required by Map Act Section 66478, the dedication requirement shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible, or exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the State Allocation Board.

C.  Timing of Dedication. The required dedication may occur before, concurrently with, or up to 60 days after the filing of a final map on any portion of the subdivision. If the school district accepts the dedication, the district shall pay the subdivider the amounts required by Map Act Section 66478, and shall record the certificate required by Map Act Section 66478. 

D.  Termination of Dedication Requirement. The requirement of dedication shall automatically terminate unless, within 30 days after the requirement is imposed by the review authority, the school district makes a binding commitment to the subdivider agreeing to accept the dedication at any time before the construction of the first 400 dwelling units. Upon acceptance of the dedication, the school district shall repay to the subdivider and/or successors the costs specified in Business and Professions Code Section 11525.2.

E.  Judicial Review. Any person who is aggrieved by or fails to agree to the reasonableness of any requirement imposed in compliance with this section may bring a special proceeding in the superior court in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.37. 

F.  Reversion of Land – Repurchase. Should the school district find itself unable to accept the dedication for reasons other than specified in the commitment with the subdivider, the dedicated land shall revert to the subdivider. If the dedication is accepted, and the school district, within 10 years from the date of acceptance, offers the property or any substantial part thereof for public sale, the subdivider shall have the first option to repurchase the property for the price paid by the district, plus a sum equal to the amount of property taxes which would have been paid during the period of public ownership. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.70       IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS

Sections:

19.70.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.70.020  Improvement plans.

19.70.030  Installation of improvements.

19.70.040  Improvement agreements and security.

19.70.050  Soils reports.


19.70.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the review and approval of improvement plans, the installation of improvements, agreements and guarantees for their installation, and dedications. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.70.020  Improvement plans.

After the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any improvements necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval. Improvement shall be defined as any infrastructure including streets, storm drains, sewers, water facilities, utilities, site grading and the like. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city as follows:

A.  Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall include the following information:

1.  Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports and other information required by the city engineer; 

2.  Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control;

3.  The improvement plan checking fees required by the city fee resolution;

4.  The final map of the subdivision.

B.  Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the city engineer and other reviewing agencies for review and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection (C) of this section, the subdivider shall also submit to the city engineer a detailed cost estimate of all improvements, based on guidelines provided by the city. 

C.  Review and Approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer, within the time limits provided by Map Act Section 66456.2.

D.  Effect of Approval. The final approval of improvement plans shall be required before approval of a parcel or final map. The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.70.030  Installation of improvements.

Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a tentative map in compliance with this chapter (see SMC 19.70.020(B)) shall be installed as provided by this section.

A.  Timing of Improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection (B) of this section, and before the approval of a parcel or final map in compliance with SMC 19.64.060, Parcel map approval, or SMC 19.64.100, Final map approval, except where:

1.  Improvements are deferred in compliance with SMC 19.70.040, Improvement agreements and security; or

2.  Improvements are required as conditions on the approval of a subdivision of four or fewer lots, in which case construction of the improvements shall be required:

a.  Only when a permit for development of an affected parcel is issued by the department; or

b.  At the time the construction of the improvements is required in compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the city, as set forth in SMC 19.70.040, Improvement agreements and security; or

c.  At the time set forth in a condition of approval, when the review authority finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by that time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

B.  Inspection of Improvements. The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows:

1.  Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the city. The designated representative shall be present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the city engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required.

2.  Inspection Procedures.

a.  Inspections Required. The city engineer shall make any inspections as he/she deems necessary to ensure that all construction complies with the approved improvement plans. The developer shall pay the full cost of any contract inspection services determined to be necessary by the city engineer. The city shall invoice the developer for inspection services at appropriate times during the period of construction of the improvements.

b.  Access to Site and Materials. The city engineer shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in accordance with the approved improvement plans. 

c.  Authority for Approval. The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed.

d.  Improper Work or Materials. Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the city engineer. In the event that the city engineer determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications, he or she shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures necessary to resume work. Any work done after issuance of a stop work order shall be a violation of this title.

3.  Notification. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer upon the completion of each stage of construction as outlined in this chapter, and shall not proceed with further construction until authorized by the city engineer. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.70.040  Improvement agreements and security.

A subdivider may file a parcel or final map before completion of all the improvements required by this development code and conditions of approval of the tentative map, only when the subdivider first obtains council approval of a subdivision improvement agreement executed and submitted for council review by the subdivider, and provides the city performance security as required by this section. Improvement agreements and required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act.

A.  Contents of Improvement Agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on a form provided by the city engineer and approved by the city attorney and shall include the following provisions:

1.  Description of Improvements. A description of all improvements to be completed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved subdivision improvement plans.

2.  Time Limit for Construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

3.  Completion by City. Provide that if the subdivider fails to complete all required improvements within the specified time, the city may elect to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including any attorney and legal fees associated with enforcement of the agreement.

4.  Surety Requirement. Require the subdivider to secure the agreement by furnishing security to insure full and faithful performance and to insure payment to laborers and material suppliers, as specified in subsection (B) of this section. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer’s cost estimate submitted by the subdivider as provided by SMC 19.70.030(B), Inspection of Improvements, and approved by the city engineer. The total cost of improvements to be guaranteed shall be as provided in the approved engineer’s cost estimate.

5.  Phased Construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider. 

6.  Time Extensions. Provisions for an extension of time under conditions specified therein, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection (D) of this section.

B.  Security Required to Guarantee Improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney, as follows:

1.  Type of Security. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be secured by all of the following:

a.  A guarantee for "Faithful Performance," in the amount of 100 percent of the engineer’s estimate;

b.  A guarantee for "Materials and Labor," in the amount of 100 percent of the engineer’s estimate;

c.  A one-year guarantee and warranty for work in the amount of 10 percent of the engineer’s estimate.

2.  Form of Security. The required surety shall consist of one or more of the following forms selected by the city engineer for the full amounts specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section.

a.  A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

b.  A bond or bonds executed by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;

c.  An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal, or local government when any said agency provides at least 20 percent of the financing for the portion of the act or agreement requiring security, or from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment; or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution;

d.  A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the city, where the review authority finds that it would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two years after the recordation of the map; or

e.  Any form of security, including security interests in real property, which is acceptable to the city.

C.  Time Extensions. An extension of time for completion of improvements under a subdivision improvement agreement shall be granted by the council only as follows:

1.  Public Works Report. The city engineer notifies the council that either the subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with reasonable diligence or is not yet ready to develop the subdivision, and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to complete all required work within the time of the requested extension. 

2.  Agreement by Sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or other surety, or if recommended by the city engineer, at an increased amount.

3.  Council Action. The council approves the extension by at least a four-fifths vote. As a condition of granting a time extension, the council may impose whatever additional requirements the council deems reasonable to protect the public interest.

D.  Acceptance of Improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by the council of subdivision improvements, the city engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.70.050  Soils reports.

Soils reports shall be provided by the subdivider as required by this section.

A.  Preliminary Soils Report. A preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be required for every subdivision. The preliminary soils report shall be submitted with the improvement plans for review and approval by the city engineer and building official. 

1.  Form of Report. The preliminary soils report shall include a complete description of the site based on a field investigation of soils matters. The soils matters reviewed shall include stability, erosion, settlement, feasibility of construction of the proposed improvements, description of soils-related hazards and problems and proposed methods of eliminating or reducing these hazards and problems. The investigation and report shall include field investigation and laboratory tests with detailed information and recommendations relative to all aspects of grading, filling and other earthwork, foundation design, pavement design and subsurface drainage.

The report shall also recommend any required corrective action for the purpose of preventing structural damages to the subdivision improvements and the structures to be constructed on the lots. The report shall also recommend any special precautions required for erosion control, and the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.

If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, or environmental impacts, a subsequent soils investigation of each parcel in the subdivision may be required and submitted to the city engineer before approval of a parcel or final map.

2.  Preliminary Soils Report Waiver. The preliminary soils report may be waived if the city engineer and the building official determine that existing available information on the qualities of the soils of the subdivision makes no preliminary analysis necessary.

B.  Final Soils Report. A final soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be required.

1.  The report shall contain sufficient information to ensure compliance with all recommendations of the preliminary soils report and the specifications for the project.

2.  The report shall also contain information relative to soils conditions encountered which differed from that described in the preliminary soils reports, along with any corrections, additions or modifications not shown on the approved plans.

C.  Geologic Investigation and Report. If the city engineer determines that conditions warrant, a geologic investigation and report may also be required. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.71       SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS

Sections:

19.71.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.71.020  Survey procedure and practice.

19.71.030  Monuments.

19.71.040  Survey information on final or parcel map.


19.71.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides requirements for subdivision survey work, and the placement of subdivision monuments. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.71.020  Survey procedure and practice.

The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a final map or parcel map, shall conform to the standard practices and principles of land surveying, the California Land Surveyor’s Act, and the provisions of this chapter. All related documents shall be executed by a California-registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. Whenever the city engineer has established a system of coordinates and/or monuments which is within a reasonable distance of the subdivision boundary, as determined by the city engineer, the field survey shall be tied into the system. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.71.030  Monuments.

In surveying a subdivision, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient permanent monuments so that any part of the survey may be readily retraced. Survey monuments shall be set by the engineer or surveyor for all new subdivisions requiring a parcel map or final map, unless waived by the city engineer, in compliance with this section.

A.  Boundary Monuments.

1.  Boundary monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and ends of curves and at intermediate points approximately 1,000 feet apart. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the final map or parcel map.

2.  All exterior boundary monuments shall be set prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map or as certified on the final map.

B.  Interior Monuments. Whenever interior monuments are required, the monuments shall be set at:

1.  All block and lot corners and angle points;

2.  The beginnings and ends of curves;

3.  Points of intersection with centerlines of other existing and proposed streets and alleys; and

4.  The points of intersection with the exterior boundary lines.

C.  Monument Type and Positioning. All monuments set in the course of the survey shall be as specified by the city engineer and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed by the city engineer.

D.  Identification Marks. All monuments shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signs the engineer’s or surveyor’s certificate and under whose supervision the survey is made.

E.  Replacement of Destroyed Monuments. Any monument which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements by the city shall be replaced by the subdivider.

F.  Timing of Monument Installation. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be completely monumented or referenced before the final map or parcel map is submitted to the city engineer for filing. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map or parcel map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes the city a bond, instrument of credit, or cash deposit in a sufficient amount to guarantee payment of the cost of setting the monuments in compliance with Map Act Section 66496.

G.  Notice of Completion. Within five days after all monuments have been set, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and the city engineer that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer’s estimate for improvements in compliance with SMC 19.70.040, Improvement agreements and security. If requested, this amount of the bond may be released upon verification of the setting of the monuments by the city engineer. 

H.  Inspection and Approval. All monuments shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.71.040  Survey information on final or parcel map.

The following survey information shall be shown on each final map or parcel map for which a field survey was made in compliance with this development code.

A.  Stakes, monuments (together with their precise position) or other evidence found on the ground, to determine the boundaries of the subdivision;

B.  Corners of all adjoining properties identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision names, numbers and pages of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation;

C.  All information and data necessary to locate and retrace any point or line without unreasonable difficulty;

D.  The location and description of any required monuments to be set after recordation of the final map, and the statement that they are "to be set";

E.  Bearing and length of each lot line, block line and boundary line and each required bearing and distance;

F.  Length, radius and angle of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve;

G.  The centerlines of any street or alley in or adjoining the subdivision which have been established by the city engineer, together with reference to a map showing the centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be so stated;

H.  Any other survey data or information as may be required to be shown by the city engineer or by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.80 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY

Sections:

19.80.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.80.020    Planning agency defined.

19.80.030    City planner.

19.80.040    Project advisory committee.

19.80.050    Planning commission.

19.80.060    Design review and historic preservation commission.


19.80.010 Purpose of chapter.

This chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of city staff and official bodies in the administration of this development code, in addition to the council. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.80.020 Planning agency defined.

The functions of a planning agency shall be performed by the Sonoma city council, planning commission, design review and historic preservation commission and department of planning, building and public works, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65100). (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.80.030 City planner.

A. Appointment. The city planner shall be appointed by the city manager.

B. Duties and Authority. The city planner shall:

1. Have the responsibility to perform all of the functions designated by state law (Government Code Section 65103, Planning Agency Functions);

2. Have the responsibility and authority to grant applications for all administrative permits and approvals issued by the planning division;

3. Perform other responsibilities assigned by the city council and the city manager;

4. Perform the duties and functions prescribed in this development code, including the review of development projects, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65901 et seq.), SMC 19.52.020, Authority for land use and zoning decisions, Table 5-1, Review Authority for Planning Permits, and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.80.040 Project advisory committee.

A. Establishment. The project advisory committee is hereby established.

B. Composition. The project advisory committee shall be composed of representatives of the department of planning and public works (including the city planner, the building official and the city engineer), the police department, and the fire department; and shall also include a public member, who is not already an appointed city commissioner, representing the community-at-large and appointed by the city council.

C. Duties and Authority. The project advisory committee shall meet with prospective applicants, as requested, to review development proposals prior to the submittal of a formal application, in order to provide comments and suggestions on issues related to site planning, environmental impacts, public services and infrastructure, and potential conditions of approval, subject to the limitations set forth in SMC 19.52.040(A), Preapplication Review. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.80.050 Planning commission.

A. Establishment. The Sonoma planning commission is established by Chapter 2.44 SMC, Planning Commission, which identifies the membership, terms of office, removal, rules of order, and general responsibilities.

B. Duties and Authority. The commission shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this development code, including:

1. The review of and determination on applications for development projects and subdivisions filed with the planning division as described in Divisions V and VI; and

2. The recommendation, to the council for final determinations, on development agreements, General Plan amendments, specific plans, development code amendments, zoning map amendments, environmental documents, and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the city’s planning process.

The above listed duties and functions shall be performed in compliance with SMC 19.52.020, Authority for land use and zoning decisions, Table 5-1, Review Authority for Planning Permits, and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.80.060 Design review and historic preservation commission.

A. Establishment. The Sonoma design review and historic preservation commission is established by Chapter 2.60 SMC, Design Review and Historic Preservation Commission, which identifies the membership, terms of office, removal, rules of order, and general responsibilities.

B. Duties and Authority. The design review and historic preservation commission shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this development code, including:

1. The review of and determination of sign applications in accordance with SMC Title 18;

2. The review of applications for the demolition or relocation of structures within the Historic Overlay zone and of potentially historic structures located outside of the Historic Overlay zone, in accordance with SMC 19.54.090, Demolition permit;

3. Architectural review, in accordance with SMC 19.54.080, Site design and architectural review.

The above listed duties and functions shall be performed in compliance with SMC 19.52.020, Authority for land use and zoning decisions, Table 5-1, Review Authority for Planning Permits, and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.82 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND PARCELS

Sections:

19.82.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.82.020    Restrictions on nonconforming uses and structures.

19.82.030    Loss of nonconforming status.

19.82.040    Nonconforming signs.

19.82.050    Nonconforming parcels.


19.82.010 Purpose of chapter.

This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of nonconforming land uses, structures, and parcels, with the exception of wine tasting facilities and wine bars which are governed by SMC 19.50.120(B). Within the zoning districts established by this development code, there exist land uses, structures, and parcels that were lawful before the adoption or amendment of this development code, but are prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the terms of this development code or future amendments. It is the intent of this development code to discourage the long-term continuance of these nonconformities, but to permit them to exist under limited conditions. (Ord. 01-2019 § 4, 2019; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.82.020 Restrictions on nonconforming uses and structures.

Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following provisions, except as otherwise provided by SMC 19.82.030, Loss of nonconforming status:

A. Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming use of land, or within a structure, may be continued, transferred, or sold; provided, that:

1. The use shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater floor area or portion of the site than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided by subsection (C) of this section; and

2. Additional uses on the site shall not be allowed unless the nonconforming use is first discontinued, and any replacement use complies with all applicable provisions of this development code.

B. Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure may continue to be used as follows:

1. Changes to Structure. The enlargement, extension, reconstruction, or structural alteration of a structure that is nonconforming only as to height and setback regulations may be allowed with conditional use permit approval if:

a. The additions or improvements conform to all other applicable provisions of this development code;

b. The exterior limits of new construction do not exceed the applicable height limit or encroach any further into the setbacks than the comparable portions of the existing structure;

c. Changes involving the replacement/reconstruction do not include the replacement of more than 50 percent of the original floor area, or more than 50 percent of the total length of all exterior walls of the original structure; and

d. The enlargement of the structure will not accommodate the expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming use of land.

2. Maintenance and Repair. A nonconforming structure may undergo normal maintenance and repairs, provided no structural alterations are made (exception: see subsection (B)(3) of this section), and the work does not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure in any one-year period, unless the commission allows more extensive work through conditional use permit approval.

3. Seismic Retrofitting/Building Code Compliance. Repairs or alterations otherwise required by law shall be allowed in the following circumstances:

a. Unreinforced Masonry Structures. Reconstruction required to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures shall be permitted without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards; and

b. Building Code Requirements. Reconstruction required to comply with building code requirements shall be allowed without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting/code compliance is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards, as identified in subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section and other applicable building code requirements, including state law (e.g., Title 24, California Code of Regulations, etc.).

4. Site Plan and Architectural Review Required. Any alteration which exceeds 1,000 square feet in gross floor area shall require site plan and architectural review, in compliance with SMC 19.54.080.

C. Nonconforming Use of a Conforming Structure. The nonconforming use of a structure that otherwise conforms with all applicable provisions of this development code may be continued, transferred, and sold, as follows:

1. Expansion of Use. The nonconforming use of a portion of a structure may be extended throughout the structure, subject to use permit approval (SMC 19.54.040).

2. Substitution of Use. The nonconforming use of a conforming structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or less intensive/more restricted nature. However, the replacement use shall serve as the “new bench mark” in terms of establishing the acceptable level of noncompliance.

D. Destroyed Structure. The reconstruction, restoration, and reuse of a nonconforming structure verified to have been involuntarily damaged by fire or calamity to the extent of more than 50 percent of the appraised value of the structure as determined by a qualified appraiser, may be allowed, provided the reconstruction, restoration, and reuse:

1. Shall occur within one year after the date of the damage/destruction;

2. Has no greater floor area than the one damaged/destroyed; and

3. A single-family dwelling may be rebuilt on its original foundation, to its original footprint, by only the owner at that time of destruction, within a period of one year from the time of destruction, regardless of the extent/percentage of destruction. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.82.030 Loss of nonconforming status.

If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, it shall be concluded that the use has been abandoned. Without further action by the city, further use of the site or structure shall comply with all the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this development code. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.82.040 Nonconforming signs.

Requirements for nonconforming signs are addressed in SMC Title 18, Signs and Display Advertising. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.82.050 Nonconforming parcels.

A. Determination of Nonconforming Status. A nonconforming parcel of record that does not comply with the access, area, or width requirements of this development code for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be considered to be a legal building site if it meets one of the criteria specified by this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the following:

1. Approved Subdivision. The parcel was created through a subdivision approved by the city or the county of Sonoma.

2. Individual Parcel Legally Created by Deed. The parcel is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed before the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming.

3. Variance or Lot Line Adjustment. The parcel was approved through the variance procedure (SMC 19.54.060) or resulted from a lot line adjustment.

4. Partial Government Acquisition. The parcel was created in conformity with the provisions of this development code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the parcel was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size was decreased not more than 20 percent and the yard facing any road was decreased not more than 50 percent.

B. Limitations on the Use of Nonconforming Parcels. Nonconforming parcels shall be developed and used only as follows:

1. Use of Contiguous Parcels. Until such time as contiguous nonconforming parcels are merged, no structure shall be constructed on any nonconforming contiguously owned, residentially zoned parcels that are less than 30 feet wide, or less than 5,000 square feet in area, or on slopes more than 20 percent, if the current owner(s) acquired or were transferred the parcels after October 12, 1976.

2. Further Subdivision Prohibited. Where structures have been erected on a nonconforming parcel, the area where structures are located shall not be later subdivided, nor shall lot lines be altered through lot line adjustment, so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of this development code, or in any way that makes the use of the parcel more nonconforming. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.84 APPEALS 

Sections:

19.84.010    Purpose of chapter.

19.84.020    Appeal subjects and jurisdiction.

19.84.030    Filing of appeals.

19.84.040    Processing of appeals.


19.84.010 Purpose of chapter.

Determinations or actions of the city planner and city commissions may be appealed as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.84.020 Appeal subjects and jurisdiction.

Determinations and actions that may be appealed, and the authority to act upon an appeal shall be as follows:

A. Code Administration and Interpretation. The following determinations and actions of the city planner and department staff may be appealed to the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable, and then to the council:

1. Determinations on the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this development code that are believed to be in error, and cannot be resolved with staff;

2. Any determination that a permit application or information submitted with the application is incomplete, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65943); and

3. Any enforcement action in compliance with Chapter 19.90 SMC, Enforcement of Development Code Provisions.

B. Land Use Permit and Hearing Decisions. Decisions of the city planner on zoning clearances may be appealed to the planning commission or the design review and historic preservation commission, as applicable. Decisions by a commission may be appealed to the council. (Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.84.030 Filing of appeals.

A. Eligibility. An appeal may be filed by:

1. Any person affected by an administrative determination or action by the city planner, as described in SMC 19.84.020(A);

2. In the case of a land use permit or hearing decision described in SMC 19.84.020(B), by anyone who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a public hearing in connection with the decision being appealed, or who otherwise informed the city in writing of the nature of their concerns before the hearing;

3. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance of this city, any member of the city council may, at his/her discretion, appeal any final decision of any city commission board or official, to the city council. If an appeal is made by a council member, there shall be a presumption applied that the reason for the appeal is because the appealed decision or interpretation has significant and material effects on the quality of life within the city of Sonoma. No inference of bias shall be made because of the appeal and no other reason need be stated by the council person in his/her notice of appeal.

Appeals made according to this subsection shall not be subject to any fees.

B. Timing and Form of Appeal. All appeals shall be submitted in writing on a city application form, and shall specifically state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal. Appeals shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days following the final date of the determination or action being appealed.

C. Fee. Appeals shall be accompanied by the filing fee set by the city council’s fee resolution, except as provided for in subsection (A)(3) of this section.

D. Scope of Land Use Permit Appeals. An appeal of a decision by the city planner or commission on a land use permit shall be limited to issues raised at the public hearing, or in writing before the hearing, or information that was not known at the time of the decision that is being appealed.

E. Effect of Filing an Appeal. The filing of a valid appeal shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any permit until such time as the matter on appeal is resolved. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.84.040 Processing of appeals.

A. Scheduling of Hearing. After an appeal has been received in compliance with the procedures listed in SMC 19.84.030(B), Timing and Form of Appeal, the appeal shall be transmitted to the city planner who shall place the item on the next available commission agenda, or the city clerk shall schedule the matter for the next available council agenda, as applicable to the appeal.

B. Report. After the appeal hearing has been scheduled, the city planner shall prepare a report on the matter, and forward the report to the appropriate appeal body.

C. Joining an Appeal. Only those persons who file an appeal within the 15-day appeal period in compliance with SMC 19.84.030(A), Eligibility, shall be considered the appellants of the subject permit. Any person who wishes to join an appeal shall follow the same procedures for an appellant in compliance with subsection (A) of this section. No person shall be allowed to join an appeal after the end of the 15-day appeal period.

D. Action and Findings.

1. General Procedure. The appeal body shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings. At the hearing, the appeal body may consider any issue involving the matter that is the subject of the appeal, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal.

a. The appeal body may affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, decision, or determination that is the subject of the appeal, based upon findings of fact about the particular case. The findings shall identify the reasons for the action on the appeal and verify the compliance or noncompliance of the subject of the appeal with the provisions of this development code.

b. When reviewing a decision on a land use permit, the appeal body may adopt additional conditions of approval that may address other issues or concerns than the subject of the appeal.

2. Appeals to the City Council.

a. By an Appellant. A decision by a commission may be appealed to the city council as provided by SMC 19.84.030, Filing of appeals.

b. Council’s Decision Is Final. The decision of the council on an appeal shall be final.

c. Tie Vote. A tie vote by the city council with regard to an appeal shall result in the affirmation of the decision of the body whose decision was appealed.

E. Effective Date of Appeal Decision. A decision by the commission is effective on the sixteenth day after the decision, when no appeal to the decision has been filed with the council. A decision by the council is effective as of the date of the decision. A final decision by the city council with regard to an appeal shall take the form of a resolution. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.86       GENERAL PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT CODE/ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

Sections:

19.86.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.86.020  Applicability.

19.86.030  Initiation of amendments.

19.86.040  Hearings and notice.

19.86.050  Planning commission action on amendments.

19.86.060  City council action on amendments.

19.86.070  Findings.

19.86.080  Prezoning.


19.86.010  Purpose of chapter.

The following provisions allow for the amendment of the General Plan, this development code, or the official zoning map whenever required by public necessity and general welfare. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.020  Applicability.

A General Plan amendment may include revisions to text, goals, policies, actions, or land use designations. Amendments to this development code may modify any standards, requirements, or procedures applicable to the subdivision, development, and/or use of property within the city. Zoning map amendments have the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.030  Initiation of amendments.

An amendment to the General Plan or this development code shall be initiated in compliance with this section.

A.  Who May Initiate an Amendment. An amendment may be initiated by:

1.  The filing with the planning commission of a resolution of intention by the city council;

2.  The passage of a resolution of intention by the planning commission; or

3.  The filing with the planning commission of a petition or application by the record owners of property which is the subject of a proposed amendment or by their authorized agents.

B.  Application Requirements. An application for amendment shall be on the forms and accompanied by all information required by the city, and shall also be accompanied by the filing fee established by the city’s fee resolution. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.040  Hearings and notice.

Upon receipt of a complete application to amend the General Plan, this development code, or the zoning map, or upon initiation by the city planner, planning commission, or city council, and following department review, public hearings shall be set before the commission and council. Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Chapter 19.88 SMC, Public Hearings. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.050  Planning commission action on amendments.

The planning commission shall make a written recommendation to the council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment, based upon the findings contained in SMC 19.86.070, Findings. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.060  City council action on amendments.

Upon receipt of the planning commission’s recommendation, the city council shall approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment based upon the findings in SMC 19.86.070, Findings.

If the council proposes to adopt any substantial modification(s) to the amendment not previously considered by the commission during its hearings, the proposed modification shall be first referred back to the commission for its recommendation. Failure of the commission to report back to the council within 45 days after the referral, or within any longer time set by the council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the modification(s). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.070  Findings.

A.  Findings for General Plan Amendments. An amendment to the General Plan may be approved only if all of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

1.  The proposed amendment is internally consistent with the General Plan;

2.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city;

3.  The site is physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints) for the requested/anticipated land use development(s); and

4.  The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 

B.  Findings for Development Code/Map Amendments. An amendment to the text of this development code or the official zoning map may be approved only if all of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner, as applicable to the type of amendment.

1.  Findings Required for All Development Code/Map Amendments:

a.  The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, policies, and actions of the General Plan;

b.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city; and

c.  The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

2.  Additional Finding for Development Code Amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this development code. 

3.  Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments. The site is physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints) for the requested zoning designations and anticipated land use(s)/development(s). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.86.080  Prezoning.

A.  Purpose. An unincorporated property within the city’s sphere of influence may be prezoned for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to the property in the event of subsequent annexation to the city. The initiation and the procedures for the prezoning shall be the same procedures which govern the rezoning of property within the city.

Upon the effective date of annexation of property which has been prezoned in compliance with this section, the zoning designation shall become the official zoning designation for the property and shall be so designated on the city’s official zoning map.

B.  Planning Commission Action on Prezoning. The planning commission shall make a written recommendation to the city council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed prezoning, based on the findings contained in subsection (D) of this section, Findings for Prezoning.

C.  City Council Action on Prezoning. Upon receipt of the planning commission’s recommendation, the city council shall approve, approve in modified form or disapprove the proposed prezoning based on the findings contained in subsection (D) of this section, Findings for Prezoning.

If the council proposes to adopt any substantial modification(s) to the prezoning not previously considered by the commission during its hearings, the proposed modification(s) may be first referred back to the commission for its recommendation, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65857) and SMC 19.86.060, City council action on amendments.

D.  Findings for Prezoning. A prezoning may be approved only if all of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

1.  The proposed prezoning is consistent with the land use designation of the General Plan, as well as applicable General Plan goals and policies;

2.  The proposed prezoning would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city;

3.  The site is physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses and absence of physical constraints) for the requested/anticipated land use(s)/development(s);

4.  That the prezoning and proposed annexation represent a logical extension of city boundaries;

5.  That essential public utilities (sewer, water, storm drainage, etc.) are in the vicinity and can be extended to the area to be annexed; and

6.  That all applicable public services have the capacity to serve the area being annexed. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.88       PUBLIC HEARINGS

Sections:

19.88.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.88.020  Notice of hearing.

19.88.050  Scheduling of hearing.

19.88.060  Hearing procedure.

19.88.070  Recommendation by commission.

19.88.080  Decision and notice.

19.88.090  Effective date of decision.


19.88.010  Purpose of chapter.

This chapter provides procedures for public hearings before the commission and council. When a public hearing is required by this development code, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.88.020  Notice of hearing.

When a land use permit or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing in compliance with state law (Government Code Sections 65090 et seq.), and as required by this chapter.

A.  Contents of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include:

1.  Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing and the name of the hearing body; and the phone number and street address of the planning division, where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information;

2.  Project Information. The name of the applicant; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; a general description, in text and/or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing; and any proposed CEQA determination.

B.  Minimum Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter for a land use permit, amendment, or appeal shall be given as follows, as required by state law (Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091), by all of the following methods:

1.  Publication. Notice published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 20 days before the hearing, with an additional publication thereafter.

2.  Mailing. Notice mailed or delivered at least 20 days before the hearing to the following:

a.  Owner(s) of Proposed Site. The owner(s) of the property being considered in the application, or the owner’s agent, and the applicant;

b.  Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide schools, water, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the facilities and services may be significantly affected;

c.  Affected Owners. All owners of real property as shown on the latest Sonoma County equalized assessment roll, within a radius of 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and any other person whose property might, in the judgement of the city planner, be affected by the proposed project;

d.  Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the city planner and has paid the required fee for the notice.

3.  Posting. Notice posted in at least four public places within the boundaries of the local agency, including one public place on the site (if applicable) directly affected by the proceeding and including the notice board at City Hall.

C.  Additional Notice to Tenants. The city planner shall endeavor to provide mailed notice to commercial and residential tenants within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing at least 20 days before the hearing. 

D.  Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed in compliance with subsection (B)(2) of this section is more than 1,000, the city planner may choose to provide the alternative notice allowed by state law (Government Code Section 65091(a)(3)).

E.  Large Project Posting. In addition to the types of notice required above, posting shall be required for specified projects, as follows:

1.  Applicable Projects. Provisions for a large project posting shall apply to the following types of projects:

a.  Applications for residential development that would result in five or more new units or parcels;

b.  Applications for commercial or mixed use development that would result in the creation of 2,500 square feet or more of new commercial building area.

2.  Size and Placement. A large project posting shall consist of a minimum 24-inch by 36-inch sign board, securely mounted on posts with a minimum clearance of three feet, placed on the property that is the subject of the application. The posting shall be placed so that it is clearly visible and readable from a public right-of-way.

3.  Content. Information provided on the posting shall include the following: the name of the applicant; a general description of the application; the property address; a telephone number for a project contact; and the phone number and street address of the planning division, where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information. In addition, the words "Proposed Development Project" shall appear at the top of the sign, with a minimum letter height of three inches.

4.  Maintenance on Property. The placement of a large project posting consistent with the provisions of this section shall be considered an application submittal requirement. The posting shall occur upon submittal of an application for a planning or subdivision permit and the posting shall be maintained in good order until such time as the application has been decided.

5.  Responsibility of Applicant. The fabrication, placement and maintenance of a large project posting shall be the sole responsibility of the project applicant.

F.  Applications for Drive-Through Facilities. Whenever a hearing is held on a permit for a new drive-through facility or the modification of an existing drive-through facility, the city shall incorporate, where necessary, notice procedures for the blind, aged and disabled communities in order to facilitate their participation in any hearing on, or appeal of the denial of, the permit application.

G.  Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required above, the city planner may provide any additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the city planner determines is necessary or desirable.

H.  Resolution of Conflicting Requirements. In situations where noticing requirements established by the state or federal government require public notice in a manner that conflicts with the provisions of this section, the applicable state or federal requirements shall prevail. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.88.050  Scheduling of hearing.

After the completion of any environmental documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and a department staff report, the matter shall be scheduled for public hearing on the next available commission or council agenda (as applicable), but no sooner than 20 days after the posting of a proposed negative declaration. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.88.060  Hearing procedure.

Hearings shall be held at the date, time, and place described in the public notice required by this chapter. Any hearing may be continued from time to time; provided, that before the adjournment or recess of the hearing, a public announcement is made specifying the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.88.070  Recommendation by commission.

At the conclusion of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the General Plan, this development code, or the zoning map, the commission shall forward a recommendation, including all required findings, to the council for final action.

Following the hearing, a copy of the commission’s recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.88.080  Decision and notice.

A.  Decision. The hearing body (commission or council, as applicable) may announce and record their decision on the matter being considered at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing, or defer action and continue the matter to a later meeting agenda in compliance with SMC 19.88.060, Hearing procedure. The decision of the council on any matter is final.

B.  Notice of Decision. The notice of decision shall contain applicable findings, any conditions of approval, and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or general welfare of the city. Following the hearing and decision, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be provided. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.88.090  Effective date of decision.

The decision of the city planner or commission is final and effective on the fifteenth day following the decision unless an appeal is filed in compliance with Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals. The decision of the city council is effective upon the adoption by the council of a resolution implementing its decision. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.90       ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT CODE PROVISIONS

Sections:

19.90.010  Purpose of chapter.

19.90.020  Building permits and business licenses.

19.90.030  Official duty to enforce.

19.90.040  Violations.

19.90.050  Remedies are cumulative.

19.90.060  Inspection.

19.90.070  Initial enforcement action.

19.90.080  Legal remedies.

19.90.090  Permit revocation or modification.

19.90.100  Recovery of costs.

19.90.110  Additional permit processing fees.


19.90.010  Purpose of chapter.

The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this development code and any conditions of land use permit or subdivision approval, to promote the city’s planning efforts and for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.020  Building permits and business licenses.

A.  Compliance. All departments, officials, and public employees of the city which are vested with the authority or duty to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this development code.

B.  Permits or Licenses in Conflict with Code. Permits or licenses for uses or structures that would be in conflict with the provisions of this development code shall not be issued.

C.  Permits or Licenses Deemed Void. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this development code shall be deemed void. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.030  Official duty to enforce.

A.  City Planner. It shall be the duty of the city planner to enforce the provisions of the development code and any use of land or structures and the addition, alteration, construction, erection, moving, or reconstruction of or to any structure.

B.  Police Department. During nonoffice hours, it shall be the responsibility of the police department to monitor and enforce the provisions of this development code. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.040  Violations.

Any structure constructed or maintained contrary to the provisions of the development code and any use of land or structures operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this development code is hereby declared to be a public nuisance(s).

A.  Public Nuisance. Any structure or use which is altered, constructed, converted, enlarged, established, erected, maintained, moved, or operated, contrary to the provisions of this development code or any applicable condition of approval imposed on a permit, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties identified in this chapter and Chapter 1.12 SMC, General Penalty.

B.  Misdemeanor. Except where otherwise provided by this development code, any person, partnership, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or failing to comply with any provision(s) of this development code or any condition imposed on any development permit, map, or license, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

C.  Stop Work Order. Any construction in violation of this development code or any condition(s) imposed on a permit shall be subject to the issuance of a "stop work order." Any violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.050  Remedies are cumulative.

All remedies contained in this development code for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this development code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of city, county, or state law. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of this development code, the conviction shall not prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violation(s). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.060  Inspection.

Every applicant seeking a permit or any other action in compliance with this development code shall allow the city officials handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application (Government Code Section 65105). If the permit or other action in compliance with this development code is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate city officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval imposed on the permit. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.070  Initial enforcement action.

This section describes the procedures for initiating enforcement action in cases where the city planner has determined that real property within the city is being used, maintained, or allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this development code. It is the objective of these provisions to encourage the voluntary cooperation of responsible parties in the prompt correction of violations, so that the other enforcement measures provided by this chapter may be avoided.

A.  Notice to Responsible Parties. The city planner shall provide the record owner of the subject site and any person in possession or control of the site with a written notice of violation, which shall include the following information:

1.  A time limit for correcting the violation in compliance with subsection (B) of this section;

2.  A statement that the city intends to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with the abatement of the violation(s) in compliance with SMC 19.90.100, Recovery of costs, and/or initiate legal action as described in SMC 19.90.080, Legal remedies;

3.  A statement that the property owner may request and be provided a meeting with the city planner to discuss possible methods and time limits for the correction of the violations.

B.  Time Limit for Correction. The notice of violation shall state that the violation shall be corrected within 30 days from the date of the notice to avoid further enforcement action by the city, unless the responsible party contacts the city planner within that time to arrange for a longer period for correction. The 30-day time limit may be extended by the city planner upon determining that the responsible party will likely correct the violation within a reasonable time. The city planner may also require through the notice that correction occur within less than 30 days if the city planner determines that the violation constitutes a hazard to public health or safety.

C.  Use of Other Enforcement Procedures. The enforcement procedures of SMC 19.90.080, Legal remedies, may be employed by the city planner after or instead of the provisions of this section where the city planner determines that this section would be ineffective in securing the correction of the violation within a reasonable time. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.080  Legal remedies.

The city may choose to undertake any of the following legal actions to correct and/or abate nuisances or violations of this development code:

A.  Civil Actions.

1.  Injunction. The city attorney or the city prosecutor, upon order of the council, may apply to the superior court of Sonoma County for injunctive relief to terminate a violation of this development code.

2.  Abatement Proceedings. Where any person, firm, or corporation fails to abate a violation after being provided a notice of violation in compliance with SMC 19.90.070(A), and the opportunity to correct or end the violation, the city attorney, upon order of the council, shall apply to the superior court of Sonoma County for an order authorizing the city to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation and require the violator to pay for the cost of the actions.

3.  Nuisance Abatement. The city may pursue nuisance abatement in compliance with Chapter 14.30 SMC, Nuisance Abatement.

B.  Civil Remedies and Penalties.

l.  Civil Penalties. Any person who willfully violates the provisions of this development code or any permit issued in compliance with this development code shall be liable for a civil penalty in compliance with the council’s fee resolution for each day that the violation continues to exist.

2.  Costs and Damages. Any person violating any provisions of this development code or any permit issued in compliance with this development code shall be liable to the city for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the city, its agents, and agencies as a direct result of the violations.

3.  Procedure. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose where no fee has been established, the court should consider all relevant circumstances, including the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of the conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities, and net worth of the defendant, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant.

C.  Criminal Actions and Penalties.

1.  Misdemeanor. Any person, whether as agent, principal, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this development code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punishable by:

a.  Fine. A fine of not more than $1,000; or

b.  Imprisonment. Imprisonment in the county jail for up to six months; or

c.  Both fine and imprisonment.

2.  Separate Offense. Any violation of this development code which is committed and continues from day-to-day constitutes a separate offense for each and every day during which the violation is committed or continued.

3.  Prosecution. Criminal prosecutions shall make use of the procedures set forth in SMC 1.12.010 (general penalty). (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.090  Permit revocation or modification.

The review authority shall hold a public hearing in order to revoke or modify any permit granted in compliance with the provisions of this development code. Ten days before the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the permit was granted. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, first class postage paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the city of Sonoma, and/or the project applicant.

A.  Permit Revocation or Modification. A permit may be revoked or modified by the review authority if any one of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

1.  That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in SMC 19.54.030(H), Temporary Use Permits – Findings, Decision, or SMC 19.54.040(E), Use Permits – Findings, Decision, can no longer be made; 

2.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;

3.  That one or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met;

4.  That the improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation; or

5.  That the improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or constitutes a nuisance.

B.  Variance Revocation or Modification. A variance may be revoked or modified by the review authority if any one of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner, in addition to those outlined in subsection (A) of this section:

1.  That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in SMC 19.54.060(E), Variances – Findings, Decision, can no longer be made, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance; or

2.  That one or more of the conditions of the variance have not been met, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.100  Recovery of costs.

This section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs, including staff and city attorney time expended on the enforcement of the provisions of this development code in cases where no permit is required in order to correct a violation. The intent of this section is to recover city administrative costs reasonably related to enforcement.

A.  Record of Costs. The department shall maintain records of all administrative costs incurred by responsible city departments, associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of this development code, and shall recover the costs from the property owner in compliance with this section. Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by the council.

B.  Notice. Upon investigation and a determination that a violation of any of the provisions of this development code is found to exist, the city planner shall notify the record owner or any person having possession or control of the property by mail, of the existence of the violation, the department’s intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the owner’s right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice shall be in a form approved by the city attorney.

C.  Summary of Costs and Notice.

1.  At the conclusion of the case, the city planner shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession or control of the property by certified mail.

2.  The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the city attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for city cost recovery within 10 days of the date of the notice, and that if no request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be liable for the charges.

3.  In the event that no request for hearing is timely filed or, after a hearing the city planner affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner or person in control shall be liable to the city in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount as determined by the city planner.

4.  The costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction.

D.  Request for Hearing on Costs. Any property owner, or other person having possession and control of the subject property, who receives a summary of costs shall have the right to a hearing before the city planner on their objections to the proposed costs.

1.  A request for hearing shall be filed with the department within 10 days of the service by mail of the department’s summary of costs, on a form provided by the department. 

2.  Within 30 days of the filing of the request, and on 10 days’ written notice to the owner, the city planner shall hold a hearing on the owner’s objections, and determine their validity.

3.  In determining the validity of the costs, the city planner shall consider the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include: whether the present owner created the violation; whether there is a present ability to correct the violation; whether the owner moved promptly to correct the violation; the degree of cooperation provided by the owner; and whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation exists.

4.  The city planner’s decision shall be appealable to the council as provided by Chapter 19.84 SMC, Appeals. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.90.110  Additional permit processing fees.

Any person who establishes a land use, or alters, constructs, enlarges, erects, maintains, or moves any structure without first obtaining any permit required by this development code, shall pay the additional permit processing fees established by the council’s fee resolution for the correction of the violations, before being granted a permit for a use or structure on the site. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.92 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

19.92.010    Purpose of division.

19.92.020    Definitions of specialized terms and phrases.


19.92.010 Purpose of division.

This division provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this development code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this division conflict with definitions in other provisions of the municipal code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this development code. If a word is not defined in this division, or in other provisions of the city of Sonoma Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct. (Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


19.92.020 Definitions of specialized terms and phrases.

As used in this development code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

A. Definitions, “A.”

“Accessory dwelling unit” means an attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, and includes separate permanent provisions for entry, living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling (Government Code Section 65852.2). An accessory dwelling unit may also be provided as an efficiency dwelling unit (Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1) and/or a manufactured home (Health and Safety Code Section 18007), as defined in this section.

“Accessory dwelling unit, junior” means a living space not exceeding 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family dwelling. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall include an efficiency kitchen, and may include separate sanitation facilities or share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

“Accessory retail uses” means the retail sales of various products (including food service) in a store or similar facility that is located within a health care, hotel, office, or industrial complex. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops, and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes.

“Accessory structure” means a structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure. For the purposes of this development code, accessory structures and uses include: detached garages, greenhouses, artist’s studios, and workshops; hot tubs, jacuzzis, spas, and swimming pools, together with any enclosures; and any other open air enclosures, including gazebos and detached patio covers.

“Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same parcel, which does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the parcel where the principal use is located.

“Adult business” means any business operated at a fixed location by whatever name, which specializes in sales, services or showings that appeal to prurient interests, sexual appetites, fantasies and curiosities, including but not limited to the sale of sexually oriented and adult-restricted books, magazines, videotapes and other devices; the showing of sexually oriented and adult-restricted movies and videos; and the live performance of actual, simulated or suggested sexual activities.

“Agent” means a person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with city employees, committees, commissions, and the council, regarding matters regulated by this development code.

“Agricultural employee housing” means housing as described in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6, and employee housing as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 17008.

“Alley” means a public or private roadway, generally not more than 30 feet wide, that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage, that is not intended for general traffic circulation.

“Allowed use” means a use of land identified by Chapter 19.10 SMC, Zones and Allowable Uses, as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with land use permit and, where applicable, site plan and site plan and design review and/or building permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code.

“Alteration” means any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting.

“Animal keeping” means the keeping of animals and/or poultry, other than household pets, as defined and regulated under Chapter 8.08 SMC.

Apartment. See “Multifamily dwelling.”

“Approval” includes both approval and approval with conditions. 

“Area, net” means the portion of a parcel which is:

1. Not subject to any easement or included as a proposed public or private facility, such as an alley, highway, street, or other necessary public site within a proposed development project; or

2. Subject to an easement where the owner of the underlying fee has the right to use the entire surface except the portion where the owner of the easement may place utility poles or minor utility structures.

Except as provided above, portions of a parcel to a highway easement or any other private or public easement shall not be counted as part of the net area.

“Art, antique, collectible and gift sales” means retail sales uses including antique shops, art galleries, curio, gift, and souvenir shops, and the sales of collectible items including sports cards and comic books. Stores selling handcrafted items that are produced on the site are instead defined as “artisan shops.”

“Artisans/craft product manufacturing” means establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products.

“Artisan shops” means retail stores selling art glass, ceramics, jewelry, and other handcrafted items, where the facility includes an area for the crafting of the items being sold.

“Attic” means the area located between the uppermost plate and the roof or ridge of a structure.

“Auto and vehicle sales/rental” means retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see “Auto parts sales”); bicycle and moped sales (see “General retail”); tire recapping establishments (see “Vehicle services”); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts; or “Service station,” which are separately defined.

“Auto parts sales” means stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation (see “Vehicle services”). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under “Vehicle services” or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under “Recycling facilities – scrap and dismantling yards:’

“Automated teller machines (ATMs)” means computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations.

Automobile Repair. See “Vehicle services.” 

B. Definitions, “B.”

“Banks and financial services” means financial institutions including:

•    banks and trust companies

•    credit agencies

•    holding (but not primarily operating) companies

•    lending and thrift institutions

•    other investment companies

•    securities/commodity contract brokers, and dealers

•    security and commodity exchanges

•    vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies

See also “Automated teller machines,” above.

“Bed and breakfast inns (B&Bs)” mean residential structures with one family or resident-manager in permanent residence with up to five bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided subject to SMC 19.50.030, Bed and breakfast inns, and applicable health department regulations. A bed and breakfast inn with more than five guest rooms is considered a hotel or motel, and is included under the definition of “Hotel or motel.”

“Broadcasting studios” means commercial and public communications uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Transmission and receiving apparatus, including antennas and towers, are included under the definition of “Telecommunications facilities.”

Building. See “Structure.”

“Building material stores” means retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in “Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution.” Hardware stores are listed in the definition of “General retail,” even if they sell some building materials.

“Business support services” means establishments primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, etc., also includes:

•    blueprinting

•    business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see “Vehicle services”)

•    commercial art and design (production)

•    computer-related services (rental, repair)

•    copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services

•    equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are “Storage yards and sales lots”)

•    film processing laboratories

•    heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site 

•    janitorial services

•    mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping)

•    other “heavy service” business services

•    outdoor advertising services

•    photocopying

•    photo finishing

•    protective services (other than office related)

•    soils and materials testing laboratories

•    window cleaning.

C. Definitions, “C.”

Cabinet Shop. See “Furniture, furnishings and equipment stores (cabinet shops).”

“California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)” means state law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur.

“Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis that is used for medicinal, nonmedicinal, or other purposes.

“Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 

“Cannabis” also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.

“Cannabis concentrate” means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate the cannabinoid active ingredient, thereby increasing the product’s potency.

“Cannabis product” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

“Car washes” means permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes are fund-raising activities, typically conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day.

“Caretaker and employee housing” means a residence that is accessory to a nonresidential primary use of the site, where needed for security, or 24-hour care or supervision.

“Cemeteries” mean interment establishments engaged in subdividing property into cemetery lots and offering burial plots or air space for sale. Includes animal cemeteries; cemetery, mausoleum, crematorium and columbarium operations, and on-site funeral homes accessory to these uses. 

“Child day care facilities” mean facilities that provide nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services.

1. “Child day care center” means commercial or nonprofit child day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate 15 or more children. Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use.

2. “Large family day care home” means a day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for seven to 14 children. Children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility.

3. “Small family day care home” means a day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for eight or fewer children. Children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility.

“City” means the city of Sonoma, state of California, referred to in this development code as the “city.” 

“City council” means the Sonoma city council, referred to in this development code as the “council.” 

“City planner” mean the city of Sonoma city planner, or designee of the city planner.

“Clubs, lodges, and private meeting halls” means permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for:

•    business associations

•    civic, social and fraternal organizations

•    labor unions and similar organizations

•    political organizations

•    professional membership organizations

•    other membership organizations.

“Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession, manufacturing, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis product for medicinal, nonmedicinal, or any other purpose and includes (1) the production of hashish oil and the distillation or extraction of cannabidiol (“CBD”) from industrial hemp having more than three-tenths of one percent THC contained in the dried flowering tops and (2) the activities of any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of state law that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses.

Commercial Development, Large. For purposes of determining whether use permit review is required, “large commercial development” is defined as follows:

•    New construction of a commercial building with an area of 10,000 square feet or greater.

•    An addition to an existing commercial building of 10,000 square feet or greater.

•    An addition to an existing commercial building that would result in a building area of 10,000 square feet or greater.

Commission. See “Design review and historic preservation commission” and “Planning commission.”

“Common interest development” means any residential condominium, community apartment house, or stock cooperative.

“Community care facility” means a residential care facility serving six or fewer persons as provided for under Section 1566.3 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Community centers” means multipurpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one or more meeting or multipurpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for such activities as meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc.

“Community garden” means a site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, flowers, which is shared and maintained by nearby residents.

“Condominium” means, as defined by Civil Code Section 1315, a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. The area within the boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to any land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. 

“Convenience stores” means retail stores of 3,500 square feet or less in gross floor area, which carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers’ shopping needs. These stores may be part of a service station or an independent facility.

“Corporation yard” means a publicly owned and operated facility used for public works operations, including: equipment storage, staging, and repair; vehicle storage, staging, and repair, materials storage, and related office uses.

“County” means the county of Sonoma, state of California.

“Coverage” means the portion of a site covered by building footprints, usually expressed as a percentage of site area.

“Crop production and horticulture” means land devoted to growing commercial crops, in the form of orchards, vineyards, row crops, truck gardens, and other plantings.

“Cultivation” of cannabis means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis, including nurseries.

D. Definitions, “D.”

“Delivery,” with reference to cannabis, means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform.

“Density” means the number of housing units per net acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses. 

“Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density provided in SMC 19.44.030, Types of bonuses and incentives allowed.

“Department” means the Sonoma community development department, referred to in this development code as “department.”

“Design review and historic preservation commission” means the city of Sonoma design review and historic preservation commission, appointed by the Sonoma city council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101 and Chapter 2.60 SMC.

“Detached” means any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure. 

“Development” means any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of structures. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the effective date of this development code.

“Development agreement” means a contract between the city and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations, and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to city policies, rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the city may be assured that the applicant will provide infrastructure and/or pay fees required by a new project.

“Development code” means the city of Sonoma development code, SMC Title 19, referred to herein as “this development code.”

Disabled Person. For purposes of the reasonable accommodation process set forth in SMC 19.54.100 et seq., “disabled person” shall mean any person who has a medical condition, physical disability, or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of such impairment. People who are currently using illegal substances are not included in this definition unless they have a separate disability.

“Distribution,” with reference to cannabis, means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.

District. See “Zoning district.”

“Drive-in and drive-through sales” means facilities where food or other products may be purchased by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include fast-food restaurants, pharmacies, and stores specializing in coffee, dairy products, photo finishing, etc.

“Drive-in and drive-through services” means facilities where services may be obtained by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include drive-up bank teller windows, dry cleaners, etc. Does not include: automatic teller machines (ATMs) or automobile service stations, or car washes, which are separately defined.

“Duplex” means a residential structure under single ownership containing two dwellings.

“Dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” or “housing unit” means a room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis.

E. Definitions, “E.”

“Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

“Efficiency dwelling unit” means a small, self-contained dwelling unit containing a habitable room of not less than 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal dimension of seven feet. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable rooms. An additional 100 square feet of floor area within the unit shall be provided for each occupant of such a unit in excess of two.

“Efficiency kitchen” means a removable kitchen that contains a sink with a maximum waste line diameter of 1.5 inches; cooking appliances that are removable by a cord and plug connection and that do not require natural gas, propane, or electrical service greater than 120 volts; a limited food preparation counter; and storage cabinets. The entire kitchen shall not exceed six lineal feet, except that if existing counter space is being converted to efficiency kitchen use then the counter space shall not exceed eight lineal feet.

“Emergency shelters” means temporary lodging for homeless persons with minimal supportive services that may be limited to occupancy of six months or less.

“Enlargement of use” means the expansion of a land use activity on a site or within a structure so that the use/activity occupies more floor or site area.

“Environmental impact report (EIR)” means an informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

“Equestrian facilities” means commercial horse, donkey, and mule facilities including horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events), pack stations, and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks accessory and incidental to these uses.

“Equipment rental” means service establishments with outdoor storage/rental yards, which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for rental, including construction equipment. 

F. Definitions, “F.”

“Farmers market” means a temporary outdoor gathering of individual retailers, primarily focused on the sale of fresh produce, but also including other foods, beverages, handicrafts, art objects, and other items.

“Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

“Floor area” means the total of the gross horizontal areas of all floors, excluding basements, cellars, attics, and below-grade parking, within the outer surfaces of the exterior walls of buildings, or the center lines of party walls separating buildings or portions thereof.

“Floor area ratio” means the maximum gross floor area of a building (or buildings) permitted on a lot divided by the gross area of the lot. When calculating floor area ratio, the following shall be excluded: 

1. Porches, cellars, attics, and underground parking;

2. Detached garages (up to 400 square feet);

3. Second units;

4. Accessory structures with an area of 120 square feet or less.

“Food and beverage manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for human consumption, and certain related products. Includes:

•    bakeries

•    bottling plants

•    breweries

•    candy, sugar and confectionery products manufacturing

•    catering services separate from stores or restaurants

•    coffee roasting

•    dairy products manufacturing

•    fats and oil product manufacturing

•    fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing

•    grain mill products and by-products

•    meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, by-product processing 

•    soft drink production

•    miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products

May include tasting and accessory retail sales of items produced on site.

Does not include bakeries which sell all products on-site, which are included in the definition of “General retail;” or beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant (see “Nightclubs and bars”).

“Formula business” is hereby defined as auto parts sales, building material stores, furniture, furnishings and equipment stores, general retail uses, grocery stores, personal services, or restaurants, as defined in this section, which are required by contractual or other arrangement or affiliation to maintain a standardized (“formula”) array of services and/or merchandise, menu, employee uniforms, decor, facade design, signage, color scheme, trademark or servicemark, name, or similar standardized features, which cause them to be substantially identical to 10 or more other businesses in the United States regardless of ownership or location at the time that the application is deemed complete.

1. “Standardized array of services” shall be defined as a common menu or set of services priced and performed in a consistent manner.

2. “Standardized array of merchandise” shall be defined as 50 percent or more of in-stock merchandise from a single distributor bearing uniform markings.

3. “Trademark” shall be defined as a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a combination of words, phrases, symbols or designs, that identifies and distinguishes the source of the goods of one party from those of others.

4. “Servicemark” shall be defined as a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a combination of words, phrases, symbols or designs, that identifies and distinguishes the source of a service of one party from those of others.

5. “Decor” shall be defined as the style of interior furnishings, which may include but is not limited to style of furniture, wallcoverings or permanent fixtures.

6. “Color scheme” shall be defined as selection of colors used throughout, such as on the furnishings, permanent fixtures, and wallcoverings, or as used on the facade.

7. “Facade” shall be defined as the face or front of a building, including awnings, looking onto a street or an open space.

8. “Uniform apparel” shall be defined as standardized items of clothing including but not limited to standardized aprons, pants, shirts, smocks or dresses, hat, and pins (other than name tags) as well as standardized colors of clothing.

9. “Signage” shall be defined as a sign pursuant to SMC Titles 18 and 19.

“Formula business, large” means a formula business which occupies or is proposed to occupy a tenant space having an area of 10,000 square feet or greater.

“Formula business, small” means a formula business which occupies or is proposed to occupy a tenant space having an area of less than 10,000 square feet.

“Formula restaurant, large” means a formula restaurant substantially identical to 250 or more other restaurants in the United States regardless of ownership or location at the time that the application is deemed complete.

“Fueling station” means fuel dispensers and related equipment, available on a restricted basis rather than for general use.

“Fully enclosed and secure structure” means either:

1. A space within a building that complies with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes), and has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. Walls and roof must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through, and must be constructed with nontransparent material. Plastic sheeting, canvas, vinyl, or similar products or materials, regardless of gauge, are not considered solid materials; or

2. A greenhouse or other accessory structure having the purpose of allowing cultivation of flowers, plants, or other vegetation; provided, that it is required to obtain a building permit under the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 14.10 SMC (Construction Codes).

A “fully enclosed and secure structure” must be an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the parcel on which that private residence is situated.

Furniture/Fixtures Manufacturing Cabinet Shops. Definition needed.

“Furniture, furnishings and equipment stores” means stores engaged primarily in selling the following products and related services, including incidental repair services:

•    draperies

•    floor coverings 

•    furniture

•    glass and china

•    home appliances

•    home furnishings

•    home sound systems

•    interior decorating materials and services

•    large musical instruments

•    lawn furniture

•    movable spas and hot tubs

•    office furniture

•    other household electrical and gas appliances 

•    outdoor furniture

•    refrigerators 

•    stoves

•    televisions.

G. Definitions, “G.” 

“Garage” or “carport” means parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards.

1. A garage is an attached or detached accessory structure with a door, enclosed on at least three sides.

2. A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides.

“Garage sale” means any sale held for the purpose of selling, trading or otherwise disposing of unwanted household furnishings, personal goods or other tangible properties of a resident of the premises on which the sale is conducted in a residential zone.

“General Plan” means the city of Sonoma General Plan, including all its elements and all amendments to the General Plan, as adopted by the city council under the provisions of Government Code Sections 65300 et seq., and referred to in this development code as the “General Plan.”

“General retail” means stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. These stores and lines of merchandise include:

•    art galleries

•    artists’ supplies

•    bakeries (all production in support of on-site sales) 

•    bicycles

•    books

•    cameras and photographic supplies

•    clothing and accessories

•    collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps, etc.) 

•    department stores

•    drug and discount stores

•    dry goods

•    fabrics and sewing supplies

•    florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only – outdoor sales are “Plant nurseries”)

•    furniture, home furnishings and equipment 

•    general stores

•    gift and souvenir shops 

•    hardware

•    hobby materials 

•    jewelry

•    luggage and leather goods

•    musical instruments, parts and accessories 

•    newsstands

•    orthopedic supplies

•    pet stores and pet supplies

•    religious goods

•    small wares

•    specialty shops

•    sporting goods and equipment 

•    stationery

•    toys and games

•    variety stores.

“Governmental and public facilities” means facilities operated by public agencies including government offices, parks and preserves, corporation yards, fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

“Grade” means the ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior base of a structure, typically used as the basis for measurement of the height of the structure.

“Grocery store” means a retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store.

“Guest house” means a detached structure of 400 square feet or more, accessory to a single-family dwelling, accommodating living/sleeping quarters, but without kitchen or cooking facilities.

“Guideline” means a recommended course of action. A guideline may be qualitative – in contrast to a quantified standard – and is aimed at retaining and enhancing desired design characteristics. Although not mandated, guidelines are typically used by decision makers as a factor in evaluating development proposals.

H. Definitions, “H.”

“Health/fitness facilities” means fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic clubs including any of the following: indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities.

“Heliport” means a designated, marked area on the ground or the top of a structure where helicopters may land at any time.

“Home occupation” means the conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property.

“Hotel or motel” means facilities with guest rooms or suites, provided with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less than 30 days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway, and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc.

“Household pets” means the keeping/raising of birds, cats, dogs, or other common household pets, as determined by the city planner accessory to a residential use.

I. Definitions, “I.”

“Illegal building or use” means a building or use that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this development code, and did not lawfully exist on the effective date of applicable provisions of this development code.

“Indoor” or “indoors,” with reference to cultivation of cannabis, means inside a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a private residence.

“Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities” means establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including:

•    bowling alleys

•    coin-operated amusement arcades

•    dance halls, clubs and ballrooms

•    electronic game arcades

•    ice skating and roller skating

•    pool and billiard rooms as primary uses

Four or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment, or a premises where 50 percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade as described above; three or less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site.

“Intensification of use” means a change in the use of a structure or site, where the new use is required by Chapter 19.48 SMC, Parking and Loading Standards, to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation), which generate more activity on the site.

J. Definitions, “J.” No specialized terms beginning with the letter “J” are used at this time. 

K. Definitions, “K.”

“Kennel” means the keeping or boarding of more than three dogs or three cats on a property, subject to the limitations and exceptions set forth in section SMC 8.08.101.

“Kitchen” means a room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.

L. Definitions, “L.”

“Land use permit” means authority granted by the city to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including use permits, minor use permits, temporary use and temporary event permits, and variances, as established by Division V, Planning Permit Procedures.

Large Family Day Care Home. See “Child day care facilities.”

“Libraries and museums” mean public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, and planetariums, which are generally noncommercial in nature.

“Live/work facilities” means an integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-family or multifamily, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and which includes:

1. Complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with the city building code; and

2. Working space reserved for and regularly used by one or more occupants of the unit. 

“Livestock raising” means the breeding, and keeping of farm animals, whether for commercial or hobby purposes.

“Lot or parcel” means a recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances, including this development code. Types of lots include the following. See Figure 8-4, Lot Types.

1. “Corner lot” means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot.

2. “Flag lot” means a lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.

3. “Interior lot” means a lot abutting only one street.

4. “Key lot” means an interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot.

5. “Reverse corner lot” means a corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

6. “Through lot” means a lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets.


[IMAGE]
“Lot area” means gross lot area, the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights-of-way. Net lot area is exclusive of easements, including those for utilities or flood control channels, which limit the use of the lot.

Lot Coverage. See “Site coverage.”

“Lot depth” means the average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line. The city planner shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.

“Lot frontage” means the boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way.

“Lot line or property line” means any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows:

1. “Front lot line” means, on an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. (If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the city planner.) On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line. 

2. “Interior lot line” means any lot line not abutting a street.

3. “Rear lot line” means a property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line.

4. “Side lot line” means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. The city planner shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape.

“Luminaire” means a complete lighting unit consisting of lamp(s) and the parts that distribute the light, position and protect the lamp(s), and connect the lamp(s) to the power supply.

M. Definitions, “M.”

“Manufacture,” with reference to cannabis, means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, dilute or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.

“Manufactured home” means a dwelling unit including mobile homes and factory-built housing as defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 18210.5 and 19971, respectively.

Map Act. See “Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act.”

“MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Medical cannabis” or “medicinal cannabis” means cannabis that is intended to be used for medical cannabis purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act (“CUA,” Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq.), the Medical Marijuana Program Act (“MMPA,” Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq.), the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MCRSA,” Business and Professions Code Section 19300 et seq.), and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”).

“Medical services – Clinics, offices, laboratories” means facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals, including:

•    health management organizations (HMOs)

•    medical and dental laboratories

•    medical, dental and psychiatric offices

•    out-patient care facilities

•    other allied health services

•    counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under “Offices.”

“Medical services – Extended care” means residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a primary use with in-patient beds, such as: board and care homes; convalescent and rest homes; extended care facilities; skilled nursing facilities. Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are included under “Residential care homes.”

“Medical services – Hospitals” means hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports (see the separate definition of “Heliport”).

“Microbrewery” means a facility where beer brewed on the premises is sold for on-site consumption. 

“Mixed use project” means a project which combines both commercial and residential uses, where the residential component is typically located above the commercial.

“Mobile home” means a trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of “Single-family dwelling.”

“Mobile home park” means any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on which two or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for residential purposes.

“Mortuaries and funeral homes” means funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted.

“Mounted” means attached or supported.

“Multifamily dwelling” means a building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for three or more families living independently of each other. Includes: triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with three or four dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure) and apartments (five or more units under one ownership in a single building); townhouse development (three or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit); and senior citizen multifamily housing; see also “Common interest development.”

N. Definitions, “N.”

“Negative declaration” means a statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

“Nightclubs and bars” means any bar, cocktail lounge, discotheque, or similar establishment which provides live entertainment (music and/or dancing, comedy, etc.) in conjunction with alcoholic beverage sales, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery.

“Nonconforming parcel” means a parcel that was legally created prior to the adoption of this development code and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., access, area or width requirements, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. 

“Nonconforming sign” means a sign which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this development code, or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to all of the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended provision.

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure that was legally constructed prior to the adoption of this development code and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., open space, distance between structures, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

“Nonconforming use” means a use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) or land that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption of this development code and which does not conform to current code provisions governing allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located.

O. Definitions, “O.”

“Occupancy” means all or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant.

Offices. This development code distinguishes between the following types of office facilities. These do not include medical offices (see “Medical services – Clinics, offices, laboratories”), or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use. Incidental offices that are customarily accessory to another use are allowed as part of an approved primary use.

1. “Administrative/business” means establishments providing direct services to consumers, such as insurance agencies, real estate offices, utility company offices, etc.

2. “Government” means city, and other local, state, and federal government agency or service facilities. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing distribution centers.

3. “Production” means office-type facilities occupied by businesses engaged in the production of intellectual property. These uses include:

•    advertising agencies

•    architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services

•    computer software production and programming services

•    educational, scientific and research organizations

•    media postproduction services

•    photography and commercial art studios

•    writers’ and artists’ offices.

4. “Professional” means professional offices including:

•    accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services 

•    attorneys

•    counseling services

•    court reporting services

•    data processing services

•    detective agencies and similar services

•    employment, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services 

•    literary and talent agencies

•    management and public relations services.

5. “Temporary” means a mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary offices may include: construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard; a temporary on-site real estate office for a development project; or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction. 

6. “Temporary real estate” means the temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales office for the units on the same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use.

“Off-site” means an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, but is not located on the same site as the primary use.

“On-site” means an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, which is located on the same site as the primary use.

“Open fencing” means a barrier constructed of material which is transparent, such as glass, plastic panels or wrought iron, used in conjunction with recreation and seating areas.

“Outdoor” or “outdoors,” with reference to cultivation of cannabis, means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure or a private residence. “Outdoors” specifically includes cultivation that occurs within any greenhouse, hoop house, or other similar structure that does not meet the definition of a fully enclosed and secure structure.

“Outdoor commercial recreation” means facilities for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use, including:

•    amphitheaters

•    amusement and theme parks

•    health and athletic club outdoor facilities

•    miniature golf courses

•    skateboard parks

•    stadiums and coliseums

•    swim and tennis clubs

•    tennis courts

•    water slides 

•    zoos

May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, video game arcades, etc. Does not include parks and playgrounds, which are separately defined.

“Outdoor retail sales and activities” means permanent outdoor sales and rental establishments not classified under another land use definition where the business is not conducted entirely within a structure.

“Outdoor retail sales, temporary” means temporary outdoor retail operations including: Christmas trees, pumpkins or the sale of other seasonal items; farmers’ markets; semi-annual sales of art/handcrafted items in conjunction with community festivals or art shows; sidewalk or parking lot sales longer than one weekend; retail sales from individual vehicles in temporary locations outside the public right-of-way.

P. Definitions, “P.”

Parcel. See “Lot or parcel.”

“Parks and playgrounds” means public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic fields for noncommercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis courts.

“Pedestrian orientation” means any physical structure or place with design qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting and pleasant place for pedestrians including but not limited to:

1. Street furniture;

2. Design amenities related to the street level such as awnings, paseos, arcades;

3. Visibility into buildings at the street level;

4. Highly articulated facades at the street level with interesting uses of material, color, and architectural detailing;

5. Continuity of the sidewalk with a minimum of intrusions into pedestrian right-of-way;

6. Continuity of building facades along the street with few interruptions in the progression of buildings and stores;

7. Signage oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the motorist; and 

8. Landscaping.

“Pedestrian oriented use” means a use which is intended to encourage walk-in customers and which generally does not limit the number of customers by requiring appointments or otherwise excluding the general public. A pedestrian oriented use provides spontaneous draw from sidewalk and street due to intense and surprising visual interest, high customer turnover and intense social interaction.

“Pedestrian scale” means a relationship of buildings, streets, and other improvements which results in a high level of comfort for pedestrians.

“Permitted use” means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state, or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.

“Personal cultivation” means cannabis cultivation conducted by an individual strictly for that individual’s personal use, possession, processing, transporting, or giving away without any compensation whatsoever in accordance with this code and state law, including but not limited to Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, as may be amended. “Personal cultivation” also means and includes cultivation of medical cannabis conducted by a qualified patient exclusively for his or her personal medical use, and cultivation conducted by a primary caregiver for the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, in accordance with state law, including Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 and 11362.765, as may be amended. Except as herein defined, “personal cultivation” does not include, and shall not authorize, any cultivation conducted as part of a business or commercial activity, including cultivation for compensation or retail or wholesale sales of cannabis.

“Personal services” means establishments providing nonmedical services as a primary use, including: 

•    barber and beauty shops

•    clothing rental

•    dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment

•    home electronics and small appliance repair

•    laundromats (self-service laundries) 

•    psychic readers

•    shoe repair shops

•    spas and hot tubs 

•    tailors

•    tanning salons

•    tattoo parlors

These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.

“Planning commission” means the city of Sonoma planning commission, appointed by the Sonoma city council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101 and Chapter 2.44 SMC.

“Plant nurseries and garden supply stores” means commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover or outdoors. Includes stores selling these products, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies, and commercial scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under “General retail.” Home greenhouses are included under “Residential accessory uses and structures.”

“Policy” means a general direction that the city will follow in order to meet its goals and objectives by undertaking specific action programs. A specific statement of principle or guiding actions which implies clear commitment but is not mandatory.

“Prescribed grazing” means the application of livestock (cattle, sheep or goats) to feed on standing forage as a landscape management technique to control invasive plant species and reduce wildland fire hazards in a manner that preserves desirable natural characteristics.

“Primary caregiver” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Primary structure” means a structure that accommodates the primary use of the site.

“Primary use” means the main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours during which activities occur.

“Primary zoning district” means the zoning district applied to a site by the zoning map, to which an overlay zoning district may also be applied.

“Principle” means a basic truth or value on which other values are based and from which more detailed standards or guidelines may be derived. A principle is used to generate guidelines, standards, and regulations, but is not itself used to evaluate specific development proposals.

“Private residence,” with reference to cannabis cultivation, means a house, an apartment unit, condominium, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.

“Produce stands for on-site production” means an accessory structure used for the display and sale of vegetables and other produce grown on the site which it serves, with no space within the structure for customers.

“Property line” means the recorded boundary of a parcel of land.

“Proposed project” means a proposed new structure, new addition to an existing structure, or area of other new site development; these do not include the alteration of any portion of an existing structure other than an addition.

“Public utility equipment” means transmission points, junction boxes, vaults and other small structures used for the local distribution of utility services.

“Public utility facilities” means fixed-base structures and facilities serving as distribution or processing centers for the provision of utilities. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091:

•    corporation and maintenance yards

•    electrical substations and switching stations

•    natural gas regulating and distribution facilities

•    public water system wells, treatment plants and storage

•    wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields

These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in “Offices”), or equipment and material storage yards.

Q. Definitions, “Q.” 

“Qualifying patient” or “qualified patient” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to time.

R. Definitions, “R.”

“Recreational facilities” means open-air and indoor facilities used for public recreation, including skate parks and rinks, swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, and other similar facilities. 

“Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

1. It contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

2. It contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

3. It is built on a single chassis; and

4. It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

“Recreational vehicle park” means a site where one or more lots are used, or are intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tents. Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water, sewer, and electric hookups to each lot and are intended as a higher density, more intensively developed use than campgrounds. May include accessory retail uses where they are clearly incidental and intended to serve RV park patrons only.

“Recycling facilities” land use type includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials.

1. “Collection facility” means a center where the public may donate, redeem or sell recyclable materials, which may include the following, where allowed by the applicable zoning district:

a. Reverse vending machine(s);

b. Small collection facilities which occupy an area of 350 square feet or less and may include:

i. A mobile unit;

ii. Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet; and

iii. Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures;

c. Large collection facilities which occupy an area of more than 350 square feet and/or include permanent structures.

2. “Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other containers.

3. “Processing facility” means a structure or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing, flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, remanufacturing and shredding. Processing facilities include the following types, both of which are included under the definition of “Scrap and dismantling yards,” below:

a. “Light processing facility” occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and averages two outbound truck shipments each day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; and 

b. A “heavy processing facility” is any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 

4. “Recycling facility” means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A “certified” recycling or processing facility is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residentially, commercially or industrially designated site used solely for the recycling of material generated on the site. See “Collection facility” above.

5. “Recycling or recyclable material” means reusable domestic containers and other materials which can be reconstituted, remanufactured, or reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 

6. “Reverse vending machine” means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value, as determined by state law. These vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers.

A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.

7. “Scrap and dismantling yards” means outdoor establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap, and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. Includes light and heavy processing facilities for recycling (see the definitions above). Does not include: places where these activities are conducted entirely within buildings; pawn shops, and other second hand stores; the sale of operative used cars; or landfills or other waste disposal sites. 

“Regulation” means a mandated process; a development or design standard.

“Religious facilities” means facilities operated by religious organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, etc., and religious schools; and accessory uses on the same site, such as living quarters for ministers and staff, and child day care facilities where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, such as full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related operations (such as a recreational camp) are classified according to their respective activities.

“Repair services for consumer products” means commercial repair of consumer items such as televisions, audio equipment, computers, lamps, vacuum cleaners, and other portable household appliances.

“Research and development (R&D)” means indoor facilities for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include computer software companies (see “Offices (production)),” soils and other materials testing laboratories (see “Business support services”), or medical laboratories (see “Medical services – Clinics, offices, laboratories”).

“Residential accessory uses and structures” means any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the character of the residential use. These uses include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property:

•    garages 

•    gazebos 

•    greenhouses 

•    spas and hot tubs

•    storage sheds 

•    studios 

•    swimming pools

•    tennis and other on-site sport courts 

•    workshops

Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use. Includes home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts.

“Residential care homes” means intermediate care facilities providing residential, social, habilitative, and personal care for children, the elderly, the developmentally disabled, and persons with limited ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a major element. Includes: children’s homes; transitional houses; orphanages; rehabilitation centers; self-help group homes. A residential care facility serving six or fewer clients shall be a self-contained entity located and operated within a single parcel of record and shall not be operated or managed in conjunction with the same or similar use on any adjoining parcel. Convalescent homes and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of “Medical services – Extended care.”

“Residential district or zone” means any of the residential zoning districts established by Chapter 19.10 SMC, Zones and Allowable Uses.

“Restaurant” means a retail business selling food and beverages prepared on the site, for on- or off-premises consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premises consumption, and establishments where most customers are served food at tables for on-premises consumption, but may include providing food for take-out. Also includes coffee houses.

“Review authority” means the individual or official city body (the city planner, planning commission, or city council) identified by this development code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Division V, Planning Permit Procedures.

S. Definitions, “S.”

“Schools” means public and private educational institutions, including: 

•    boarding schools

•    business, secretarial, and vocational schools

•    community colleges, colleges and universities

•    elementary, middle, and junior high schools

•    establishments providing courses by mail 

•    high schools

•    military academies

•    professional schools (law, medicine, etc.)

•    seminaries/religious ministry training facilities

Also includes specialized schools offering instruction in the following: 

•    art

•    ballet and other dance

•    computers and electronics 

•    cooking

•    drama

•    driver education 

•    language

•    music

Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see “Child day care facilities”). See also the definition of “Studios for art, dance, music, photography, etc.” for smaller-scale facilities offering specialized instruction.

“Second hand stores” means retail sales of used consumer items, including furniture.

“Secondary residential units” means a second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. A secondary residential unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, and parking.

“Senior citizen” means an adult 60 years or older.

Senior Residential Care Facilities. See “Residential care homes.”

“Service station” means a retail business selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide services which are incidental to fuel services. These secondary services may include vehicle engine maintenance and repair, towing and trailer rental services. Does not include the storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle painting, body or fender work, or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces.

“Setback” means the distance by which a structure, parking area or other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. Setbacks from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement. See also “Yard.” Figure 8-5, Setbacks, shows the location of front, side, street-side, rear, and interior setbacks.
[IMAGE]


“Shopping center” means primarily retail commercial sites with three or more separate businesses sharing common pedestrian and parking areas.

“Shopping center, reconfiguration” means the modification of an existing shopping center in one or more of the following ways:

•    Combining or dividing tenant spaces having a total area of 5,000 square feet or greater.

•    Modifying parking areas by relocating driveway entrances or adding ten or more parking spaces.

•    Modifying building footprints involving a total building area of 1,000 square feet or greater, whether or not there is any net increase in building area.

“Single-family dwelling” means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations. May include the rental of rooms within a dwelling also occupied by the property owner or a primary tenant.

“Site” means a parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.

“Site coverage” means the percentage of total site area occupied by structures, and paving for vehicle use. Structure/building coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs, etc.). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. Pavement coverage includes areas necessary for the ingress, egress, outdoor parking, and circulation of motor vehicles.

Small Family Day Care Homes. See “Child day care facilities.”

“Solid fence,” with reference to cannabis cultivation, means a fence constructed of substantial material, such as wood or metal, that prevents viewing the contents from one side to the other side of the fence.

“Special event” means the rental or other use of a property by a third party for an activity such as a wedding, reception, retreat, conference, fund-raising event or musical performance.

“Special events venue” means a building, building complex, and/or outdoor area used to regularly accommodate events such as weddings, receptions, retreats, conferences, fund-raising events, and musical performances, including the rental of the venue to third parties for such purposes. A special events venue may be a stand-alone use or may be associated with another use such as a hotel.

“Specific plan” means a plan that addresses a defined geographic area and that specifies land use, transportation, and other infrastructure, development criteria, and implementation measures, prepared in accordance with Article 8 of the California Planning and Zoning Law.

“Stand” means a structure for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the structure itself.

“Standard” means a rule or basis for comparison, typically expressed in quantitative terms. A quantified measure or criterion which must be met.

“Storage – Indoor” means the storage of various materials entirely within a structure, as the primary use of the structure. The storage of materials accessory and incidental to a primary use is not considered a land use separate from the primary use.

“Storage – Outdoor” means the storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.

“Storage – Personal storage facility (mini-storage)” means a structure or group of structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.

“Street” means a public thoroughfare accepted by the city, which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this subsection.

“Street line” means the boundary between a street right-of-way and property.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the ground. For the purposes of this development code, the term “structure” includes “buildings.”

Structure, Primary. See “Primary structure.”

“Studios for art, dance, music, photography, etc.” means small-scale facilities, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than one instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of “Schools – specialized education and training.” These include facilities for: individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment.

“Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized Sonoma County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes the following, as defined in Civil Code Section 1315: a condominium project; a community apartment project; or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative.

“Subdivision Map Act,” or “Map Act” means Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions.

“Supportive housing” means permanent affordable housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the target population as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 53260(d), and that is linked to on- or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community (Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14(b)). Supportive housing shall be subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. For example, such housing structured as single-family is permitted in the RL and RS residential zones, whereas supportive housing structured as multifamily is limited to the RM and RH residential zones and the Mixed Use zone.

T. Definitions, “T.”

“Tap room” means an establishment licensed under a Type 42 license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control devoted to the sampling and sale of only beer produced by one or multiple breweries for consumption on or off premises. Food may be served; provided, that: (1) food items are made off premises; (2) the facilities are approved by Sonoma County department of health services; (3) food items provided for consumption on site limited to cheeses, crackers, charcuterie and similar items made available strictly in conjunction with and ancillary to the wine tasting experience; and (4) the establishment is not a restaurant. Nothing in this definition or elsewhere in the development code pertaining thereto is intended to limit the rights and obligations imposed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control with regard to issuance of a Type 42 license. Additional standards and regulations applicable to this use are found in SMC 19.50.130.

“Telecommunications facilities” means public and commercial electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network, and wireless communications, including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas, and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections (see “Public utility facilities”). 

“Temporary structure” means a structure without any foundation or footings, and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

“Temporary use” means a use of land that is designed, operated and occupies a site for a limited period of time, typically less than 12 months.

“Theaters and auditoriums” means indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including:

•    civic theaters, and facilities for “live” theater and concerts

•    exhibition and convention halls

•    motion picture theaters

•    public and semi-public auditoriums

•    similar public assembly uses

Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events.

“Trails, hiking and bicycling” means paved and unpaved trails, paths and ways available for public use by pedestrians or bicyclists.

“Transitional housing” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months (Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2(h)). The housing may take several forms such as group housing and multifamily units and may include supportive services to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living. Transitional housing shall be subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. For example, such housing structured as single-family is permitted in the RL and RS residential zones, whereas transitional housing structured as multifamily is limited to the RM and RH residential zones and the Mixed Use zone.

U. Definitions, “U.”

Unit. See “Dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” or “housing unit.”

“Use” means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.

Use, Primary. See “Primary use.” 

V. Definitions, “V.”

“Vacation rental” means the rental or letting of up to two complete residential units, containing bedrooms, kitchens, and bathrooms, for a period of less than 30 days. Typically, no on-site manager is present.

“Variance” means a discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the development standards of this development code, in compliance with SMC 19.54.060, Variances.

“Vehicle services” means the repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories:

1. “Major repair/body work” means repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles. These establishments provide towing, collision repair, other body work, and painting services; and also include tire recapping establishments.

2. “Maintenance/minor repair” means minor facilities specializing in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, etc.).

3. Service Stations. See “Service station.”

Does not include automobile parking (see “Parking facilities/vehicle storage”), repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see “Auto and vehicle sales/rental”); service stations, which are separately defined; or automobile dismantling yards, which are included under “Recycling facilities (scrap and dismantling yards).”

“Veterinarians, animal hospitals, kennels, boarding” means office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Kennels and boarding operations are commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.

W. Definitions, “W.”

“Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution” facilities include:

1. “Warehousing” means facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public (see “Storage – Personal storage facility” (mini-storage)); warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution.

2. “Wholesaling and distribution” means establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as:

•    agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants

•    assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products

•    merchant wholesalers

•    stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment.

“Wine bar” means an establishment licensed under a Type 42 license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control devoted to the sampling and sale of wine produced by one or multiple wineries for consumption on or off premises. Food may be served; provided, that: (1) food items are made off premises; (2) the facilities are approved by Sonoma County department of health services; (3) food items provided for consumption on site limited to cheeses, crackers, charcuterie and similar items made available strictly in conjunction with and ancillary to the wine tasting experience; and (4) the establishment is not a restaurant. Nothing in this definition or elsewhere in the development code pertaining thereto is intended to limit the rights and obligations imposed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control with regard to issuance of a Type 42 license. Additional standards and regulations applicable to this use are found in SMC 19.50.120.

“Wine tasting facility” means an establishment licensed under a winegrower Type 2 license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control that sells wine and related products and enables customers to taste wine (with and without charge) on behalf of a single winery or, as a cooperative venture, multiple wineries, as a regular part of the sales process of the winery’s products, either as the sole occupant of a tenant space or as part of a larger retail establishment engaged in the sale of products other than wine. Food may be provided if it is pre-prepared off premises, or prepared by a caterer under the caterer’s license either off premises or on premises in facilities approved by the Sonoma County department of health services. Food provided to the general public shall be subject to the following limitations: (1) food items are made off premises; (2) the facilities are approved by Sonoma County department of health services; (3) food items provided for consumption on site shall be prepackaged items made available strictly in conjunction with and ancillary to the wine tasting experience; and (4) the establishment is not a restaurant. Nothing in this definition or elsewhere in the development code pertaining thereto is intended to limit the rights and obligations imposed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control with regard to issuance of a winegrower Type 2 license. Additional standards and regulations applicable to this use are found in SMC 19.50.120.

“Wineries” means a commercial facility used for the production and distribution of wine.

“Winery accessory uses” means uses and activities conducted in conjunction with, and upon the same site as, a winery, including wine tasting, food service and restaurants, gift sales, and special events.

X. Definitions, “X.” No specialized terms beginning with the letter “X” are used at this time. 

Y. Definitions, “Y.”

“Yard” means an area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this development code. See SMC 19.40.110, Setback regulations and exceptions, and Figure 8-5, Setbacks.

1. “Front yard” means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback.

2. “Rear yard” means an area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback.

3. “Side yard” means an area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback.

Z. Definitions, “Z.”

“Zero lot line” means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides rests directly on a lot line.

“Zoning clearance” means a ministerial certificate issued by the department prior to issuance of any building permit to ensure that the proposed use and/or construction complies with all of the provisions of this development code.

“Zoning district” means any of the residential, commercial, special purpose, or overlay districts established by Chapter 19.10 SMC, Zones and Allowable Uses, within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.). (Ord. 01-2019 §§ 5, 6, 2019; Ord. 05-2018 § 1, 2018; Ord. 01-2017 § 4, 2017; Ord. 08-2015 § 2, 2015; Ord. 07-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 03-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 02-2014 §§ 4 – 6, 2014; Ord. 06-2013 § 3, 2013; Ord. 03-2012 § 3, 2012; Ord. 02-2012 § 6, 2012; Ord. 06-2010 § 2, 2010; Ord. 2003-02 § 3, 2003).


Chapter 19.94 HOUSING ALLOCATION PROCESS

Sections:

19.94.010    Findings.

19.94.020    Definitions.

19.94.030    Requirement for preapplication.

19.94.040    Allocation process.

19.94.050    Tracking and carry-over of unused and forfeited allocations.

19.94.060    Requirement for filing.

19.94.070    Exceptions to allocation process.

19.94.080    Limitation on development.

19.94.090    Review of findings.

19.94.100    Severability clause.


19.94.010 Findings.

The city council of the city of Sonoma hereby finds and declares as follows:

A. Municipal services as detailed in the 1999 Water System Improvement Study, the 2003 Addendum to the Water System Improvement Study, the 2007 Water Connection Charge and Rate Study, and the review of municipal services, including water supply and sewer treatment capacity conducted for the 2005 – 2020 General Plan update (as set forth in the May 2004 Background Report, the Environmental Impact Report) are constrained and are not sufficient to accommodate unlimited development.

B. A residential growth level averaging 65 dwelling units per year is consistent with the current and projected availability of water and sewer treatment capacity and will result in a reduction in the environmental impacts caused by increased growth.

C. Appropriate controls on the pace of residential development are essential in preserving the health, safety and welfare of the community.

D. Controls on residential growth must reflect the policies of the General Plan and promote variety in housing types and affordability.

E. Because the effect of this chapter is to make procedural changes and clarifications to existing residential development controls in response to identified constraints on development, it is the determination of the city council that this chapter is categorically exempt with regard to the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.020 Definitions.

“Affordable housing” means housing units which:

A. Are affordable to and occupied by very low, low and moderate income households;

B. Count toward the city’s fair-share housing requirements; and

C. Are contractually required to remain affordable for a prescribed number of years, as determined by the city council, following initial occupancy.

“Application, complete” means an application for all necessary development approvals associated with a proposed project, including the completed application form, any required supplemental materials (such as maps, site plans, and building elevations), and applicable fees, submitted to the city of Sonoma planning division and deemed complete by the city planner.

“Density bonus units” means housing units allowed within a development consistent with the provisions of SMC 19.44.030(A).

“Development allocation” means a unit representing potential residential development. One development allocation is equivalent to one residential dwelling unit. A development allocation shall not be considered as an entitlement and shall not obviate the requirement of obtaining any applicable development approvals.

“Development year” means September 1st through August 31st.

“Inclusionary units” means housing units provided within a development pursuant to the provisions of SMC 19.44.020.

“Multifamily housing project” means a residential project of attached or clustered residential housing units not offered for individual sale.

“Planning approval” means planning commission and city council official approval of a tentative subdivision map prepared according to the requirements of the State Subdivision Map Act in the case of large projects resulting in eventual sale of units, or of planning commission and city council official use permit approval of a multifamily housing project.

“Preapplication” means a form filed by a residential developer for a large project subject to the development allocation process in order to establish a place in line among those projects awaiting allocations. A preapplication shall not constitute an application for planning approval.

“Processing queue” means the list of residential development projects, which, because of the limitation of planning approvals established by this chapter, must wait until the appropriate development year to begin planning processing. The order of projects in the processing queue is determined by the date on which a preapplication is received.

“Project, infill” means any major subdivision, multiple-family project, planned unit development or condominium project of more than four and fewer than 16 lots or units (including existing units proposed to be retained); or any residential project(s) or other project(s) containing a residential component on separate but adjoining parcels which by appearance, access, or other characteristics or commonality can reasonably be considered as a single project of between four and 16 units, excluding density bonus units and any inclusionary units exempted under SMC 19.94.070(E) and (F). Applications for infill projects shall be limited to properties that do not exceed one acre in size located within city limits at the time of filing a development application and shall fully utilize the project site. Project phasing and remainder areas shall not be allowed. A project which requires a prezoning, a rezoning or a General Plan amendment shall not be considered as an infill project, nor shall any project proposed for a site which has not been within city limits for at least three years prior to the filing of the application.

“Project, large” means any major subdivision, multiple-family project, planned unit development or condominium project of more than 15 lots or units; or any residential project(s) or other project(s) containing a residential component on separate but adjoining parcels which by appearance, access, or other characteristics of commonality can reasonably be considered as a single project of more than 15 lots or units; or any project of 15 units or fewer which does not otherwise qualify as a small project or an infill project; or any additional units (except for a second unit) proposed for a site previously developed under the provisions for small projects.

“Project, small” means any minor subdivision of property resulting in four lots or less, any duplex, triplex or multifamily project resulting in a total of four dwelling units or less, and any residential development on single-family lots of record in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.030 Requirement for preapplication.

Prospective residential developers of large projects shall submit a preapplication form at any time to establish a place in the processing queue. (Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.040 Allocation process.

At the beginning of each development year the city council shall distribute development allocations, in order, as follows:

A. The annual distribution of development allocations shall begin with a pool of 65 allocations.

B. Any unused development or forfeited allocations, as defined in SMC 19.94.050 and 19.94.060, shall be added to the pool except that the number of allocations available for distribution in any year shall not exceed 165 allocations.

C. The total amount of small development approved during the preceding development year shall be subtracted from the available development applications.

D. Thirty allocations shall be made available for infill development during each development year. These allocations shall be distributed during the development year on a first-come, first-served basis to applicants filing complete applications for infill development as defined in this chapter.

E. Development allocations shall be distributed to large developments and exempt developments which have received some but not all of the allocations requested through their preapplication, except that no more than 20 allocations shall be granted to any one development per year.

F. Any remaining development allocations shall be distributed to the next available preapplications in the processing queue in order of date received, except that no more than 20 allocations shall be granted to any one development per year.

Once the available development allocations, plus or minus five percent, have been distributed, no further allocations shall be granted until the beginning of the next development year. (Ord. 05-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.050 Tracking and carry-over of unused and forfeited allocations.

Unused and forfeited allocations shall be tracked and shall be annually reported on to the city council as part of the allocation process set forth in SMC 19.94.040. If, in any development year, less than 65 development allocations are distributed (including allocations reserved for infill development), the difference between the number of allocations distributed and 65 shall be carried over to the next development year. No more than 165 allocations may be distributed in any one development year. (Ord. 05-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.060 Requirement for filing.

Once a large development has received 50 percent of its requested allocations (as enumerated in its preapplication form), a development application shall be filed within four years of the date on which the project received 100 percent of its allocations; otherwise, its allocations shall be forfeited. (Ord. 05-2014 § 1, 2014; Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.070 Exceptions to allocation process.

The following types of development shall be exempt from the allocation process in that a qualifying development may apply for a building permit or planning approval, as applicable, at any time:

A. Small projects shall be exempt from the planning approval allocation process, but the number of small projects approved in any one development year shall be deducted from the 65-unit allocation of the following year, as described in SMC 19.94.040(C).

B. Condominium conversions where no additional dwelling units are created.

C. Accessory dwelling units and accessory dwelling units, junior.

D. Density bonus units.

E. Inclusionary units provided at the low income level (except within projects located in the Sonoma residential zone) or at the very low income level.

F. Inclusionary units provided in numbers in excess of the normal requirement.

G. As determined by the city council on a case-by-case basis, applications in which at least 60 percent of the proposed units qualify as affordable housing, as defined in this chapter, and which involve city participation in planning, financing or development. (Note: to qualify for consideration, the level of city participation must exceed that which occurs in the normal development review process.)

A preapplication shall be filed for any project exempted under this subsection (G), and the allocations associated with the project shall be subtracted from the annual pool of development allocations in accordance with the allocation process, based on the date of the preapplication. (Ord. 01-2017 § 5, 2017; Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.080 Limitation on development.

No residential development shall occur except in accordance with the allocation process and any applicable exceptions to the allocation process. If a property has been partially developed under the exception for small development, any subsequent development shall be subject to the allocation process as a large development or as an infill development, as applicable. (Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.090 Review of findings.

Beginning in 2005 and every two years thereafter, the city council shall review the findings to determine whether the conditions necessitating this chapter have changed and, if so, whether corresponding changes in the provisions of this chapter are warranted. This review shall occur no later than March 31st of any year in which it is required. (Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).


19.94.100 Severability clause.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof regardless of the fact that any one or more such provisions be declared invalid. (Ord. 02-2008 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-2004 § 1, 2004).



-----------------------------

The Sonoma Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 02-2019, passed June 10, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Sonoma Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.sonomacity.org/ City Telephone: (707) 938-3681

Code Publishing Company